DOMINE DIRIGE NOS
blazon or coat of arms

THE SURVEY OF LONDON: CONTAINING The Original, Increase, Modern Estate and
Government of that City, Methodically set down.

With a Memorial of those famouser Acts of Charity, which for public and Pious
Uses have been bestowed by many Worshipful Citizens and Benefactors.

As also all the Ancient and Modern Monuments erected in the Churches, not only
of those two famous Cities, LONDON and WESTMINSTER, but (now newly added) Four
miles compass.

Begun first by the pains and industry of JOHN STOW, in the year 1598.

Afterward enlarged by the care and diligence of A. M. in the year 1618.

And now completely finished by the study and labor of A. M. H. D. and others,
this present year 1633.

Whereunto, besides many Additions (as appears by the Contents) are annexed
diverse Alphabetical Tables: especially two,

The first, and Index of Things.

The second, a Concordance of Names.

LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourn, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
South Entrance of the ROYAL EXCHANGE* 1633.

Adrian Drift Esqr.
blazon or coat of arms

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE RALPH FREEMAN, now Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON,
Sir Edward Barkham, Sir Martin Lumley, Sir John Gore, Sir Hugh Ham^^^rsley, Sir
Richard Deane, Sir James Cambell, Sir Robert Ducy, Sir George ^hitmore, Sir
Nicholas Raynton, Knights; Edward Litleton, Esquire, Recorder of LONDON: And to
all the other Aldermen, Brethren-Senators in the state of so famous a City; All
of them being my Honorable and worthy Masters: A. M. Wishes the fruition of
all temporal Felicities in this life; and the never-failing fullness of
blessedness in the life to come.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THis famous City has now enjoyed the peaceful succession of more than one
and thirty worthy Lord Majors, since Master John Stow (the painful Searcher
into Reverend Antiquity) did first present LONDONS SVRVEY to this Honorable
Senate, Sir Robert Lee, then Lord Mayor, with gracious and favorable
acceptance.

Who purposing to add increase to this Work (according to the dignity of the
Subject) but prevented by infirmity, and Sicknesse-bringing Death, imparted not
only his good Intentions, but best Collections also unto me, by his importunacy
now persuaded both to correct the Errors, and perfect so well deserving a
Work: And had his request been wanting, the respect and honor I owe to this
Royal City (the tender Mother and Nurse to us both) had been incitement
enough to further a Book of such consequence, as far as my weak abilities
would give leave.

Having therefore at first drawn a brief Discourse thereof, lest I might
unadvisedly dash on the Rocks of Displeasure, I delivered it to the Right
Worshipful, Sir Henry Mountague, then Recorder of London, by whom commanded
to appear before your Worships in the Council Chamber at Guild Hall, I
received Encouragement and Authority, with promise of help and furtherance, to
perfect this worthy Monument. Which accordingly (after the care and pains of
twelve years travel about it) I presented unto this Honorable Senate, in the
year 1618.

But now that I might add a Complement to this Survey, which might best become
it, have I done my diligent endeavor (unto which have I called the assistance
of other learned Antiquaries) to set down Methodically, M. D.
the Original, Increase, Modern Estate, and Government of this City; as also
by what Name, or Office rather, whether of Port-graves, Port-reeves, Barons,
Provosts, or Bayliffes, the Governors, Rulers, and Magistrates were anciently
distinguished.

Before all other, I find the name of Alderman, well worthy observation, as
being derived from most venerable Antiquity: C^mbd. in Brit.
For ancient Records say, that in the days of King Edgar, there was a worthy
Noble man, of the Blood Royal, named Ailwine, in great authority and favor
with the King, insomuch that he was therefore termed, Healf-Koning, as much to
say, as Halfe-King; and by Office was styled, Alderman of all England: as
appears by this Epitaph engraven on his Tomb, in that Famous Monastery (by
him founded) in the I Will of Ely:

Hic requiescit D. Ailwinus, incliti Regis Edgari Cognatus, totius Angliae
Aldermannus, and huius sacri Coenobii miraculosus Fundator.

Here rests Lord Ailwine, Cousin to the Noble King Edgar, Alderman of all
England, and miraculous Founder of this holy Abbey.

Which plainly shows, that in those times of ancient and venerable respect,
this Title of Alderman, was only given, for a further addition of Repute and
Honor.

Some Authors have delivered, Math. Paris. Geffery Monm. Will, Malmes. Pol*
Virgil.
that men bearing such a Style, were sometimes called Doomesmen, sometimes
Ealdermen, Judges of the Kings Courts, etc. As being distinguished by those
additions of Honor and Esteem from other men, for their greater maturity of
Judgment, gravity of years, experience and person; and therefore the fitter
for weighty employment in the State-affaires, by apt correspondency of their
trust and fidelity. Which name of dignity declaring the most eminent degree of
Magistracy, does still (as heretofore it has) extend it self thorowout all
England, in Cities, Towns, and Corporations; and in some the Alderman only is
the chief Commander: Even so is it much more Maiesticall here, in the supreme
City of the whole Land, London, the Metropolis of Great Britain, the Mother of
authentike Memory, the Ancient and Modern Seat of our Kings, yea, the very
Chamber Royal for Majesty it self, and the open Haven for all Merchandise and
Commerce, as being the rich Storehouse of Peace and Plenty.

It shall be needless to trouble your Honor, and the rest of my worthy
Masters, with repetition here of those Officers and Governors, that ruled this
Great City in elder times, because you shall find them sufficiently set down
in their apt and distinct places, until this higher degree of Honor came to
full perfection, I mean the Maioralty, which some hold to be in King John's
time, but most maintain and avouch it to be in the first year of King
Richard the first, whose Virtue and Courage won him the name of Cueur-de-lion.
From which happy beginning, it has neither been mine, nor my most industrious
and helpful Friends good fortune, W. W.
to rank down in formal order the successive line of the Sheriffs, Majors,
and Aldermen, according to my former intended purpose, concerning their
Birthplace, and Parentage; nor how many of them this Honorable City it self
then yielded, as challenging them her own Offspring, she being as well a
loving Mother to breed them in her own Bowels, as a careful Nurse afterward
to bring them up.

For my self, Londons Offspring, though the meanest, yet hold I it no small
attribute of Honor to record it, how much more Glory then for you (equal in
worth and rank) to read it, and what comfort for Posterity to remember and
acknowledge it, that this Ancient, Famous, and Renowned Mother City, never
wanted from time to time Honorable Sons of her own bearing and breeding, to
sit at Stern, to undergo all Offices of Credit and Authority, yea, even the
Maioralty, from Father to Son in the third Generation; and they to boast their
Grandfathers, and great Grandfathers, Witness Garrards. Bar^es. Rowe^. Branch,
etc.
borne and bred in this worthy City, some to the fourth, others the third, but
many the second Generation, as in the Reportary following will more at large
appear.

I forbear to speak of such as have been Aldermen and Sheriffs; Witness
Barnhams, Father and Son.
first, the Fathers; then, the Sons; yet neither living to enjoy the
Maioralties Dignity. As also what fluent plenty of Magistrates in the same high
Office, the several Sheirffes of England have yielded, wherewith the said
Discourse will more familiarly acquaint you.

And now, let me beseech your Honor and Worships, to allow this Survey of
London your gracious entertainment; and the rather, for that it now comes in a
fairer Volume than ever, replete with plenty and enlargement of memorable
Additions, not only with the splendour of Arms, and other glorious Ensigns of
Honor, but with special observations of venerable Antiquity, and infinite
supplements of Ancient and Modern Monuments, as well of the Churches in the
famous Cities of London and Westminster, as in four miles compass round about
them, such as before this instant were never published.

To the Reader.
THat I may give you a reason of such things as the Judicious and severe
Censurer may deem blemishes and imperfections in this Work: For the Order,
you may be pleased to understand, it is not so absolutely Methodicall as I
could wish it were, yet needs none other Apology, than the length of time it
has been growing to this Bulk, and Mortality of the Authors, who have spent
(two of them now) their lives in the disquisition of venerable Antiquity
concerning this City. The Learned know, Men are all various in their Opinions,
as in their Faces you hardly find of a Nation two that resemble in all
proportions, so in their Minds is there as much discrepancy, and then must
there needs be the same or more in their Writings, the express Image of their
Minds. And this is the Fate of our present Work, which begun Methodically,
has not been so well prosecuted, whether out of difference in Judgment, or
want of Information, I dispute not: Probable it may be, the desire of inserting
all things for the delight of the Reader, might breed this want of Method, and
the rather am I induced to incline thereto, since every days Experience
teaches, how unstable oftentimes and incertaine Friendship is, when she
promises Information in this kind: Yet this, the ingenuity of a courteous
Reader will excuse, since the Benefit compensates the Wrong.

And to administer a salve to this sore, and prevent Distraction in the Reader,
in this last Impression have you variety of Tables, succinct and pithy, yet not
obscure: In the beginning, the whole body of the Book dissected into sixty
Chapters, whose short Contents epitomize the Substance of the Work: Then brief
Schemes as well of all the Churches in and about London and Westminster four
miles compass, as of all the Halls and Companies of this Honorable City, both
Alphabetically ranged with reference to their proper places. Lastly, that
nothing might be wanting which should bring ease and furtherance to the
Studious Reader, have you a Catalogue of Authors, on whose authority the truth
of our Assertions may depend.

Neither leave we you hear: In the end also have we furnished it with two
exact Tables; The first an Index, containing in it the chief Streets, Lanes,
Conduits, stately Houses of Noblemen, Innes of Court, Chancery, and other
ancient Monuments of this City, not without the admixion also of worthy Actions
and Customs of Citizens. The other a Concordance of those, whose Honor in
their Office, Charity in their Alms, Memory in their Monument, has acquainted
Posterity with their Names: By this Guide, he who boasts his Birth in a
Magnificent City (as the Ancient did in Rome or Athens) may with great facility
find his Ancestors in their Honors, Alms giving, Tombs, or other memorable
and worthy Actions here recorded: For instance (not to exceed our Memories)
find the name of Anderson in the Concordance, and according to the first
figures (105. a.) turn to the Page, and you have his Liberality or Benefaction
to Brazen-nose College in Oxford; then consult the second (291. a.) in like
manner, and you have his Monument in Saint Olave Vpwel's Church: so the third
(592. b..) and you shall find him there Sheriff, Anno Dom. 1601. The same
order is observed in the rest, only for distinction sake, I have added these
letters. B. to such as have been Bishops, and M. to those that have borne the
Office of Mayor.

Thus have we endeavored to prevent Distraction, and reduce the copious Variety
of this Work to heads, for the Readers ease; not without a great deal of
Pains, Care, and Charge: The ^udicious can give the best estimate of the
Pains; of the Care none better than he that has reaped benefit by the
reading; as for the Charge, the proportion of the Volume speaks, especially to
the skillful in that Mystery; to which if you add the length of time (now
almost three years) it has lain under the Press, there is none but may
conceive the greatness thereof. Yet no small satisfaction to all these may you
afford (Gentle Reader) by your candide and courteous acceptance, with a future
encouragement (in this, or the like) to the ready endeavors of him that will
study to be

Your Servant, C. I.

The Contents of the several Chapters of this BOOK.
CHAP. I.
OF the Original, Antiquity, and Increase of this City of London. Fol. 1
CHAP. II.
Of the Wall about the City. 4
CHAP. III.
Of the ancient and present Brooks, Boornes, Pooles, Wels, and Conduirs of
fresh Water, serving the City: as also of the D^ch compassing the Wall of the
same for defense thereof. 8
CHAP. IV.
Of the ancient and famous River of Thames, from whence she deriveth her head
or ^rig^nall, and so conveyeth her self to the Ci^ies service, being supplied
by diverse other sweet Rivers in her course. 14
CHAP. V.
A further testimony concerning the River of Thames, and of the right and
authority of the Lord Mayor of London, to the conservacy and defense of the
said famous River. 20
CHAP. VI.
Of Towne-Ditch about the City Walls. 26
CHAP. VII.
Of the Bridges of this City. 27
CHAP. VIII.
Of the several Gates in the Wall of the City, and of their increasing and new
building from time to time, as occasion served. 31
CHAP. IX.
Of Towers and Castles in and about this City. 40
CHAP. X.
Of the rights that belonged anciently to Robert Fitz-walter, Chastillion and
Banner-bearer of London, Lord of Wadeham, etc. 50
CHAP. XI.
Of Schools and other houses of Learning. 63
CHAP. XII.
Of Houses and Innes of Students in the Common Law. 66
CHAP. XIII.
Of orders and customs observed by the Citizens in elder times. 67
CHAP. XIV.
Of great Families kept in ^lder times. 70
CHAP. XV.
Of charitable Almesgiving in ancient times. 74
CHAP. XVI.
Of Sports and Pastimes used of old in this City. 75
CHAP. XVII.
Of Watches in this City, and other Matters commanded, and the causes why. 83
CHAP. XVIII.
Of the honor of Londons Citizens, and the worthiness of men and women
dwelling in the same City, by their liberal bounty and charity to good and
godly uses from time to time. 86
CHAP. XIX.
The division of the City of London into Parts, Precincts, and Wards. 113 Of
the 26. WARDS.
CHAP. XX.
1 Portsoken Ward, with the Parish Churches, Monuments, and Halls of Companies
therein 115
CHAP. XXI.
2 Towerstreet Ward. 225
CHAP. XXII.
3 Ealdgate Ward. 144
CHAP. XXIII.
4 Limestreet Ward. 161
CHAP. XXIV.
5 Bishopsgate Ward. 16^
CHAP. XXV.
6 Broad-street Ward. 183
CHAP. XXVI.
7 Cornehill Ward. 206
CHAP. XXVII.
8 Langborne Ward, and Fenny about. 217
CHAP. XXVIII.
9 Belinsgate Ward. 225
CHAP. XXIX.
10 Bridge Ward within. 230
CHAP. XXX.
11 Candlewickstreet, or Candlewright street Ward. 234
CHAP. XXXI.
12 Walbrooke Ward. 241
CHAP. XXXII.
13 Downegate Ward. 248
CHAP. XXXIII.
14 Vintrie Ward. 254
CHAP. XXXIV.
15 Cordwainer street Ward. 264
CHAP. XXXV.
16 Cheap Ward. 272
CHAP. XXXVI.
17 Coleman street Ward. 287
CHAP. XXXVII.
18 Bassings Hall Ward. 297
CHAP. XXXVIII.
19 Creplegate Ward. 301
CHAP. XXXIX.
20 Aldersgate Ward. 320
CHAP. XL.
21 Faringdon Ward within. 335
CHAP. XLI.
22 Breadstreet Ward. 390
CHAP. XLII.
23 Queenehiche Ward. 397
CHAP. XLIII.
24 Castle Baynard Ward. 404
CHAP. XLIV.
25 Faringdon Ward without. 414
CHAP. XLV.
26 Bridge Ward without, consisting of the Borough of Southwarke, in the County
of Surrey. 442
CHAP. XLVI.
Of the Suburbs without the Wall of London, as also without the Liberties. 461
CHAP. XLVII.
Of the Liberties of the Duchy of Lancaster without the Suburbs. 489
CHAP. XLVIII.
Of the City of Westminster, with the Antiquities, Bounds, and Liberties
thereof: As also a Breviate of the first Foundation, Alterations, and
Rebuilding of that famous ancient Abbey, from time to time, till it came to be
called a Collegiate Church; together with a brief description of most of the
worthy Monuments in that Church. 493
CHAP. XLXIX.
Of the Government of the City of London: and first of the Ecclesiastical
Governors, the Bishops of London, what time they sat in that See, with the
places of their burialls. 527
CHAP. L.
Of the Temporal Government of this City, with the Names and Arms of all the
Lord Majors, as also the Order and Arms of all the Companies in London. 535
Whereunto is added also:
The Statutes of the Streets. 665 An Act for Reformation of diverse abuses crept
into the Wardmote Inquest. 669

CHAP. LI.
An Apology for the City of London. 631
CHAP. LII.
Stephanides, or a description of London. 703
CHAP. LIII.
A Relation of the two Lordships of Stepney and Hackney, together with their
free Customs, Privileges, etc. 715
CHAP. LIVE.
The Charter of London: and an Ordinace for the Affiz^ and Weight of Bread. 739
CHAP. LV.
The Popes Bull, and other Bishops their Letters, concerning the Offerings (or
Tithes) of the Parishes of London, to their Curates. 747
CHAP. LVI.
The Patrons (anciently) of all the Benefices in the City of London. 751
The REMAINS, wherein is contained:
CHAP. LVII.
First, many memorable things which should have been inserted in due place,
had the Authors friends supplied them in due time, as the College of Dulwich,
etc. 757
CHAP. LVIII.
Then, a Perambulation four miles about London, with the Monuments of all the
Churches in that compass, and observation of many other worthy matters. 783
CHAP. LIX.
Besides, a Return of London, with particular notes of the Reparations and
Adornments of every Church therein. 819
CHAP. LX.
And lastly, a Review of the sixteen Parishes without the Walls, and the nine
out Parishes. 872. 889
All the Churches in and about LONDON, four miles compass (Alphabetically
digested) with reference to the several places where their Situation,
Monuments, Reparations, and other memorable things recorded thorowout this
whole Book.
The 97. Churches within the Walls.
Names. Fol. Albanes Woodstreet. 308. 819 Alhallowes Barking. 130. 820
Breadstreet. 391. 820 Great. 251. 821 Honilane. 282. 822 Less. 251. 822
Lumbardstreet. 219. 822 Stayning. 222. 822 The Wall. 183. 823
Alphage. 305. 823 Andrew Hubbard. 228. 824 Audrew Undershaft. 151. 824 Andrew
Wardrobe. 407. 825 Anne Aldersgate. 326. 825 Anne Blackfriars. 374. 826
Antholins. 265. 827 Austins. 351. 827 Bartholomew Exchange. 191. 827 Bennet
Fink. 189. 828 Bennet Grasse-Church. 231. 773. 828 Bennet Paul's wharfe. 406.
829 Bennet Sherehog. 276. 829 Botolph Belinsgate. 225. 829 Christ's Church. 341.
763. 830 Christophers. 192. 831 Clements East-cheape. 235. 832 Dionis
Backe-Church. 218. 832 Dunstans East. 138. 832 Edmunds Lumbard street. 221. 833
Ethelborough. 178. 833 Faiths. 355. 833 Fosters. 338. 773. 836 Gabriel
Fenchurch. 217. 836 George Botolphlane. 228. 836 Gregory's by Paul's. 411. 836
Hellins. 178. 837 James Dukes place. 148. 837 James Garlikhithe. 262. 838 Iohu
Baptist. 246. 838 John Evangelist. 395. 838 John Zachary. 321. 838 Katherine
Coleman. 158. 839 Katherine Creechurch. 149. 839 Lawrence Iewrie. 284. 840
Lawrence Pountney. 239. 843 Leonard Eastcheape. 231. 843 Leonard Fosterlane.
325. 844 Magnus. 230. 844 Margaret Lothbury. 292. 845 Margaret Moses. 395. 845
Margaret New fishstreet. 230. 845 Margaret Pattons. 137. 228. 846 Mary
Abchurch. 235. 846 Mary Aldermanbury. 303. 847 Mary Aldermary. 266. 847 Mary le
Bow. 268. 848 Mary Bothaw. 246. 849 Mary Colechurch. 275. 850 Mary Hill. 227.
850 Mary Mounthawe. 400. 850 Mary Summerset. 400. 850 Mary Staynings. 321. 851
Mary Wooll-church. 244. 851 Mary Woollnoth. 223. 852 Martins Ironmonger lane.
282. 852 Martins Ludgate. 372. 852 Martins Orgars. 2^8. 853 Martins Oteswich.
188. 853 Martins Vintry. 261. 853 Matthew Frydaystreet. 350. 854 Maudlins
Milkestreet. 306. 854 Maudlins Oldfishstreet. 409. 855 Michael Bassingshall.
299. 855 Michael Cornehill. 212. 856 Michael Crookedlane. 236. 856 Michael
Queenhithe. 400. 857 Michael Querne. 387. 857 Michael Royal. 256. 859 Michael
Woodstreet. 311. 859 Mildred Breadstreet. 392. 859 Mildred Poultrey. 273. 861
Nicholas Acons. 223. 862 Nicholas Coleabby. 398. 863 Nicholas Olaves. 399. 863
Olaves Harestreet. 134. 863 Olaves Jewrie. 290. 863 Olaves Silverstreet. 324.
865 Pancras Soperlane. 277. 866 Peter's Cheap. 337. 866 Peter's Cornehill. 210.
867 Peter's Paul's wharfe 400. 867 Peter's Poor. 184. 868 Stevens Colemanstreet.
293. 869 Stevens Walbrooke. 244. 870 Swithins. 241. 870 Thomas Apostle. 258.
871 Trinity Church. 397. 872
The 16. Churches without the Walls, standing part within the Liberties, and
part without.
Andrew Holborne. 4^8. 763. 770. 872 Bartholomew great. 420. 873 Bartholomew
less. 415. 874 Brides Church. 437. 762. 875 Bridewell Precinct. 312. 876
Botolph Aldersgate. 330. 772. 867 Botolph Algate. 118. 878 Botolph Bishopsgate.
169. 780. 879 Dunstans West. 431. 879 George Southwarke. 454. 793. 882. Giles
Criplegate. 312. 762. 778. 883 Olaves Southwarke. 457. 884 Saviors Southwarke.
450. 884 Sepulchers. 423. 779. 885 Thomas Southwarke. 457. 887 Trinity
Minories. 146. 888
The 9. out Churches in Middlesex and Surry.
Clement Danes. 491. 889 Giles in the Fields. 488. 800. 894 James Clarkenwell.
484. 899 Katherine Tower. 117. 900 Leonard Shorditch. 471 Martins in the
Fields, 493. 800. 901 Mary Whitechapell. 469. 903 Magdalens Bermondsey. 460.
905 Savoy Church. 490. 905
The 17. Churches four miles compass about London, and in the City of
Westminster.
Battersey. 795 Chelsey. 786 Detford. 805 Fulham. 783 Greenwich. 803 Hackney.
796 Islington. 798 Kenzington. 799 Lambeth. 790 Westmin. Marg. 499. 519. 773.
807 Peter. 500. 763. 774. 814.
Putney. 784 Newington. 792 Roderith. 806 Stepney. 787 Stratford Bow and
Bromley. 789 Wandsworth. 793
All the Companies in LONDON, Alphabetically ordered, together with their
several Halls, and Arms, with reference to the places where they are spoken
of in this Work.
Their Halls. Arms. ARmorers. 293. 624 Apothecaries. (...) 645 Bakers White.
Brown. 138. 624 642

Barber-Surgeons. 339. 623 Black-Smithes. 409. 635 Bottle-makers, and
Home-makers 638 Bowyers. 312. 634 Brewers. 311. 622 Bricklayers and Tylers.
144. 634 Butchers. 340. 627 Carpenters. 184. 628 Clerks. 255. 644
Clothworkers. 137. 610 Cooks and Pastelars. 330. 633 Coopers. 299. 633
Cordwainers. 395. 628 Curriers. 311. 629 Cutlers. 258. 626 Diers. 249. 621
Drapers. 187. 601 Farriers. 640 Fishmongers. 231. 602 Fletchers. 156. 635
Founders. 293. 631 Fruterers. 256. 637 Girdlers. 297. 626 Glasiers. 261. 644
Goldsmiths. 323. 603 Grocers. 274. 600 Haberdashers. 312. 606 Imbroderers. 338.
632 Inne-holders. 249. 631 Ioyners. 249. 636 Ironmongers. 156. 608
Leathersellers. 179. 622 Lorimers. 641 Masons, or Marblers. 297. 630 Mercers.
281. 599 Merchantaylors. 188. 605 Painter-Stayners. 399. 629 Paviers. 641
Pewterers. 217. 623 Pinners, now Plaisterers. 310. 636 Plummers. 256. 630
Poulters. 632 Sadlers. 338. 627 Saltars. 392. 607 Scriveners. 638 Skinners.
248. 604 Stationers. 372. 639 Tallow-Chandlers. 248. 625 Turners. 643 Vintners.
255. 609 Vpholsters. 643 Watermen. 645 Waxe-Chandlers. 312. 625 Weavers. 297.
637 Woodmongers. 408. 642 Wooll-packers. 640
The Companies of the Merchants.
Their Arms. ADventurers. 612 Adventurers new French Merchants. 618 East
Indian. 617 Of Elbing. 614 French. 619 Turkish. 615 Russian. 613 Spanish. 616
Of the Staple. 611 Virginian. 620
A Catalogue of Authors, venerable for Antiquity, out of whom the Truth of
those worthy and Ancient Matters contained in this Book is excerpted: Ranged
into an Alphabeticall order.
ABbas Floriacensis Alfred of Beverley. Antonius Florentinus. Arnold Rich.
Asserius Menevensis. Baconthorpe John. Baldock Ralph. Bale John. Bannester
John. Beda. Benedict of Whirhall. Beware the Cat. Body William. Bradshaw Henry.
Buchanan. Burchard. Caesar's Commentaries. Camden Clarencieux. Capgrave John.
Caxtons Chronicle. Chancery Rolls. Chaucer. Chronica Chronicorum. Chronicle of
Abingdon. Chronicle of S. Albans. Chronicle of Britain. Chronicle of
Dunstable. Chronicle of Scarborow. Clifford Thomas. Cooper Thomas. Dedicato
Radulphus. Dector Dee. Dion Romans Dunthorne William. Dyson Humphrey. Edm^rus.
Edmond de Hadenbam. Elderton William. Eversden Ioh. Fabians Chronicle. Fabians
Manuscript. Fitz-Stephen. Flores Historiarum. Floria^^nsis Wigorniensis Fox his
Monuments. Froisard. Gaguin Rebert. Geffery of Monmouth. Gervase of Tilburie.
Glastenbury Antiquities Giraldus Cambrensis. Gower John. Grafton Richard.
Guildas. Halls Chronicle. Hall Edward. Hardings Chronicle. Harrison William.
Henry of Leicester. Henry of Marleborow. Higeden Ranulph. Historia Tripartita.
Holinshed Raphael. Horn Andrew. Hoveden Roger. Huntingdon Henry. Ioceline of
Furneis. John de Bavow. John of Beverley. Ingulphus. Iucliffe Roger. Knighton
Henry. Lambert William. Lanquet Thomas. Leyland John. Lhuyd Humphrey. Lib.
Albo. Lib. S. Bartholomew. Lib. Bermondsey. Lib. Burton sup. Trent. Lib. Bury
S. Edmonds. Lib. Chartsey. Lib. de Clarkenwell. Lib. Colchester. Lib.
Constitutionum. Lib. Customs London. Lib. Dunmow. Lib. Dunthorne. Lib. Ely.
Lib. Erswicke. Lib. Fleetwood. Lib. de S. Katharines. Lib. de Knighton Guild.
Lib. S. Mariae Eborum. Lib. S. Mariae Overies. Lib. S. Martins. Lib. Osney.
Lib. de Papie. Lib. Roffens. Lib. Tewkesbury. Lib. Trinitatis. Lib. Waverley.
Lib. de Woodbridge, Lidgate John. Lilie George. Lilie William. Livius. London
John. Lucan. Magna Charta. Malverne John. Manuscripts. Manuscript French.
Marianus Scotus. Matthew Paris. Matthew of Westminster. Melancthon. Merimouth
Adam. More Thomas, Knight. Mountgomery John. Nevil Alexander. Osbernus
Dorobernensis. Otherborne Henry. Packenton William. Paradine William. Paston
William. Patten William. Pattent de Iugham. Philip Com^^ines. Politianus. Poly
Chronicon. Polydore Virgil. Pomponius M^la. Price John, Knight. Ptolomaeus.
Ralph Cogshall. Records Canterbury. Records of Guildhall. Records Parliament.
Records Patent. Records of Pontfract. Records in the Rolls. Records of the
Tower. Records of the Vintry. Register of Brockesden. Rishanger William. Robert
de Amesbury. Roger of Wendover. Rouse John. Savage Dennis. Scoggan Henry. Simon
of Durham. Smith Thomas, Knight. Socrates. Sorocold Thomas. Spelman Henry. Spot
Thomas. Strabo. Sulcardus. Tacitus. Textor John. Thorn William. Tuke Brian,
Knight. Vita Erkenwaldi. Walsingham Thomas. Walter of Coventry. Whethamsted.
William of Huntingdon. William of Malmesbury. Witchendus. Wolf Reginald.
To these might be added many more, who cover rather the benefit and
furtherance of so necessary a Work, than vainglory and reputation amongst men.

THE SURVEY OF LONDON: Containing the Original, Antiquity, Increase, Modern
Estate, and Description of that City.
AS the Roman Writers, to glorify the City of Rome, drew the Original
thereof from gods and demygods, by the Trojan progeny: so Geoffrey of
Monmouth, the Welsh Historian, deduceth the foundation of this famous City of
London, for the greater glory thereof, and emulation of Rome, from the very
same Original. For he reports, that Brute lineally descended from the
demy-god Aeneas, the son of Venus, daughter of Jupiter, about the year of
the world 2855. and 1108. before the nativity of Christ, builded this City
near unto the River now called Thames, Trinobantu^ has the written copy.
Livi^.
and named it Troynovant, or Trenovant. But herein, as Livie (the most famous
Historiographer of the Romans) writes, Antiquity is pardonable, and has an
especial privilege, by interlacing divine matters with humane, to make the
first foundation of Cities more honorable, more sacred, and as it were, of
greater Majesty.

King Lud (as the aforesaid Geoffrey of Monmouth notes) afterward, not only
repaired this City; but also increased the same with fair Buildings, Towers
and Walls, and after his own name, called it Caire-Lud, Caire Lud, the City
of Lud, but Luds-towne is a Saxon word.
as Luds Town, and the strong Gate which he builded in the West part of the
City, he likewise (for his own honor) named Ludgate.

This Lud had issue two sons, Androgeus, and Theomantius, or Tenanticus, who
being not of age to govern at the death of their Father; their Uncle
Cassibelan took upon him the Crown; about the eighth year of whose reign,
Julius Caesar arrived in this Land, with a great power of Romans to conquer
it. The manner of which Conquest, I will summarily set down out of his own
Commentaries, which are of far better credit, than the relations of Geoffrey
Monmouth.

The chief government of the Britains, Caesar's commentaries, lib. 5.
and ordering of the Wars, was then (by common advice) committed to
Cassibelan, whose Signiorie was separated from the Cities toward the
Seacoast, by the River called Thames, about 80. miles off from the Sea. This
Cassibelan in times past, had made continual war upon the Cities adjoining;
but the Britains being moved with the Romans invasiton, had resolved in that
necessity to make him their Sovereign and General of the Wars. Caesar
having knowledge of their intent, marched with his Army to the Thames, The
River of Thames to be passed afoot in Caesar's time.
into the Signory of Cassibelan. This River can be passed but only in one
place on foot, and that very hardly. When he came thither, he saw a great power
of his enemies in battle array, on the other side of the River. Now was the
Bank sticked full of stakes, sharpened at the end; and likewise other stakes
(of the same making) were driven into the Channel, and hidden with the water.
Caesar having understanding thereof, by his Prisoners and Runneawaies, sent his
Horsemen before, and commanded his Footmen to follow immediately after them.
But the Roman Soldiers went with such speed and force, having no more than
their heads only above the water: that the enemy being not able to withstand
the violence of the Footmen, and the men of Arms, forsook the bank, and
took them to flight. Cassibelan despairing of his good success, by fighting
in plain battle, sent away all his greater powers, The policy of Cassibelan
upon his ill success.
and keeping still about four thousand Waggoners, watched which way the
Romans went, and drew somewhat aside out of the way, hiding himself in
cumbersome and woody places. And wheresoever he knew the Romans should march,
he drove both Cattle and people thence into the Woods. When the Romans
Horsemen ranged any thing freely abroad into the fields for forage, or to
harry the Country: he sent his Waggoners by allwaies and paths out of the
woods, upon their men of Arms, His adva^tage against the Roman horsemen.
and encountered with them to their great prejudice, through the fear whereof,
he kept them short from ranging at their pleasure.

So the matter was brought to this pass, that Caesar would not suffer his
Horsemen to stray any farnesse from his maine Battle of Footmen, and
adventured no further to annoy his enemies, in wasting their fields, and
burning their houses, than he could compass by the travail of his Footmen, as
they were able to journey.

In the mean while, Trinobants Citizens of London.
the Trinobants, which was the strongest City, wel-neere, of all those
Countries, and out of which City, a young Gentleman called Mandubrace, upon
confidence of Caesar's help, coming unto him into the maine Land of Gallia,
now called France, had thereby escaped death, which he should have suffered at
Cassibelans hand, (as his Father Imanuence had done, who had reigned in that
City:) sent Ambassadors to Caesar, Mandubrace and the Trinobants yield to
Caesar, and he defended them.
promising to yield unto him, and to do what he should command them.
Instantly desiring him, to protect Mandubrace from the furious Tyranny of
Cassibelan, and to send him into the City, with authority to take the
government thereof upon him. Caesar accepted the offer, and appointed them to
give unto him 40. Hostages, and withal to find him grain for his Army, and
so sent he Mandubrace unto them.

When others saw that Caesar had not only defended the Trinobants against
Cassibelan, but had also saved them harmless from the pillage of his own
Soldiers: then also did the Cenimagues, Segontians, Aucalits, Bibrokes, and
Cassians likewise submit themselves unto him, Cassibelans Town west from
London, for Caesar says, 80. miles from the Sea.
and by them he learned, that not far from thence was Cassibelans Town,
(fortified with woods and marish grounds) into the which he had gathered a
great number both of men and cattle.

For the Brittans call that a Town, Cities of the Britains were cumbersome
woods fortified.
when they have fortified a cumbersome wood with a ditch and Rampire, and
thither they resort to eschew the invasions of their enemies. To this place
therefore marched Caesar with his Legions; he found it excellently fortified,
both of nature, and by man's advice: nevertheless, he resolved to assault it in
two several places at once; whereupon the Britains being not able to endure
the force of the Romans, fled out at another part, and left the Town unto
him: a great number of cattle he found there, and many of the Britains he
slew, and others he took in the chase.

Whilst these things were a doing in these quarters, Cassibelan sent
messengers into Kent, which lies upon the Sea, and in which there reigned then
four particular Kings, named, Cingetorix, Carvil, Taximagul, and Segonax, whom
he commanded to raise all their forces, and suddenly to set upon, and assault
the Romans in their Trenches by the Sea side: the which when the Romans
perceived, they sallied out upon them, slew a great sort of them, and taking
Cingetorix their noble Captain prisoner, retired themselves to their Camp in
good safety.

When Cassibelan heard of this, and had formerly taken many other losses, and
found his Country sore wasted, and himself left almost alone, by the
defection of the other Cities, he sent Ambassadors by Comius of Arras to
Caesar, to entreat him concerning his own submission: the which Caesar did
accept; and taking Hostages, assessed the Realm of Britain to a yearly
Tribute, to be paid to the people of Rome, Britain ses^ed to pay a yearly
tribute to Rome.
giving straight charge to Cassibelan, that he should not seek any revenge
upon Mandubrace, or the Trinobants, and so withdrew his Army to the Sea again.

Thus far out of Caesar's Commentaries, concerning this History, which happened
in the year before Christ's nativity, 54. In all which process, there is for
this purpose to be noted, that Caesar names the City of Trinobantes, which
has a resemblance with Troy nova, or Trinobantum, Trinobant, new London.
having no greater difference in the Orthography, than changing (b) into (v),
and yet makes an error, whereof I will not argue. Only this I will note,
that diverse learned men do not think Civitas Trinobantum, to be well and
truly translated, the City of the Trinobantes: but it should rather be the
state, communalty, or Signiorie of the Trinobantes, for that Caesar in his
Commentaries uses the word Civitas, only for a people living under the
selfsame Prince and Law. But certain it is, Cities of the Britains not
artificially builded with houses, nor walled with stone
that the Cities of the Britains were (in those days) neither artificially
builded with houses, nor strongly walled with stone, but were only thick and
cumbersome Woods, plashed within, and trenched about: and the like (in effect)
do other the Roman and Greek Authors affirm, Strabo.
as Strabo, Pomponius Mela, Pomponius Mela.
and Dion, a Senator of Rome, which flourished in the several reigns of the
Roman Emperors, Tacitus.
Tiberius, Dion.
Claudius, Domitian, and Severus: to wit, that before the arrival of the
Romans, the Britains had no Towns, but called that a Town, which had a
thick entangled Wood, defended (as I said) with a ditch and bank, the like
whereof the Irishmen, our next neighbors, do at this day call Fastnes. But
after that these hither parts of Britains were reduced into the form of a
Province, by the Romans, who sowed the seeds of civility over all Europe; this
City, whatsoever it was before, began to be renowned and of fame. London most
famous for merchants and intercourse.
For Tacitus, who first of all Authors names it Londinium, says, that in the
26. year after Christ, it was, albeit no Colonie of the Romans, yet most
famous for the great multitude of Merchants, provision, and intercourse. At
which time, in that notable revolt of the Britains from Nero, in which
threescore and ten thousand Romans and their confederates were slain; this
City, with Verulamium, near Saint Albans, and Maldon in Essex, then all
famous, were ransacked and spoiled. For Suetonius Paulinus, then Lieutenant for
the Romans in this I Will, abandoned it, as not then fortified, and left it to
the spoil.

Shortly after, The Britains had no houses, but cottages.
Julius Agricola, the Roman Lieutenant, in the time of Domitian, was the first
that (by adhorting the Britains publicly, and helping them privately) won
them to build houses, for themselves, Temples for the gods, and Courts for
Justice, to bring up the Noble men's children in good Letters, and humanity, and
to apparel themselves Roman like. The Britains wen^ naked, their bodies
painted.
Whereas before (for the most part) they went naked, painting their bodies,
etc. as all the Roman Writers have observed.

True it is, I confess, that afterward many Cities and Towns in Britain,
under the Government of the Romans, were walled with Stone, and baked Brickes,
Richborrow in Kent.
or Tyles; as Richborrow, Ryptachester, Verulamiu^.
in the I Will of Thanet, till the channel altered his course; Cilcester.
besides Sandwich in Kent, Wroxcester.
Verulamium, besides Saint Albanes in Hartfordshire, Kencester.
Cilcester in Hampshire, Leyland.
Wroxcester in Shropshire, Kencester in Herefordshire, there miles from
Hereford Town; Ribcester, seven miles above Preston, on the water of Rible;
Aldeburge, a mile from Borrowbridge, or Wathelingstreet, on Ure River, and
others.

And no doubt but this City of London was also walled with Stone, Of the wall
about London.
in the time of the Roman Government here, but yet very lately. For, it
seems not to have been walled in the year of our Lord 296. because in that
year, when Alectus the Tyrant was slain in the Field, the Franks or
Franconians easily entered London, and had sacked the same, had not GOD (of his
great favor) at the very instant, brought along the River of Thames, certain
Bands of Roman Soldiers, who slew those Franks in every street of the City.

Wall about the City of LONDON.
IN few years after, as Simeon of Durham, Simeon of Durham.
an ancient Writer, reports, Helen, the Mother of Constatine the great, was
the first that inwalled this City, about the year of Christ, 306. But
howsoever those walls of stone might be builded by Helen, yet the Britains (I
know) had no skill of building with stone, as it may appear by that which
follows, about the year of Christ, 399. when Arcadius and Honorius, the
sons of Theodosius Magnus, governed the Empire, the one in the East, the
other in the West. For Honorius having received Britain, the City of Rome was
invaded and destroyed by the Goths; The Romans left to govern in Britain.
after which time the Romans left to rule in Britain, as being employed in
defense of their Territories nearer home. Whereupon the Britains, not able to
defend themselves against the invasions of their enemies, were many years
together under the oppression of two cruel Nations, the Scots and Picts, The
Scots and Picts invade this Land.
and at length were forced to send their Ambassadors, with Letters and
lamentable supplications to Rome, requiring aid and succor from thence, upon
promise of their continual fealty, so that the Romans would rescue them out
of the hands of their enemies. Hereupon, the Romans sent unto them a Legion of
armed Soldiers, which coming into this Island, and encountering with the
enemies, overthrew a great number of them, and drove the rest out of the
frontiers of the Country. And so setting the Britains at liberty, counseled
them to make a Wall, extending all along between the two seas, which might be
of force to keep out their evil neighbors, and then returned home with great
triumph. The Britains wanting Masons, builded that wall, Britains unskilful
of building with stone.
not of stone (as they were advised) but made it of turfe, and that so slender,
that it served little or nothing at all for their defense. And the enemy
perceiving that the Roman Legion was returned home, forthwith arrived out of
their Boats, invaded their borders, overcame the Country, and (as it were)
bare down all that was before them.

Whereupon, Ambassadors were eftsoons dispatched to Rome, lamentably
beseeching, that they would not suffer their miserable Country to be utterly
destroyed. Then again, another Legion was sent, which coming on a sudden,
made a great slaughter of the enemy, and chased him home, even to his own
Country. These Romans at their departure told the Britains plainly, that it
was not for their ease or leisure, to take upon them (any more) such long and
laborious journies for their defense, and therefore bade them practice the use
of Armor and Weapons, and learn to withstand their enemies, whom nothing else
did make so strong, as their faint heart and cowardice. And for so much as they
thought, that it would be no small help and encouragement unto their
tributarie friends, whom they were now forced to forsake: they builded for them
a wall of hard stone, Witchendus.
from the West Sea to the East Sea, Wall of stone builded by the Romans,
betwixt the Britains and Scots.
right between those two Cities, which were there made to keep out the
enemies, in the selfsame place where Severus before had cast his Trench: the
Britains also putting to their helping hands as laborers.

This Wall they builded eight foot thick in breadth, and twelve foot in height,
right as it were by a line from East to West; as the ruins thereof, (remaining
in many places till this day) do make to appear. Which work thus perfected,
they gave the people straight charge to look well to themselves, they teach
them to handle their weapons, and instruct them in warlike feats. And lest by
the Sea side Southwards, where their Ships lay at harbor, the enemy should
come on Land; they made up sundry bulwarks, each somewhat distant from other,
and so bid them farewell, as minding no more to return. This happened in the
days of Theodosius the younger, almost 500. years after the first arrival of
the Romans here, about the year after Christ's Incarnation, 434.

The Britains after this continuing a lingering and doubtful war with the
Scots and Picts; made choice of Vortiger to be their King and Leader: which man
(as says Malmesbury) was neither valorous of courage, Malmesb.
nor wise of counsel, Bid.
but wholly given over to the unlawful lusts of his flesh. The Britains given
to gluttony, drunkenness, pride, and contention.
The people likewise (in short time) being grown to some quietness, gave
themselves to gluttony and drunkenness, pride, contention, envy, and such
other vices, casting from them the yoke of Christ. In the mean season, a
bitter Plague fell among them, The Bri^taines Plagued for their sinful life.
consuming in short time such a multitude, that the quick were not sufficient
to bury the dead: and yet the remnant remained so hardened in sin, that
neither death of their friends, nor fear of their own danger, could cure the
mortality of their souls; whereupon a great stroke of vengeance ensued upon the
whole sinful Nation. For, being now again infested with their old neighbors,
the Scots and Picts, they consult with their King Vortiger, Witchendus.
and send for the Saxons, who shortly after arrived here in Britain; Bid.
where, The Saxons Sent for to defend the Britains, but they drove the^ into
the Mountains.
says Bid, they were received as friends: but as it proved, they minded to
destroy the Country as enemies. For after they had driven out the Scots and
Picts, they also drove the Britains, some over the Seas, some into the waste
mountains of Wales and Cornwall, and divided the Country into diverse
Kingdoms amongst themselves.

These Saxons were likewise ignorant of building with stone, Saxons unskilful
of building with stone.
until the year 680. for then it is affirmed, that Bennet, Abbot of Wirrall,
Master to the reverend Bid, Bennet, a Monk, brought in Masons.
first brought Artificers of stone houses, and glass windows into this Island,
amongst the Saxons: Arts, before that time, unto them unknown, and therefore
used they but wooden buildings. And to this accords Polychronicon, Wooden
churches, and golden priests.
who says, that then had ye wooden Churches; nay wooden Chalices, and
golden Priests; but since, golden Chalices, and wooden Priests. And, to knit
up this Argument, King Edgar, in his Charter to the Abbey of Malmesbury, dated
the year of Christ 974. has words to this effect: All the Monasteries in my
Realm, Monasteries of rotten timber
to the outward sight, are nothing but worm-eaten and rotten Timber, and
boords; and that worse is, within they are almost empty and void of divine
Service.

Thus much be said for walling, not only in respect of this City, but
generally also of the first within the Realm. Now to return to our Trinobant,
(as Caesar calls it;) the same is (since) by Tacitus, Ptolomaeus, and Antonius,
called Londinium, Longidinium; of Ammianus, Lundinum, and Augusta, who calls
it also an ancient City. Of our Britains, Lundaine; of the old Saxons,
Lundenceaster, Lundenbirig, Londennir. Of strangers, Londra and Londres; of the
inhabitants, London: whereof you may read a more large and learned Discourse,
and how it took the name, in that Work of my loving friend, Master Camden,
now Clarenceaulx, which is called Britania.

Concerning Mr. Camden, in his more absolute relation of London, the Argument
we have now in hand; I will be so bold as to borrow his own words, as he has
set them down in his Britania. Summing over the several names then given and
attributed thereto, as formerly has been declared: he comes to his own
judgment:

For mine own part, Camden in his Britannia concerning the name of London.
(says he) seeing that Caesar and Strabo do write, that the ancient
Britains called those Woods and Groves, by the name of Cities and Towns,
which they had fenced with Trees, cast down and plashed, to stop up all
passage: Seeing also I have understood, that such Woods or Groves are in the
British Tongue named Llhwn: Of British Towns and Cities
I incline a little to the opinion, that London thence took name, as one would
say, by way of excellency; The City, or A City thick of Trees. But if
herein I fail of the truth; let me (with good leave) give my conjecture. And
here would I have no man to charge me with inconstancy, while I disport in
conjecture; that whence it had the fame, London received nama from Ships and
shipping.
thence also it took name, even from Ships, which the Britains in their
language call Lhong: so that Londinum may seem to sound as much as a
Ship-Road, or City of Ships. For the Britains term a City Dinas, Dinas Brit.
whence the Latins have fetched their Dinum. Dinum Lat.
And hence it is, that elsewhere it is called Longidinium; and in the Funeral
Song or Dumpe of a most ancient British Po^^.
Bard, Lhong-porth, that is, An Harbor or Haven of Ships. And by this very
term Bononia, or Bolen in France, which Ptolomee calls Gessoriacum Navale,
in the British Glossarie is named Bolunglhong: How many cities have derived
their names from Ships.
as Naupactus, Naustathmos, Nauplia, Navalia Augusti, etc.

But of these, none has better right to assume unto it the name of a
Ship-Roade, or Haven, than our London. For in regard of both Elements, most
happy and blessed it is; The situation of London.
as being situated in a rich and fertile soil, abounding with plentiful store
of all things, and on the gentle ascent and rising of an Hill, hard by the
Thames side, the most mild Merchant (as one would say) of all things that the
world does yield: which swelling at certain hours with the Ocean Tides, by
his safe and deep Channel (able to entertain the greatest Ships that be)
daily brings in so great riches from all parts, The benefit of the Thames
ebbing and flowing, and also of the shipping.
that it striveth at this day with the Mart-Townes of Christendom for the
second Prize, and affords a most sure and beautiful Road for Shipping. A man
would say that sees the Shipping there, that it is (as it were) a very Wood of
Trees, disbranched to make glades and let in light: So shaded it is with Masts
and Sails.

Who was the first Founder, Concerning the first founder of London.
is by length of time grown out of knowledge: and intruth, very few Cities
there are, that know theier own first Founders, considering they grew up to
their greatness by little and little. But as other Cities, so this of ours,
fathereth her original upon the Trojans, as verily believing that Brute (the
Nephew in the third descent of great Aeneas) was the builder thereof. Brute
supposed to be the builder.
But whosoever founded it; the happy and fortunate estate thereof has given
good proof, that built it was in a good hour, and marked for life and long
continuance. Antiquity of London.
And that it is for Antiquity Honorable, Ammianus Marcellinus gives us to
understand; who called it in his time, (and that was 1200. years ago) An old
Town. And Cornelius Tacitus in like manner, who in Nero's days, 1540. years
since, reported it to have bin a place Very famous for fresh trade, concourse
of Merchants, and great store of victuals, and all things necessary. This only
at that time was wanting to the glory thereof, London no free City, nor
Colonie in the Romans time.
that it had the name neither of a free City, nor of a Colony. Neither verily
could it have stood with the Romans profit, if a City flourishing with
Merchandise, should have enjoyed the right of a Colonie or Free City. And
therefore it was (as I suppose) that they ordained it to be a Praefectura:
London a Praefectura, governed by Officers yearly sent to it from Rome.
for so they termed all Towns where Marts were kept, and Justice ministered:
Yet so, as that they had no Magistrates of their own: but Rulers were sent
every year to govern in them, and for to minister Law, which in public
matters, namely of Tax, Tributes, Tolles, Customs, Warfare, etc. they should
have from the Senate of Rome. Hence it comes that Tacitus, the Panegyrist,
and Marcellinus call it only a Town.

And although it was not in name loftier; London flourished equal with any
other place.
yet in wealth, riches and prosperity, it flourished as much as any other: yea
and continued in manner always the same, under the dominion of Romans,
English-Saxons, and Normans, seldom or never afflicted with any great
calamities. In the reign of Nero, when the Britains had conspired to recover
and resume their liberty under the leading of Boadicia; Suetonius Paulinus,
Lieutenant for Rome.
the Londoners could not with all their weeping tears, hold Suetonius
Paulinus, but that after he had levied a power of the Citizens to aid him, he
would needs dislodge and remove from thence, leaving the City naked to the
enemy; who forthwith surprised and slew some few, whom either weakness of
sex, feebleness of age, or sweetness of the place had detained there.

This City of London having bin destroyed and burnt by the Danes and other
Pagan enemies, The City of London destroyed by the Danes and again repaired.
about the year of Christ 839; was, by Alfred, King of the West Saxons, in the
year 886. repaired, honourabley restored, The City of London lay waste, and
not inhabited for the space of almost 50 years.
and made again habitable: Who also committed the custody thereof unto his
son in law, Ethelred, Earl of Mercia, unto whom before he had given his
daughter Ethelfled.

And that this City was then strongly walled, may appear by diverse accidents;
W. Malmesbury.
whereof William of Malmesbury has, Assure.
that about the year of Christ, 994 the Londoners did shut up their gates,
Marianu^.
and defended their King, Florentius.
Ethelred, within their Walls against the Danes.

In the year 1016. Edmund Ironside, reigning over the West Saxons, Canutus the
Dane, bringing his Navy unto the west part of the Bridge, did cast a trench
about the City of London, and then attempted to have won it by assault: but
the Citizens repulsed him, and drove them from their Walls.

Also in the year 1052. Earl Godwin, with his Navy sailed up by the South
end of the Bridge, and so assailed the Walls of this City.

William Fitzstephen, W. Fitzstephen.
in the reign of Henry the second, writing of the Walls of this City, The
City of London walled round about by the River of Thames.
has these words: the wall is high and great, well towred on the North side,
with due distance between the Towers. On the South side also, the City was
walled and towred: but the fishfull River of Thames, by his ebbing and flowing,
has long since subverted them.

By the North side, he means from the River of Thames in the East, to the
River of Thames in the West: for so stretched the Wall in his time, and the
City being far more in length from East to West, than in breadth from South
to North; and also narrower at both ends, than in the midst, is therefore
compassed with the Wall on the Land side, in form of a bow, except denting in
betwixt Cripplegate and Aldersgate. But the Wall on the South side, along by
the River of Thames, was straight, as the string of a bow, and all furnished
with Towers or Bulwarks, (as we now term them) in due distance every one from
other, as witnesses our Author, and our selves may behold for the Land side.
This may suffice for proof of a Wall, and form thereof about this City, and
the same to have been of great Antiquity, as any other within this Realm.

And now touching the maintenance and repairing the said Wall, Walls of London
repaired.
I read, that in the year 1215. the 6. of King John, the Barons entering the
City by Ealdgate, Roger of Randover.
first took assurance of the Citizens, Mat. Paris.
then brake into the Jews houses, Ranul.
searched their coffers, Co^shal.
to fill their own purses: and after, Mat. Paris.
with great diligence repaired the walls and gates of the City, with stones
taken from the Jews broken houses. In the year 1257. Henry the third caused
the walls of this City, which were sore decayed, and destitute of Towers and
Towrets, to be repaired in more seemly wise than before, at the common charges
of the City. Also, in the year 1282 King Edward the first, having granted to
Robert Kilwarby, Archbishop of Canterbury, license for the enlarging of the
Black Friars Church, to break and take down a part of the Wall of the City,
from Ludgate to the River of Thames: He also granted to Henry Waleis, Mayor,
and the Citizens of London, the favor to take toward the making of the wall,
and enclosure of the City, certain customs, or toll, as appears by his
Grant. This wall was then to be made from Ludgate west to Fleetbridge, along
behind the houses, and along by the water of the Fleet unto the River of
Thames. Moreover, in the year 1310. Edward the second commanded the Citizens
to make up the Wall already begun, and the Tower at the end of the same Wall,
within the water of Thames, near unto the Black Friars, etc. 1322. the second
of Edward the third, the Walls of this City were repaired. Patent.
It was also granted by King Richard the second, in the tenth year of his
reign, that a toll should be taken of the wares, sold by Land or by Water,
(for ten years) toward the repairing of the Walls, and cleansing of the
Ditch about London. In the 17. of Edward the fourth, Ralph Ioseline Mayor,
caused part of the Wall about the City of London to be repaired; to wit,
betwixt Ealdgate and Aldersgate. He also caused the Moore-field to be searched
for clay, and brick thereof to be made and burnt: he likewise caused chalk to
be brought out of Kent, and to be burnt into lime in the same Moore-field, for
more furtherance of the work. Then the Skinners, to begin in the East, made
that part of the Wall, betwixt Ealdgate and Buries marks, toward Bishopsgate;
as may appear by their Arms in three places fixed there. The Mayor, with his
Company of Drapers, made all that part betwixt Bishopsgate and Alhallowes
Church in the same Wall, and from Alhallowes toward the Posterne called
Mooregate. A great part of the same Wall was repaired by the Executors of Sir
John Crosby, late Alderman, as may appear by his Arms in two places there
fixed: And other Companies repaired the rest of the Wall to the Posterne of
Cripplegate.

In a Record which I have seen, and affirmed also by John Rouse, and (after
him) by Raphael Holinshed, I find thus written: In Anno 1477. by the diligence
of Ralph Ioseline, Mayor of London, the Wall about London was new made, betwixt
Aldgate and Creplegate. He caused the Moore-fields to be searched for clay, and
brick to be made and burnt there. He caused chalk also to be brought out of
Kent, and in the same Moore-fields to be burnt into lime, only for the
furtherance of that work. The Mayor, with his company of Drapers, made all
that part betwixt Bishopsgate and Alhallowes Church in the same wall.
Bishopsgate new builded.
Bishopsgate it self was new built by the Merchants Almanes of the Stillyard.
And from Alhallowes Church in the wall, toward Mooregate, a great part of the
same was builded, of the goods, and by the Executours of Sir John Crosby,
sometimes an Alderman, and Mayor of London, as may appear by his Arms thereon
fixed in two places. The Company of Skinners made that part of the wall
between Ealdgate and Buries marks, toward Bishopsgate; as may appear by
their Arms in three places fixed. The other Companies of the City, made the
other deal of the wall: which was a great work to be done in one year.

The Goldsmiths repaired from Creplegate toward Aldersgate, and there the
work ceased. The circuit of the wall of London on the lands side, to wit, from
the Tower of London in the East, unto Ealdgate, Circuit of the Wall from the
East to the West, and accordingly to every gate.
is 82. Perches: from Ealdgate to Bishopsgate, 86. Perches: from Bishopsgate in
the North, to the Posterne of Creplegate, 162. Perches: from Creplegate to
Aldersgate, 75. Perches: from Aldersgate to Newgate, 66. Perches: from Newgate
in the West, to Ludgate, 42. Perches: in all, 513. Perches of assise. From
Ludgate to the Fleet-Dike West about 60. Perches: from Fleet-bridge South to
the River Thames, about 70. Perches: and so the Total of these Perches
amounts to 643. every Perch consisting of 5. yardes and an half; which do
yield 3536. yards and an half, containing 10608. foot, which make up two
English miles, and more by 608. foot.

Of Ancient and present Rivers, Brooks, Boorns, Pooles, Wels, and Conduits of
fresh Water, serving the City, as also of the Ditch compassing the Wall of the
same, for Defense thereof.
ANciently, until the Conquerours time, and two hundred years after, the
City of London was watered (besides the famous River of Thames on the south
part) with the River of Wels, as it was then called: on the west, with water
called Walbrooke, running through the midst of the City into the River of
Thames, serving the heart thereof: and with a fourth water or Boorne, which
ran within the City, through Langboorne Ward, watring that part in the East.
In the West Suburbs was also another great water, called Oldborne, which had
his fall into the River of the Wels.

Then were there three principal fountains or wels in the other Suburbs; to
wit, Holy-Well, Clements Well, and Clerks Well. Near unto this last named
Fountain, were diverse other wels; to wit, Skinners Well, Fags Well, Tode Well,
Loders Well, and Radwell. All which said Wels having the fall of their
overflowing into the foresaid River, much increased the stream, and in that
place, gave it the name of Well. In west Smithfield there was a Poole, in
Records called Horsepoole, and another near unto the parish Church of S. Giles
without Creplegate. Besides all which, they had in every street and lane of the
City, diverse fair Wels, and fresh Springs: and after this manner was this
City then served with sweet and fresh waters, which being since decayed, other
means have been sought to supply the want; as shall be showed: but first of
the aforementioned Rivers and other waters, is to be said as follows:

Thames, River of Thames.
the most famous River of this Island, begins a little above a Village called
Winchcomb in Oxfordshire, and still increasing, passes first by the University
of Oxford, and so (with a mavelous quiet course) to London, and thence
breaks into the French Ocean by maine tides, which twice in twenty four
hours does ebb and flow, more than threescore miles in lenght, to the great
commodity of Travailours, by which all kind of Merchandises are easily
conveyed to London, the principal Storchouse, and Staple of all commodities
within this Realm. So that, omitting to speak of great ships, and other
vessels of burden, there appertains to the City of London, Westminster, and
the Borough of Southwarke, above the number (as is supposed) of two thousand
Wherries, Wherries on the Thames.
and other small Boats, whereby three thousand poor men (at least) be set on
work, and maintained.

That the River of Wels in the West part of the City, River of Wels.
was of old so called of the Wels, it may be proved thus: William the
Conqueror, in his Charter to the College of Saint Martin le grand in London,
has these words: I do give and grant to the same Church, all the land and the
Moore without the Posterne which is called Creplegate, on either part of the
Posterne: that is to say, from the North corner of the Wall (as the River of
the Wels, there near running, departs the same Moore from the Wall) unto the
running water which enters the City. This water has been long since called,
the River of the Wels; which name of River continued, and it was so called in
the Reign of Edward the first: as shall be showed, with the decay also of the
said River.

In a fair book of Parliament records, D^cay of the River of the Wels.
now lately restored to the Tower, it appears, Parliament Record.
that a Parliament being holden at Carlisle, in the year 1307. the 35. of Edw.
the first, Henry Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, complained, that whereas (in times
past) the course of water, running at London under Oldborne-bridge, and
Fleet-bridge into the Thames, had been of such breadth and depth, that ten or
twelve Ships, River of Wels bare Ships.
Navies at once with Merchandises, were wont to come to the foresaid Bridge of
Fleet, and some of them unto Oldborne-bridge: Now the same course (by filth of
the Tanners, and such others) was sore decayed; also by raising of Wharfes, but
especially, by a diversion of the water, made by theni of the New Temple, for
their Milles standing without Baynards Castle, Patent Record.
in the first year of King John, Milles by Baynards Castle, made in the first
of K. John.
and by diverse others impediments, so as the said Ships could not enter as they
were wont, and as they ought. Wherefore he desired, that the Mayor of London,
with the Shiriffes, and other discreet Aldermen, might be appointed to view the
said course of the said water, and that by the oaths of good men, all the
foresaid hindrances might be removed, and it to be made as it was wont of old.
Whereupon Roger le Barbason, the Constable of the Tower, with the Mayor and
Shiriffes, were assigned to take with them honest and discreet men, and to make
diligent search and inquiry, how the said River was in former time, and that
they leave nothing that may hurt or stop it, River so called in the year
1307.
but keep it in the same estate that it was wont to be. So far the Record.

Whereupon it followed, that the said River was at that time cleansed, these
Milles removed, and other things done for the preservation of the course
thereof: notwithstanding never brought to the old depth and breadth: whereupon the
name of River ceased, and it was since called a Brook; namely, Turnemill or
Tremill Brook, Turnemill Brook.
for that diverse Milles were erected upon it, as appears by a fair Register
Book, containing the foundation of the Priorie at Clarken-well, and donation
of the lands thereunto belonging, as also by diverse other Records.

This Brook has been diverse times since cleansed, namely, and last of all to
any effect, in the year one thousand five hundred and two, the seventeenth of
Henry the Seventh, the whole course of Fleet-Dike, then so called, was scowred
(I say) down unto the Thames, so that Boats with Fish and Fuel were rowed to
Fleet-bridge and Oldborne-bridge, as they of old time had been accustomed,
which was a great commodity to all the inhabitants in that part of the City.

In the year 1589. was granted a fifteen by a common Council of the City, for
the clensing of this Brook or Dike: Fleet-Dike promised to be cleansed, the
money collected, and the Citizens deceived.
the money amounting to a thousand marks, was collected, and it was undertaken,
that by drawing diverse Springs about Hampsted Heath into one head and course,
both the City should be served of fresh water in all places of want, and
also, that by such a follower, (as men call it) the channel of this Brook
should be scowred into the River of Thames. But much money being therein spent,
the effect failed; so that the Brook, by means of continual incrochments
upon the banks, getting over the water, and casting of soylage into the
stream, is now become worse cloyed than ever it was before.

The running water, so called by William Conqueror in his said Charter, which
enters the City, etc. (before there was any ditch) between Bishopsgate and
the late-made Posterne called Mooregate, entered the wall, and was truly of the
wall called Walbrooke, not of Gualo, as some have far fetched. It ran through
the City, with diverse windings from the North toward the South, into the
River of Thames; and had (over the same) diverse Bridges along the streets and
lanes through which it passed. I have read in an old Book, long since printed,
that the Prior of holy Trinity within Ealdgate, ought to make over Walbrooke in
the Ward of Broadstreet, against the stone wall of the City, viz. the same
bridge that is next the Church of All Saints at the Wall. Also, that the Prior
of the New Hospital, S. Mary Spittle, without Bishopsgate, ought to make the
middle part of one other Bridge next to the said Bridge toward the North: and
that in the 28. year of Edward the first, it was by Inquisition found before
the Mayor of London, that the Parish of S. Stephen upon Walbrooke, ought of
right to scowre the course of the said Brook; and therefore the Shiriffes were
commanded to distraine the said Parishioners so to do. In the year 1300. the
keepers of those bridges at that time, were William Jordan, and John de Bever.
This watercourse having diverse Bridges, was afterward vaulted over with
Brick, Walbrooke vaulted and paved over.
and paved level with the streets and lanes, where-through it passed; and
since that also, houses have been builded thereon, so that the course of
Walbrooke is now hid under ground, and thereby hardly known.

Langborne water, Langborne.
so called of the length thereof, was a great stream breaking out of the
ground in Fen Church street, which ran down with a swift course, west,
through the street, thwart Grastreet, and down Lumbard street, to the west end
of Saint Mary Wolnoths Church, and then turning the course South, Shareborne
Lane.
down Shareborne Lane (so termed of sharing or dividing) it brake into diverse
rilles or rillets to the River of Thames. Of this Boorne that Ward took the
name, and is to this day called Langborne Ward. Langborne Ward.
This Boorne is also long since stopped up at the head, and the rest of the
course filled up, and paved over, so that no sign thereof remains, more than
the names aforesaid.

Oldborne or Hilborne, Oldborne.
was the like water, breaking out about the place where now the Bars do
stand, and it ran down the whole street to Oldborne bridge, and into the
River of the Wels, or Turne-mill brook. This Boorne was likewise (long since)
stopped up at the head, and in other places, where the same has broken out:
but yet till this day, the said street is there called, high Oldborne hill, and
both the sides thereof, (together with all the grounds adjoining, that lie
betwixt it and the River of Thames) remain full of Springs, so that water is
there found at hand, and hard to be stopped in every house.

There are (says Fitzstephen) near London, Fitzstephen.
on the North side, special Wels in the suburbs, sweet, wholesome and clear,
among which, Holy Well, Clerks Well, and Clements Well, are most famous,
and frequented by scholars and youths of the City in summer evenings, when
they walk forth to take the Air.

The first, Holy Well,
to wit, Holy Well, is much decayed and spoiled, with filthiness purposely laid
there, for the heightning of the ground for Garden plots.

The Fountain called Saint Clements Well, Clements Well.
North from the Parish Church of S. Clements, and near unto an Inn of
Chancerie, called Clements Inn, is fair curbed square with hard stone, clean
for common use, and is always full.

The third is called Clerks Well, Clarks Well.
or Clarken-Well, and is curbed about square with hard stone: not far from
the west end of Clarken-well Church, but close without the Wall that incloseth
it. The said Church the took name of the Well; and the Well took name of the
Parish Clerks in London, who (of old time) were accustomed there yearly to
assemble, and to play some large History of holy Scripture. For example, of
later time, to wit, in the year 1390. the 14. of Richard the second, I read,
Plays by the Parish Clarks at Clarks Well.
that the Parish Clerks of London, on the 18. of July, played Enterludes at
Skinners Well, near unto Clerks Well, which Play continued three days
together, the King, Queen, and Nobles being present. Also the year 1409. the
tenth of Henry the fourth, they played a Play at the Skinners Well, Plays at
the Skinners well.
which lasted eight days, and was of matter from the Creation of the world:
there were to see the same, the most part of the Nobles and Gentiles in
England, etc.

Other smaller Wels were many near unto Clerks well; Skinners well.
namely Skinners well, so called, for that the Skinners of London held there
certain Plays, yearly played of holy Scripture, etc. In place whereof,
Wrestling place.
the wrestlings have of latter years been kept, and is in part continued at
Bartholomewtide.

Then was there Fags well, Fags well.
near unto Smithfield, by the Charter House, now lately dammed up. Todwell,
Loders well, and Radwell are all decayed, and so filled up, that their places
are hardly now discerned.

Somewhat North from Holy well, is one other Well, curbed square with stone,
and is called Dame Annis the clear; and not far from it, but somewhat west,
is also another clear water, called Perilous Pond, because diverse Youths (by
swimming therein) have been drowned. And thus much be said for Fountains and
Wels.

Horsepoole in West smithfield, was sometime a great water; and because the
inhabitants in that part of the City did there water their Horses, the same
was in old Records called Horsepoole. It is now much decayed, the Springs being
stopped up, and the Land-water falling into the small bottom, remaining
enclosed with Brick, is called Smith-field Pond.

By S. Giles Churchyard was a large water, Poole without Creplegate.
called a Poole: I read in the year 1244. that Anne of Lodbury was drowned
therein. This Poole is now (for the most part) stopped up; but the Spring is
preserved, and was coopeped about with stone, by the Executors of Richard
Whittington.

The said River of Wels, the running water of Walbrooke, the Boornes
aforenamed, and other the fresh waters that were in and about this City, being
in process of time, by incroachment for buildings, and heightnings of grounds,
utterly decayed, and the number of Citizens mightily increased; they were
forced to seek fresh waters abroad; whereof some, at the request of King
Henry the third, in the 21. year of his reign, Patent, 1236.
were (for the profit of the City, and good of the whole Realm thither
repairing; to wit, for the poor to drink, and the rich to dress their meat)
granted to the Citizens, Water conveyed from Teyborne.
and their Successors, by one Gilbert Sanford, with liberty to convey water
from the Town of Teyborne, by pipes of lead into their City.

The first Cisterne of lead, Andr. Horn. Great Conduit in west Cheap.
castellated with stone in the City of London, was called the Great Conduit in
west Cheap, which was begun to be builded in the year 1285. Henry Wales being
then Mayor: Water coe^veyed from Teyborne to London.
the watercourse from Padington to James head, has 510. rods; from James head
on the hill, to the Mewsgate, 102. rods; from the Mewsgate to the Cross in
Cheap, 484. rods.

The Tonne upon Cornhill was cisternated in the year 1401. Tonne upon Cornhill.
John Sandworth then being Mayor.

Bosses of water at Belinsgate, Bosse of Belinsgate, and other Bosses.
by Paul's wharfe, and by S. Giles Church without Creplegate, made about the
year 1423.

Water conveyed to the Gaoles of Newgate and Ludgate, 1432.

Water was first procured to the Standard in west Cheap, about the year 1285.
which Standard was again new builded by the Executors of John Wells, as shall
be showed in another place.

King Henry the sixth, in the year 1442. granted to John Hatherley, Mayor,
license to take up 200. fodar of Lead, for the building of Conduits, of a
common Granery, and of a common Granery, and of a new Cross in west Cheap,
for the honor of the City.

The Conduit in west Cheap, by Paul's gate, (commonly called, The little
Conduit) was builded about the year 1442. one thousand marks was granted by
common Council for the building thereof, and repairing of the other Conduits.

The Conduit in Aldermanbury, and the Standard in Fleetstreet, were made and
finished by the Executors of Sir William Eastfield, in the year 1471. A
Cisterne also was added to the Standard in Fleetstreet, and a Cisterne was made
at Fleet bridge, and another without Creplegate, in the year 1478.

Conduit in Grastreet, in the year 1491.

Conduit at Oldborne Cross, about 1498. again new made by Mr. William Lamb,
1577.

Little Conduit by the Stocks Market, about 1500.

Conduit at Bishopsgate, about 1513.

Conduit at London wall, against Colemanstreet, about 1528.

Conduit at Ealdgate without, about 1535.

Conduit in Lothbury, and in Colemanstreet, near to the Church, 1546.

Conduit of Thames water at Dowgate, 1568.

Thames water conveyed into men's houses by pipes of Lead, Thames water conveyed
into men's houses in the east part of the City.
from a most artificial Forcier standing near unto London Bridge, and made by
Peter Morbis, Dutchman, in the year 1582. for the service of the City on the
East part thereof.

Conduits of Thames water by the parish Churches of S. Mary Magdalen, Conduits
in old Fishstreet.
and S. Nicholas cole-Abbey, near unto old Fishstreet, in the year 1583.

One other new Forcier was made near to Broken Wharfe, Thames water conveyed
into the west part of the City.
to convey Thames water into men's houses of west Cheap, about Paul's,
Flectstreet, etc. by an English Gentleman, named Bevis Bulmer, in the year
1594.

Another Conduit was also built at Aldersgate, without the Gate, in Anno 1610.
and Thames water conveyed unto it in pipes of wood and stone, by an English
Gentleman, named Mr. Thomas Hayes.

Next to the Conduit water thus conveyed to Aldersgate, and as you have already
heard; that famous (and never to be forgotten) new River, brought from Chadwell
and Amwell, by the only care, cost, and liberal expenses of one worthy man,
Sir Hugh Middleton, Knight and Barornet, Citizen and Goldsmith of London,
deserves to be recorded in everlasting memory.

I spare here to speak of the length of time that such an intent was in
talking on, like much good matter, well motioned, though little minded; long
debated, but never concluded, till courage and resolution lovingly shook hands
together, as it appears it did in the Soul of this (no way to be daunted)
well-minded Gentleman.

For, Malignant enemies to all honest and commendable actions.
if those enemies to all good endeavors, Danger, Difficulty, Impossibility,
Detraction, Contempt, Scorn, Derision, yea, and Desperate Despite, could have
prevailed by their accursed and malevolent interposition, either before, at the
beginning, in the very birth of proceeding, or in the least stolen advantage of
the whole prosecution; this Work of so great worth had never bin accomplished.

I am not ignorant of an Act of Parliament, In or about the 10. year of her
reign.
granted by Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, to her Citizens of London, for
cutting and conveying a River from any part of Middlesex or Hertfordshire, to
the City of London, with a limitation of ten years time for the performance
thereof: But the expiration of her Royal life sooner came, than any such
matter would be undertaken.

Also our late gracious Sovereign King James pleased to grant the like Act
(but without date of time) for the same effect: and when all else refused, Sir
Hugh Middleto^ undertook it, to bring his intended River from Chadwell and
Amwell, to the North side of London, near Is^ington, where he builded a large
Cisterne to receive it.

The Work began the 20. day of February, When the River began at the first,
and finished in 5. years.
Anno Dom. 1608. and in five years space was fully accomplished: concerning the
conveyance of it along to London, from Chadwell and Amwell, I my self (by
favor of the Gentlemen) did diverse times ride to see it, and diligently
observed, that admirable Art, pains and industry were bestowed for the passage
of it, by reason that all grounds are not of a like nature, some being ozie and
very muddy, others again as stiff, craggy and stony.

The depth of the Trench (in some places) descended full thirty foot, The
ingenious conveying of the River in some places.
if no^ more; whereas (in other places) it required as sprightfull Art again,
to mount it over a valley in a Trough, between a couple of hills, and the
Trough all the while borne up by wooden Arches, some of them fixed in the
ground very deep, and rising in height above 23. foot.

Being brought to the intended Cisterne, The Lord Mayor and Aldermen rode to
see the Cisterne.
but not (as yet) the water admitted entrance thereinto: on Michael-masse day,
in Anno 1613. being the day when Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight, (Brother to the
said Sir Hugh Middleton) was elected Lord of London for the year ensuing; in
the afternoon of the same day, Sir John Swinerton, Knight, and Lord Mayor of
London, accompanied with the said Sir Thomas, Sir Henry Montague, Knight, and
Recorder of London, and many of the worthy Aldermen, rode to see the Cisterne,
and first issuing of the River thereinto: which was performed in this manner:

A troop of Laborers, The workmen in the Cisterne.
to the number of 60. or more, well apparelled, and wearing green Monmouth
Caps, all alike, carried Spades, Shovels, Pickaxes, and such like instruments
of laborious employment, marching after Drums twice or thrice about the
Cisterne, presented themselves before the Mount, where the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and a worthy company beside, stood to behold them, and one man (in
behalf of all the rest) delivered this Speech.

The Speech at the Cisterne, according as it was delivered to me.
LOng have we labored, long desird and prayed
For this great works perfection: and by th'ayd
Of Heaven, and good men's wishes, it is at length
Happily conquered by Cost, Art, and Strength.
And after five years dcare expense in days,
Tr^vaile and (...), beside the infinite Ways
Of Malice, (...), false suggestions;
Able to daunt the spirits of mighty ones
In wealth and courage: This, a work so rare,
Only by one man's industry, cost and care,
Is brought to (...) effect, so much withstood;
His only aim, the Cities general good.
And where (before) many (...) complaints,
Enviously (...) often restraints,
Stops, and great crosses, to our Masters charge,
And the Works hindrance: favor n^w at large
Spread it self open to him, and commends
To admiration both his pains and ends.
(The Kings most gracious love) Perfection draws
Favor from Princes, and (from all) applause.
Then worthy Magistrates, to whose content,
(Next to the State) all this great care was bent,
And for the public good (which grace requires)
Your loves and furtherance chiefly he desires,
To cherish these proceedings, which may give
Courage to some that may hereafter live,
To practice deeds of Goodness, and of Fame,
And gladly light their Actions by his Name.
Clarke of the Work, reach me the Book to show,
How many Arts from such is Labor flow.
First, hered the Overseer, All this he reads in the Clarks Book.
this tried man,
An ancient Soldier, and an Artizan.
The Clarke, next him Mathematician,
The Master of the rimber-worke takes place
Next after these; the Measurer, in like case,
Brick-layer, and Enginer; and after those;
The Borer and the Pavier. Then it shows
The Laborers next; Keeper of Amwell-head,
The VValkers last: so all their names are read.
Yet these but parcels of six hundred more,
That (at one time) have been imployd before.
Yet these in sight, and all the rest will say,
That all the week they had their Royal pay.
Now, At the letting open of the Sluice.
for the fruits then: Flow forth; precious Spring,
So long and dearly sought for, and now bring
Comfort to all that love thee: loudly sing,
And with thy Crystal murmurs struck together,
Bid all thy true wel-wishers welcome hither.
At which words the Floodgates flew open, the stream ran gallantly into the
Cisterne, Drums and Trumpets sounding in triumphall manner, and a brave Peale
of Chambers gave full issue to the intended entertainment.

Thus much for waters serving this City; first by Rivers, Brooks, Boorns,
Fountains, Pooles, etc. And since by Conduits, partly made by good and
charitable Citizens, and otherwise by charges of the Communalty, as shall be
more amply showed in our description of the Wards wherein they are placed.

And now some Benefactors to these Conduits shall be remembered. Benefactors
toward the Water-Conduits.


In the year 1236. certain Merchant strangers, of Cities beyond the Seas, to
wit, of Amiens, Corby, and Nele, for privileges which they enjoyed in this
City, gave 100 l. toward the charges of conveying water from the Town of
Teyborne.

Robert Large, Mayor, 1439. gave to the new water Conduits then in hand, 40.
Marks; and toward the vaulting over of Walbrooke, near to the parish Church
of S. Margarets in Lothbury, 200. Marks.

Sir William Eastfield, Mayor, 1438. conveyed water from Teyborne to
Fleetstreet, to Aldermanbury, and from Hightory to Creplegate.

William Combs, Sheriff, 1441. gave to the work of the Conduits. 10. l.
Richard Rawson, one of the Sheriffs, 1476. gave 20. l. Robert Revel, one of
the Sheriffs, 1490. gave 10. l. John Matthew, Mayor, 1490. gave 20. l. William
Bucke, Tailor, in the year 1494. toward repairing of Conduits, gave 100.
Marks. Dame Thomasin widow, late wife to Sir John Percivall, Merchant Tailor,
Mayor, in the year 1498. gave toward the Conduit in Oldborne, 20. Marks.
Richard Shore, one of the Sheriffs, 1505. gave to the Conduit in Oldborne, 10.
l. The Lady Ascue, widow to Sir Christopher Ascue, 1543. gave toward the
Conduits, 100. l. David Woodroofe, Sheriff, 1554. gave toward the Conduit at
Bishopsgate, 20. l. Edward Iackman, one of the Sheriffs, 1564. gave toward
the Conduits, 100. l. Barnard Randulph, common Sergeant of the City, 1583.
gave to the water Conduits, 900. l.
Thus much for the Conduits of fresh water to this City.

Of the Ancient and famous River of Thames, whence it deriveth her head or
original, and so conveyeth it self on to the Cities service, being supplied
by diverse other sweet Rivers in her course,
YOU have already heard, what Rivers, Brooks, Boornes, Pooles and Conduits of
fresh water have liberally afforded (out of their plenty) most commodious help
for the service of so great a City. And yet the River of Thames, The River of
Thames a chife honor to the whole Land, and especially to the City of London.
much more famous than all the reft, yielding by Forniers, Conduits, and other
means of conveyance, inestimable benefit to the City, we have said little or
nothing of her due worth, neither of her antiquity, course and original, all
which deserve to be more especially respected. According therefore to the
advice of very wise and learned judgments, and borrowing such helps as they
have gladly lent me, I will begin with the head or spring of this famous River,
and show how it glideth along in current, until it come to embrace the bosom
of the Sea, and there to take up her entertainment in his liquid arms. Giving
credit to such men's writings, The head or beginning of the Thames out of the
side of an Hill in Cotswold, neete to Tetbury.
as have (of set purpose) sought out the Spring of the Thames, it is faithfully
affirmed, That this famous stream has her head or beginning, out of the side
of an Hill, standing in the Plains of Cotswold, about a mile from Tetbury,
near unto the Fosse, (an highway so called of old) where it was sometime named
Isis, Isis, or the Ouse.
or the Ouse, although diverse do (ignorantly) call it Thames even there;
rather of a foolish custom, than any skill, because they either neglect, or
are utterly ignorant, how it was named at the first. From hence it runs
directly toward the East, (as all good Rivers should do) and meets with the
Cirne or Churne, a Brook, The Cirne called corinium.
called in Latin Corinium: whereof Cirncester Town (by which it comes) does
take the denomination in most opinions.

From hence it hastes unto Creekelade, Creekelade.
alias Crekanford, Lechlade.
Lechlade, Radcotebridge, Newbridge, Radcotebridge.
and Evesham, receiving (by the way) an infinite sort of small Streams,
Newbridge.
Brooks, Evesham.
Beckes, Waters and Rundels. And here (on this side of the Town) divides it
self into two courses, of which one goes straight to Botley and Hinksey; the
other passes by Godstow, a Village not far off. This later spreads it
self also (for a whi^^) into sundry smaller branches, which (...) not far,
before they be reunited, and then beclipping sundry pleasant Meddowes, Oxford
or Ouseford, so called of the River Charwell.
it passes at length by Oxford, of some supposed rather to be called Ouseford,
of this River, where it meets with the Charwell. A little from whence the
original branches do join, and go together by Abbandune (alias Sensham or
Abbington, Abbandune or Abbington.
as we call it,) although no part of it (at the first) came so near the Town
as it now does, Some write that the maine stream was brought thither, which
ran before between Andredes^ and Culingham.
till a branch thereof was led thither from the maine stream, through the
industry of the Monks, as (beside the testimony of old Records thereof, yet
extant to be seen) by the decay of Cair Dour, now Dorchester it self,
sometime the thorow-fare from Wales, and the West Country unto London, which
ensued upon this fact, Cair Dour, Dorchester.
is easy to be seen.

From hence it goes to Dorchester, and so unto Them, where joining with a
River of the same denomination, it loses the name of Isis or Ouse, Ousenie at
Oxford.
(whereof Ousennie at Oxford is producted) and from thence is called Thamesis
all along as it passes. Thamesis at Them, and so forward
From Them it goes to Wallingford, and so to Reding, which (in time past) of
the number of Bridges there, Reding sometime Pontium.
was called Pontium. Albeit that the English name does rather proceed from The
or Ree, the Saxon word for a watercourse or River: which may be seen in
Overee, S. Maryover Rhee.
or Suthree, for over the Ree, or south of the Ree; as to the skillful does
readily appear. Yet some hold, (and not altogether against probability and
likelihood) that the word Sutheree, is so called of Sudrijc; Sudrijc the South
Kingdom.
to wit, the south Kingdom, whereunto (in part) the Thames is a bound. But
that holds not in denomination, either of the said Chruch, or name of the
foresaid County. Other affirm likewise, that Reding is so called of the
Greek word (REO) which is to overflow. (REO) Reding, to overflow.


Surely, as neither of these conjectures are to be contemned, so the last
comes most near to mine aid, who affirm, that not only the course of every
water it self; but also his overflowing, The Saxon name to watercourse and
over-flowes.
was in times past called Rhee, by such Saxons as inhabited this Island. And
even to this day, in Essex, I have often observed, that when the lower grounds
(by rage of waters) has been over-flowne; the people beholding the same have
said; All is on a Rhee, All is now a River.
All is on a Rhee; as if they would have said; All is now a River. Albeit the
word River is derived from the French, and borrowed by them from the Latins:
but not without corruption, as it was brought to them. I will not here give
notice how far they are deceived, which call the aforesaid Church by the name
of Saint Mary Auderies, S. Mary Auderies, S. Mary over Isis or Ise.
or Saint Mary over Isis, or Ise: but I will proceed with the course of this
Noble Stream; which, howsoever these matters stand, Reding.
it has passed by Reding, and there received the Kenet, Kenet.
which comes from the Hills that lie West of Marleborough; Thetis, coming
from Thetisford.
and then the Thetis, commonly called the Tide, that comes from Thetisford.
It hyeth thence to Sudlington, Sudlington.
otherwise called Maidenhead, Maidenhead Windleshore.
and so to Windleshore, or Windsore, Aeton, Eaton.
and then to Chertsey, where Erkenwald Bishop of London, Chertsey.
sometime builded a Religious House or Cell, as I do read.

From Chertsey it hastes directly unto Stanes, Stanes.
and receiving another Stream by the way, Cole. Colebrooke.
called the Cole, (whereupon Colebrooke stands) it goes by Kingstone,
Kingstone.
Shene, Shene. Sion.
Sion, and Brentford, or Bregentford: Brentford,
where it meets with the Brane or the Brene, Brege^tford.
another Brook descending from Edgeworth. Brane, Brene.
Upon this Brook also, Sir John Thin had sometime a sumptuous and stately
House, Mortlach.
with a mavelous provision to enclose and retain such Fish, Putney.
as should come about the same. Fulham.
From Brentford it passes by Mortlach, Battersey.
Putney, Chelsey.
Fulham, Battersey, Lambeth.
Chelsey, Lambeth, and so to London. London.


Our famous River being thus brought to London, and hasting on apace, to meet
with Oceanus her amorous Husband: the first water that it then meets withal,
Tham^s beyond London, eastward.
is the Brom on Kent side, west of Greenwich, whose head is Bromis in Bromley
Perish, Brom on Kent side.
and going thence to Lewsham, Lewsham.
it takes in a water from the East, and so directs its course forthright
unto the Thames.

The next water that it meets withal, Wolwich. Lee or Luie on Essex side.
is on Essex side, almost against Wolwich, and that is the Lee or Luie. And
being past that, the Darwent also meets with our Thames on Kent side, Darwent
on Kent side.
two miles and more beneath Erith, it rising at Tanridge. The next River that
falls into the Thames, The Wany Isles.
is West of the Wanie Isles, a Rill of no great fame, neither long course: for,
rising about Coringham, it runs not many miles East, and by South, till it
falls into the mouth of this River, which I do now describe. Last of all we
come to the Medway, a notable River, in mine opinion, watering all the South,
and Southwest parts of Kent, in whose description we cannot (at this time)
proceed any further.

Having (in this manner) briefly touched this Noble River, and such Brooks as
fall into the same: I will insert a word or two, Commodities of this noble
River.
concerning the commodities of the said River, which I will perform with so
much brevity as is possible; hereby also finding out her whole tract and course
from the head, to the fall thereof into the Sea. It appears evidently, that
the length thereof is (at the least) an hundred and eighty miles, The length of
the Thames, from the head to the fall into the Sea.
if it be measured by the journies of the Land. And as it is in course, the
longest of the three famous Rivers of this I Will: so is it nothing inferior to
them, in abundance of all kind of Fish, whereof it is hard to say, which of the
three have either most plenty, or greatest variety, if the circumstances be
duly weighed.

What some other write, concerning the Rivers of their Countries, it skilleth
not, neither will I (as diverse do) invent strange things of this Noble
stream, therewith to nobilitate, An honorable affirmation of the River of
Thames.
and make it more honorable: But this will I in plain terms affirm, That it
neither swalloweth up bastards of the Celtish Brood, nor casts up the
right-begotten, that are thrown in, (without hurt) into their Mothers lap:
as Politian fableth of the Rhene, Position in lib. 8. Epist. Epist. ^.
Epistolarum lib. 8. Epist. 6. nor yields clots of gold, as the Tagus does:
but an infinite plenty of excellent, sweet and pleasant Fish, wherewith such as
inhabit near to her banks, are fed and fully nourished.

What should I speak of the fat and sweet Salmons, The great plenty of fat and
sweet Salmons taken in the Thames daily.
daily taken in this stream, and that in such plenty, (after the time of the
Smelt is past) as no River in Europe is able to exceed it? But what store also
of Barbels, Trowts, Chevins, Pearches, Smelts, Breames, Roches, Daces,
Gudgeons, Flounders, Shrimps, Eeles, etc. are commonly to be had therein, I
refer me to them that know by experience better than I, by reason of their
daily trade of fishing in the same. And albeit it seems from time to time, to
be (as it were) defrauded in sundry wise, The spoil and havok of covetous
Fishermen.
of these her large commodities, by the insatiable avarice of Fishermen: yet
this famous River complains commonly of no want, but the more it loses at
one time, the more it yields at another. Carps a Fish late brought into
England, and later into the Thames.
Only in Carpes it seems to be scant, since (not long since) that kind of
Fish was brought over into England, and but of late (to speak of) into this
stream; by the violent rage of Land-floods, that break open the heads and
dammes of diverse Gentlemen's Ponds, by which means it became somewhat partaker
also of this said commodity, whereof (before) it had no portion that I could
ever hear.

Oh that this worthy River might be spared but one year from Nets, etc. but
alas, then should many a poor man be undone. The River choked up with sands
and shelves in many places, a matter much pitttied, and requiring redress.
In the mean time it is lamentable to see, how it is and has been choked of
late, with sands and shelves, by the penning and wresting of the course of the
water for commodities sake. But as this is an inconveniency easily remedied, if
good order were taken for the redress thereof: so now, the fine or pay set
upon the Ballast, sometimes freely given to the Merchants by Patent, even to
the Lands end, (Iusques aupoinct) will be another cause of harm to this noble
stream: and all through an advantage taken at the want of an (i) in the word
ponct: which grew through an error committed by an English Notarie, unskilful
in the French tongue, wherein that Patent was granted.

Furthermore, the said River flows and fills all her channels, The River
ebbeth and flows every 12. hours, for the length of seventy miles.
twice in the day and night; that is, in every 12. hours once, and this ebbing
and flowing holds on for the space of 70. miles within the maine Land: the
stream or Tide being always highest at London, when the moon does exactly
touch the northeast, and south or west points of the heavens, of which one is
visible, the other under the earth, The alteration and difference of the tides.
and not in our sight. These Tides also differ in their times, each one coming
later than other, by so many minutes as pass, yet the revolution and natural
course of the heavens do reduce and bring about the said Planet, to these her
former places, whereby, the common difference between one Tide and another, is
found to consist of 24. minutes, which wants but 12. of a whole hour in 24.
as experience does confirm. In like sort, The just distance between one tide
and another.
we see by daily trial, that each Tide is not of equal height and greatness.
For at the full and change of the Moon, we have the greatest floods, and such
is their extraordinary course, that as they diminish from their changes and
fuls, unto the first and last quarters: so afterward they increase again,
until they come to the full and change.

Sometimes also they rise so high, The extraordinary rising of the tides, and
how caused.
(if the wind be at the North or North-east, which brings in the water with
more vehemence, because the Tide that fills the channel, comes from
Scotland ward) that the Thames overfloweth her banks near unto London: which
happens especially in the fuls and changes of January and February, wherein the
lower grounds are (of custom) soonest drowned. This order of flowing in like
sort is perpetual, so that when the Moon is on the South-west and North of
points, then is the water at London at the highest. Neither do the Tides
alter, except some rough winds out of the West or South-west, do keep back
and check the stream in her entrance: The stream oftentimes checked in her
entrance into the Land.
as the East and North-east do hasten the coming in thereof, or else some
other extraordinary occasion put by the ordinary course of the Northern Seas,
which do fill the said River by their natural return and flowing. And that
both these do happen eftsoons among, I refer me to such, as have not
seldom observed it: as also the sensible chopping in of three or four Tides
in one natural day, whereof the unskilful do descant many things, according
to their minds.

But howsoever these small matters do fall out, Two several times of the
Moon, the waters find their true course
and how often soever this course of the stream does happen to be disturbed:
yet at two several times of the Moon, the Waters return to their natural
course and limits of time exactly. Polydore says, The error of Polydore Virgil.
that this River is seldom increased, or rather never overfloweth her banks by
land-flouds: but he is herein very much deceived, as it shall more apparently
be seen hereafter. For the more that this River is put by of her right course,
the more the water must (of necessity) swell with the white waters, which run
down from the Land: because the passage cannot be so swift and ready in the
winding, as in the straight course.

The Land-flouds also do greatly stain the finenesse of the stream,
Land-floods do much stain the streams finenesse.
insomuch that after a great land-floud, you shall take up Haddocks with your
hands beneath the Bridge, as they float aloft on the water: whose eyes are so
blinded with the thickness of that element, that they cannot see where to
become, and make shift to save themselves before death take hold on them.
Thames water as clear as that of the Sea.
Otherwise, the water (of it self) is very clear, and, in comparison, next
unto that of the Sea, which is most subtle and pure of all other; as that of
great Rivers is most excellent in comparison of small brooks. The objection of
Aristotle answered.
Although Aristotle will have the salt water to be most gross, because a Ship
will bear a greater burden on the Sea, than on the fresh water, and an Egg
sinks in this, that swimmeth in the other. But he may easily be answered, by
the quantity of room, and abundance of waters in the Sea, whereby it becomes
of more force, to sustain such vessels as are committed to the same, and
whereunto the greatest Rivers are nothing comparable.

I would here make mention of sundry Bridges over this noble stream: of which,
that of London is most chiefly to be commended: for it is (in a manner) a
continual street, well replenished with large and stately houses on both
sides, and situate upon twenty Arches, whereof each one is made of excellent
free stone, every of them being threescore foot in height, and full twenty in
distance one from another, as I have often viewed. In the like manner, I could
entreat of the infinite number of Swans daily to be seen upon this River, and
of two thousand Wherries and small Boats, Two thousand boats upon the Thames,
and 3000. pooremen maintained by the same, whole gains come in most in the
Term time.
whereby three thousand poor Watermen are maintained, through the carriage and
recarriage of such persons as pass or repasse (from time to time) upon the
same. Beside, those huge Tide-boats, Tilt-boats, and Barges, which either carry
passengers, or bring necessary provision from all quarters of Oxfordshire,
Barkeshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire, Middlesex, Essex,
Surrey, and Kent, unto the City of London.

Having thus far proceeded in the description of this famous River, even from
her head and original, till her embracing the Sea: I thought good to go on a
little further, concerning the extent of the Thames jurisdiction, The exte^t of
the River of Thames under the jurisdiction of the L. Mayor, Communalty and
Citizens of London.
from a place called Colnie Ditch, a little above the Bridge of Stanes
westward, to London Bridge: and from thence to a certain place called Yendall,
alias Yenland, alias Yenleete, and of the Water of Medway, as being matter more
proper to the City of Londons Survey, than any other discourse else
whatsoever. For many years, the authority and jurisdiction of this River, has
undoubtedly belonged to the Lord Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens of London, by
the sufficient testimony of diverse Grants, Charters, and Confirmations, made by
the precedent Kings and Queens of this Land, Acts of Parliament for the Cities
prerogative on the River.
and by our late deceased King James of happy memory, besides sundry Acts of
Parliament ordained to that end.

But because some question appeared to be not long since made by the Lord high
Admiral of England, concerning that case of Power or Jurisdiction, a full and
final conclusion was at length established, between the Lord high Admiral,
and the Lord Mayor and Communalty of London also, concerning the Prerogative
then questioned.

Whereby, as in former ancient privileges, the right and title has been
always evident; so then it appeared a plain and manifest case, that the Lord
Mayor of London for the time being, and his successors for ever in that eminent
dignity, The Lord Mayor of London his title and authority over the River, and
to inflict punishment on all offenders.
have full power and authority over the said Rivers, the Lord Mayor bearing the
style and title of Conservator or preserver of them, within the forenamed
bounds and limits; Having absolute power, of inflicting punishment for all
unlawful fishings, either by Fishermen or any other, fishing within the same
at any time: yea, and to search, oversee and punish all such, as shall abuse
his lawful authority in those proceedings from time to time. And because his
great and serious employments withhold him from such attending on this
important business, as the urgent necessity thereof does (almost continually)
require: The water Bailiffe of London, his power on the River under the L.
Mayor.
he has a Deputy or Substitute, named the Water-Bayliffe of London, who under
his Honors authority, and by virtue of his more absolute power, does
continually search, oversee and punish all offenders, that dare infringe those
rights of duty, belonging to so famous a River, or make spoil of that intended
for general benefit.

And whereas there are a certain company of Fishermen, Tinckermen mighty
destroyers of the Fry of Fish.
called Tinckermen, frequenting the River of Thames, Eastward, who (in times
past) not onley have been reported, but also manifestly approved, and found
out, to make an infinite destruction of the young brood and Fry of Fish, by use
of unlawful Nets, and unpermittable Engines, feeding and glutting their Hogs
with them, as M. Doctor Dee reports: By the diligent and extraordinary cost
and care of the Lord Mayor, his Brethren, and the rest of the Citizens of
London, as also the vigilant respect of his worthy Officer the Water-Bayliffe,
day and night attending to cut off such an horrible abuse; those unlawful Nets
and Engines are now quite suppressed, and a true and orderly form of fishing
brought into use, Waste and spoil very providently prevented and cut off.
that such waste and havocke may no more be made. Through which restraint of
robbery, and application of continual providence, our River of Thames (the
honor and beauty of this whole Island) is become again most rich and
plentiful, yielding daily out of her bountiful bosom, great store of Fish of
all kinds, and at much more reasonable rate, than in many years past has
been seen, as our weekly Markets in this Honorable City, can better
testify, than I report: a matter highly to be commended, and (no doubt) but
will be as heedfully continued.

Upon a great complaint lately made to the Lord Mayor, Timbers in the Thames at
Tilbury hope no mean hurt to the River.
concerning Timbers being and standing in Tilbury Hope, beneath Gravesend, a
matter not only perilous to passengers upon the River, but a cause also to
destroy (infinitely) the young brood and fry of Fish, by the harms those
Timbers did to Fishermens Nets, by reason of their continual standing in the
maine course, and speedy current of the stream, which was mightily annoyed and
injured thereby: his honorable care extended so far, that by the pains and
diligence of his Water-Bayliffe, being thereto by his Office and place
warrantably directed, those grievous hurts and annoyances were all taken up,
and conveyed to the Guildhall in London, as an example to all that should dare
to offend in the like nature, or presume to prejudice such an honorable course
of our fishing, as it is faithfully reported, at every Tide, by day and night,
four Bushels of small Fish and Fry, (continually throughout the whole) are
saved and preserved by this worthy providence, The benefit ensuing by taking up
those annoying Timbers out of the stream.
which otherwise had remained to the former desperate spoil, and continued a
great hindrance to the abounding increase now likely to ensue thereby.

The Lord Mayor and Communalty, not many years since, have caused this Noble
River of Thames westward, The clearing and clensing of the River westward of
stops and hatches.
to be cleared and cleansed of 79. stops or hatches, consisting of diverse great
stakes and piles, purposely erected by Fishermen for their private gain, and
standing dangerous for passengers near unto the fair deep: so that none of
them do now remain upon the River, but only such as stand out of the
passable to fair way, and can be no prejudice to passengers. For otherwise,
they serve as a great succor to the young breed and Fry, being planted at the
waters bottom, and placed so remotely on the River; that they releeve and
comfort many poor Fishermen thereon dwelling. Some things seeming hurtful,
may be beneficial as they are used.
Beside, in the great heat and drought of Summer, when usually water is most
scanty, these are then the cause of raising it so high, that Barges may well
and safely pass, with all kind of goods to our ancient Mother City; whereas
else they would be grounded, how many soever, and be void of passage, by
lowness of the water.

There are likewise a number of Fishermen belonging to the River of Thames,
Tinckermen, Hebbermen, Petermen, Trawlerme^, All great abusers of Gods
blessings in the River.
some styled by the name of Tinckermen, others, Hebbermen, Petermen,
Trawlermen, etc. that have lived (in precedent times) by very unlawful fishing
on this River, and to the great injury of her abounding store. But by means
of this wel-provided restriction, so forwarded in the maine Magistrate, and
followed in the diligent endeavor of the careful Water-Bayliffe, (making no
spare of his pains at all times whatsoever) their insolence has been reduced
to a more temperate qualification, and the awful hand of civil Government
appears to carry much better respect, than formerly it did.

Nor let this provident care, both for the safety of passengers on the River,
Care had of the River of Thames in former times.
and preservation of the Breed, Fry, and Fish in the River, be understood as
a matter of novelty, without any precedent example in elder days; when it
plainly appears, that the very like course was kept and effected in the time
of King Henry the fourth, the seventh year of his reign, Anno Dom. 1405. Also
more late in the days of King Henry the eighth, etc. As appears by Records
in diverse Chronicles, and so warranted and avouched, as already has been
said, and shall (in more ample manner) hereafter appear.

Concerning the controversiall question, The end of controversy concerning the
Thames and Medway.
about the Rivers of Thames and Medway, all variance and difference was
absolutely concluded, in the year 1613 the twentieth day of Mary: Sir John
Swynnerton Knight, being then Lord Mayor, and careful Conservator of the said
Rivers rights; and Thomas Sparrey, Esquire, his Substiture, and respective
Water-Bayliffe, for the performing of such a maine trust reposed in him,
appertaining justly unto his place and office.

At eight several times yearly, Courts kept for the yearly preservation of
the River.
within the four Countries of Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Essex, the Lord
Mayor of London for the time then being, with his Brethren the Aldermen, for
the better maintaining of the Rivers rights and privileges, do sit in person
judicially, and charge four Juries by oath, to make inquisition after all
offenses, committed upon the River of Thames. And as the verdict (presented by
the said Jurie) makes appearance, so do they accordingly proceed to the
punishment of the transgressors, answerably to the nature of their offenses,
and as to Justice shall see me expedient: Wherein, the Rivers prosperity,
safety of passengers, and general good of the Commonwealth, are their
chiefest respects.

And because it may appear more probably unto all men, A late and honorable
testimony what care the City has for the Rivers conservation.
in what worthy manner the Lord Mayor and his Brethren do proceed in this
case, by the help of Master Edmund Howes, Gent. I have hereto added, the last
Courts that were kept about this Rivers service, in the time of Sir John
Iolles, Knight, to take away all sinister scruple or doubt, that can be
otherwise alleged. For he being present in the Journey, (as I my self might
also have been, if my leisure would have so permitted) observed the course of
all that then passed, and as he delivered it to me, so have I set it down,
with some other few collections of mine own, out of such Antiquities as have
come to my hands.

A further testimony concerning the River of Thames, and of the right and
authority of the Lord Mayor of London, to the conservancie of the said River,
etc.
IN the year 1616. on Wednesday, being the third of July, Sir John Iolles,
Knight, L. Mayor of the City of London, and Conservator of the River of
Thames, What Aldermen and other went with the L. Mayor in the journey.
and waters of Medway, assisted and accompanied by Francis Jones, Edward
Rotheram, Alexander Prescot, Martin Lumley, Aldermen of London; and William
Gore, Alderman, and Shiriffe (at that time) of the said City; Thomas Jones
Esquire, Common Sergeant of the said City, in the absence of Sir Henry
Mountague, Recorder of the same City, attended by Thomas Sparrey, Esquire,
Subconservator of the said River of Thames, with fifty Officers and other
servants, took Barges at Belinsgate, and (within few hours) arrived at
Gravesend in Kent, where a Session for the Conservancie of the said River was
kept, before the said Lord Mayor, and his forenamed Assistants.

At which time and place, A Jury of Freeholders of the said country.
a Jurie of Freeholders of the said Country, being sworn to enquire of all
offenses committed in any part of that River whatsoever within the said County;
Master Common Sergeant delivered them a charge to this effect:

That, The effect of Mr. Common Sergeants charge to the Jury.
forasmuch as there had not been any Session of Conservancy in many years
past, kept by any Lord Mayor of London in that place: it was probable and
evident, that they could not be well informed, neither of the Lord Majors
jurisdiction and power, to reform annoyances and offenses there, and to
inflict due punishment upon the offenders, nor of the nature of the service by
them to be performed, in the course of their inquiry. And therefore he
thought it convenient, to make known unto them, both the one and the other.

And hereupon he showed them, that the Jurisdiction of the City of London, The
exte^dure of the City of Londons Jurisdiction in the River of Thames.
in the River of Thames, from Stanes Bridge Westward, unto the points of the
River next the Sea Eastward, appeared to belong to the City, in manner and
form as follows:

In point of Right
1. By Prescription. 2. By allowance in Eire. 3. By ancient Charters. 4. By
Acts of Parliament. 5. By Inquisitions. 6. By Decrees upon Hearing Coram Rege
ipso, and in Camera Stellata. 7. By Letters Patents. 8. By Proclaimations. 9.
By Report of the Kings Council learned. 10. By a Quo Warranto.
In point of Usage
1. By ancient Ordinances. 2. By punishment of offenders. 3. By Writs and
Precepts. 4. By accounts for charges of Searches, from 17. R. 2. till 2. Eliz.
Regina. 5. By Commissions. 6. By continual claim ever since 37. Hen. 8. when
the Lord Admiral first interrupted the City, to exercise her authority below
London Bridge.
And to crown all these points both of right and usage, To cut off all
controversies in times to come.
Et ad omnem controversiam temporibus futuris tollendam: the City of London
has King James his most gracious and liberal Charter in that point granted,
in the third year of his Majesty's happy reign.

1. By Prescription.
IT appears by an ancient Book, called Dunthorne, Ex Lib. vocat. Dunthorn.
that Civitatis fundationis, aedificationis and constructionis, causa erat
Thamesis Fluvius; quorum vero Civitatis and fluminis gubernationem tam Duces,
Maiores, Custodes, Vicecomites, Aldr. The Cities go^^vernment of the River.
and Magnates Civitatis memoratae hucusque obtinuerunt and habuerunt. So as the
government of the River has belonged to the City time out of mind.

In 21. H. 3. Jorden Coventry, Kidels removed by the Shiriffe of London, sent
by the Mayor and Aldermen.
one of the Shiriffes of London, was by the Mayor and Aldermen sent, to remove
certain Kiddels that annoyed the Rivers of Thames and Medway; who ultra
Yenland versus Mare, did take diverse persons that were offenders, and
imprisoned them. Whereupon, complaint being made to King H. 3. he took the
matter ill at the first, and sent for the Lord Mayor and Citizens to
Kennington; and upon hearing of the matter before the said King, The Cities
Jurisdiction on the River, approved before King Hen. 3.
the Cities Jurisdiction on the River was set forth and allowed, and the
Complainants convicted, and every of them amerced at 10. pounds, and the
Amercements adjudged to the City; and their Nets were afterward burned, by
judgment given by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in the Hustings.

37. H. 3. In the 37-year of King Hen. 3.
Eodem Anno, ante Pentecostem, Vicecomites London, quia aqua Thamisiae pertinet
ad London, per praecetum dict. Dom. Regis, deriverunt omnes alios gurgites a
London usabque; Mare.

1. R. 2. Writs to the Shiriffes of Kent and Essex, The Citizens not to be
troubled in their liberties.
reciting the Cities title, with command, not to suffer the Citizens of London
to be molested, contrary to the liberties formerly granted and allowed unto
them.

2. In Eire.
In 41. H. 3. Before Hugh Bigot, The Cities Jurisdiction on the River, called
in question.
being Justice Itinerant, the Shiriffes and Citizens of London were called in
question, for their jurisdiction exercised on the Thames. Before whom, it was
found by a Jurie in Southwarke, Quod nullus aliquid juris habet in Thamisia,
usque ad novum gurgitem, nisi Cives London.

14. Ed. 2. Lib. Antiq. Reg. 156. The Constable of the Tower was indicted by
diverse Wards of London, The Constable of the Tower indicted by the Wards of
London.
before the Justices in Eire at the Tower: De muneris and recep. cove. pro
Kidellis in Thamisijs. Et Constabularius ad Kidellas respondet, quod Justice.
non habent jurisdictionem extra London, plitum. inde cognoscere cum praedict.
Kidelli sunt in alijs Comitatibus. Et Justice, dixerunt, aqua Thamisiae pertinet
ad Civitatem London, usque mare; and si velit respondeat: who then pleaded, Not
guilty.

3. By Charters.
8. R. 1. Dom. K. Richard the first his Charter.
Richardus Rex, filius Regis Henrici secundi, concessit and firmiter praecepit,
ut omnes Kidelli qui sunt in Thamisia amoveantur, ubicunque fuerint in Thamisia.

1. Ioh. Rex concessit and firmiter praecepit, K. John his Charter.
ut omnes Kidelli qui sunt in Thamisia vel in Medway amoveantur, and ne caeteri
Kidelli alicubi ponantur in Thamisia vel in Medway, super forf. x. li.
sterlingorum.

Henry the third, son to King John, granted this Charter to the City, in
form following:

HENRY by the Grace of God, The Charter of K. Hen. 3. as it is recorded in the
ancient Book called the Customs of London.
King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and Earl
of Anjou: Unto Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Justices,
Sheriffs, Stewards, Ministers, and to all Bailiffes, and to all his true men,
greeting: Weteth well, that we, for the health of our soul, and the health of
the soul of King John our Fader, and the souls of all our Ancestors; and
also for common profit of our City of London, and of all our Realm, have
granted and steadfastly commanded: That all the Wears that been in Thames or
in Medway, where that ever they be in Thames or in Medway, be done away: And
that from henceforth, no Wears be set in Thames nor in Medway, upon the
forfaiture of ten pounds. Also we claim quite to our Citizens of London, all
that that the Constable of our Tower of London was wont to take of the said
Wears. Wherefore we will, and steadfastly command, that no Constable of the
aforesaid Tower, at any time from henceforth forward, any thing ask, nor any
grievance do to any of the same City, by enchesen of the same Wears. It is
to us known enough, and by our true men do us to understand, that most
privacie and least profit might fall unto the same City, and to the whole
Realm, by enchesen of the same wears: which we make forever firm and stable
to the same City, as the Charter of our Lord King John our Fader, which our
Barons of London thereof have reasonably witnessed. Witnesses, Eustace of
London, Peter of Winchester, Ioceline of Bath, Richard of Salisbury, Bishops:
Hubert of Burgh, Earl of Kent, our Justice; Gilbert of Clare, Earl of
Gloucester and Hertford; Raufe Fitz-Nichol, and Richard of Argentine, our
Stewards. Given by the hand of our Worshipful Fader, Raufe, Bishop of
Chichester, our Chancellor, at Westminster, the 18. day of February, the
year of our reign, eleven.

In the 68. Article also are these words: Authority of the Citizens for
punishment.
And that the said Citizens remene and do away all the Wears in Thames and
Medway, and that they have the punishment thereof longing to us.

Likewise in the 68. Article are these words: The Constable of the Tower to
make no prices of victuals.
And the Constable of the Tower of London make no prices by Land nor by water,
of vitaile or any other things whatsoever they been, of men of the aforesaid
City, nor of none other, coming to the City, nor going out. Nor he shall not
arresten by any manner of way, Ships ne Boats, bringing or leading vitaile or
other merchandises to the City, or fro the City aforesaid.

11. H. 3. Concessimus etiam eisdem Baronibus nostris, Anno 11. Hen. 3.
and Carta nostra confirmavimus, quod habeant bone and in pace libere and
quiet, omnes libertates suas quibus hactenus usi sunt, tam in Civitate London,
quam extra; tam in aquis, quam in terris and omnibus aliis locis.

7. E. 3. Volumus and concedimus, Anno 7. Ed. 3.
quod dicti Cives amoveant and capiant omnes Kidellas in aqua Thamistae and
Medway, and habeant punitiones ad nos inde pertinentes.

4. By Acts of Parliament.
W. 2. Ca. 47. An. 13. L. 1. No Salmons to be taken, Against taking of Salmons.
from the nativity of our Lady, unto S. Martins day, in all points. Nor none to
be taken in Mill. pooles, from the midst of April, until Midsummer.

1. Offense, Punishment of offenders.
burning the Nets and Engines.

2. Imprisonment for a quarter of a year.

3. For a whole year.

13. R. 2. Cap. 19. Confirms the other, Anno 13. Ric. 2^.
and restraines the taking of young Salmons in many waters, from the midst of
April until Midsummer, upon the same pain.

None (within that time) to use any Nets called Stalkers, Nets called Stalkers.
nor any other Engines, by which the Fry may be destroyed, upon the same
pain.

17. R. 2. Cap. 9. Justices of peace shall be Conservators, Justices of peace
conservators for destruction of the Fry and brood.
and to survey all offenses against the said Statutes, and shall survey and
search all the Wears, that they be not strait, for the destruction of the Fry
and brood, but of reasonable wideness, Appointment of under-conservators, and
their charge.
after the old assize. And they shall punish according to the said Statutes;
and they to appoint under-conservators, who shall be sworn. And the same
Justices shall enquire, as well ex officio, as by information of the
under-conservators: And such as be indicted, they shall cause to come before
them; and if they be thereof convicted, they shall have imprisonment, and make
fine after the discretion of the same Justices. And if the same be at the
information of any of the under-conservators, he shall have half the fine.

11. Hen. 7. Cap. 15. The like power is granted to the Mayor of London, Power
of the Lord Mayor of London, in breaches and creeks*
in Breaches and in Creeks, as in the River, so far as it ebbeth and flows:
except in the Kings ground, or in the liberties and franchises of others.

1. Eliz. Chap. 17. None shall with any manner of Net, Against Nets, Weeles, and
other Engines, for the destroying of Fish.
We Will, But-eayning, Kepper, Lymecreele, Raw Fagnet, Trolnet, Trymnet,
Scalboat, Weblister, Sturlamet, or with any other device or engines, made of
cheer, woollbine, canvas; or shall by any heeling-Nets, or Trimbleboat, or any
other device, engine, cautelles, ways or means soever, heretofore made or
devised, or hereafter to be made or devised, take and kill any young brood,
spawne, or fry of Eeles, Salmon, Pike or Pickerell, or of any other Fish, in
any floudgate, pipe or the tail of any Mill, Wear, or in any straites,
streams, brooks, Rivers, salt or fresh.

Secondly, For killing of Salmons and Trow^s out of season.
none shall take and kill any Salmons and Trowts, not being in season, being
kepper Salmons, or kepper Trowts, or shedder Salmons or shedder Trowts.

Thirdly, Length of Pike, Pickerel, Salmon, Trowt, Barbel, etc.
none shall take and kill any Pike or Pickerell, not being in length ten
intches Fish, and more; nor any Salmon, not being 16. intches fish, and more;
nor any Trowt, not being eight intches; nor any Barbell, not being 12. intches,
and more.

Fourthly, Order for fishing with Nets and Tramels.
none to fish with any Nets, Tramels, Keep, Wear, Helm, Creele; or by any
other Engine, device, ways or means; but only with Net or Tramell; whereof
every mesh or mash shall be two intches and an half broad; Angling excepted.

A Provisio, An Exception.
that this shall not extend to Smelts, Roches, Minoes, Bulheads, Gudgeons or
Eeles, in place where the same have been used to be taken. Penalty for
offenders.


The Offenders to lose for every offense 20. shillings, and the fish; and also
the unlawful Nets, Engines and Instruments.

The Mayor of London (inter alia) shall have full power and authority by this
Act, The Mayor of London his power for inquiry, etc.
to enquire of all offenses committed contrary to this Act, by the oaths of
twelve men or more, and to hear and determine all and every the same.

The pains and forfeitures to be at the use of every such person and persons
(being no body politic nor corporate, For the pains and forfeitures.
or head of the same) before whom such conviction shall be had: and to the use
of every body politic and corporate, that hereafter have lawfully had any
fines, etc. upon such conviction.

5. By Inquisition.
By two Inquisitions, Inquisitions at Raynam and at Gravesend, before the Lord
Mayor of London, Conservator, etc.
the one taken at Raynam in Essex, the other at Gravesend in Kent: 9. Hen. 5.
before William Cambridge, Grocer, then Lord Mayor of London, and Conservator of
the waiters of Thames and Medway; it was presented, That where by the ancient
ordinances of London, the Mesches of Nets should be two intches in the
forepart, and one intch in the hinder-part. And further, it was thereby found,
that the offenses in the same Inquisition, are contra libertates and
consuetudines Civitatis. And it was adjudged, that the Nets should be burned,
according to the ancient custom in that behalf provided.

6. By Decrees.
In 8. H. 4. The Mayor and Aldermen of London did exhibit their humble
Petition to the Kings Council, The long conservation of the River of Thames
exhibited to the Council of K. Hen. 4.
reciting that (time out of mind) they have had the Conservation and
correction of the River of Thames, and of all Trinckes, Nets and other Engines
whatsoever, in the Rivers of Thames and Medway placed, and have used to make a
Subconservator under them: And complained, that Alexander Bonner, then
Subco^servator, having done his duty in removing Kiddels, Abusers of the
subconservator of the River.
he was evil entreated by the owners: the same owners dwelling in Erith,
Pratriferry, Barking, Woolwich, and other places in the Counties of Kent and
Essex. And upon hearing of the matter in Camera Stellata, they were found
guilty, and constrained to submit themselves to the Lord Mayor, and ordered
(always) to bring their Nets to the Lord Mayor, before they should use them:
And that the Kiddels then taken, should be at the disposition of the Lord
Mayor: and the offenders made their submission accordingly.

7. By Letters Patents.
A Grant made by King E. 4. to the E. of Pembrooke, A Grant to the Earl of
Pembrooke for building of a Wear in the Thames cancelled afterward.
for building a Wear in the River of Thames: which Grant was canceled at the
request of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, upon showing of their right, for that
it was contrary to their ancient liberties. At which time the Cities title to
the conservacie of the River of Thames and Medway, was at large set forth, and
is recited to have been shown to the Lord Chancelour, and to the Earl and
his Council; and was afterward allowed, and the Patent thereupon cancelled.

8. By Proclamations.
By Proclamation made by King H. 8. in 34. of his Reign, The conservacy of the
Thames to the Lord Mayor, without interruption.
it is affirmed, that the Lord Mayor and his predecessors, have had by diverse
Grants of the Kings of England, and by Acts of Parliament, and have also long
enjoyed the conservacy of Thames, without interruptio^ or impediment of the
said King Hen. 8. or of any of his Subjects. And by the same Proclamation it
was commanded, that none should resist, deny, or impugn the Lord Mayor and his
Deputy, in doing or executing any thing, for the conservacie of the River, and
of the Fish and Fry within the same.

9. By Report.
A Controversy being between the Lord Admiral and the Lord Mayor, For
measuring of Coals, and other things on the River of Thames, a controversy.
for the measuring of Coals and other things upon the Thames: it then fell
into consideration, to whom the conservacie of the said River did belong. Which
cause, in Anno 1597. was by the Lords of the Queens most Honorable Privy
Council, referred to the then Attorney general, and Solliciter; who certified
(among other things) that the conservacy of the River of Thames did, and ought
to belong to the City of London.

10. By Quo Warranto.
3. Iacobi Regis, A Quo Warranto brought against the City for the Rivers
conservacie.
A Quo Warranto was brought against the City in the Exchequer, to know, by
what title they claimed the conservacie of the River of Thames, and of the
waters of Medway: The City made their title to the same, by ancient
prescription: and judgment was given for them.

For proof of Usage.
1. By ancient Ordinances. 2. By punishment of offenders.
THe Lord Mayor and Aldermen have (time out of mind) made Ordinances, Times
and manner of fishing.
concerning the good government of the River of Thames, for the times and
manners of Fishing beneath London Bridge Eastward, to be observed upon pains.
And it appears, (that from time to time) from the time of King Hen. 3. and so
downward, Removing of all unlawful Engines for fishing.
the Lord Mayor has removed Kiddels, Wears, Trinkes, and other unlawful
Engines, and has reformed the disorders of such as have offended in the River
of Thames; Punishment of offenders.
and punished offenders, sometimes by imprisonment, sometimes by Fine, and by
burning of their unlawful Nets.

3. By Writs and Precepts.
9. H. 5. Precepts under the Test of the Lord Mayor, Precept for the recurning
of Iuries.
to the Shiriffes of Kent and Essex, for the returning of Juries before the
Lord Mayor, to enquire of offenses done in the River of Thames.

4. By Accounts.
In the accounts of the Chamberlain of London, Accounts of the Chamberlain of
London.
from 17. of R. 2. to 11. of Eliz. Reginae, it appears, that the
Water-Bailiffe of London has made search for unlawful Nets, in the waters of
Thames and Medway.

5. By Commissions.
9. H. 5. Commission to the Lord Mayor, Commission for execution of Acts of
Parliament.
to put in execution the Acts of Parliament, made for the conservacie of Thames
and Medway; and to enquire of all offenses made or done in the said waters, and
to punish the delinquents for the same.

A like Commission 3. H. 6. A like Commission 1. Eliz. A like Commission 1.
Iacobi.
And all these, or the like Commissions in this case, were and are directed to
the Lord Mayor for the time being.

6. By continual claim.
37. H. 8. Letters from the Lord Admiral, A stay moved for matters in
question, by letters from my Lord Admiral.
for stay of such matters as were then in question, between his Lordship and
the City, concerning the Jurisdiction of this City upon the Thames.

3. Edw. 6. Order, that the Chamberlain should take care, An order for stay of
Inquests.
for stay of certain Inquests, charged by virtue of a Commission, directed to
the Lord Admiral, to enquire of abuses used in fishing beneath the Bridge.

4. Edw. 6. Master Common Sergeant, The Cities authority to pull down wears
in the River.
appointed to repair to the Duke of Somerset, and to inform his Lordship of
the Cities authority, in pulling down Wears within the River of Thames.

6. Edw. 6. Order, that suit should be made to the Kings Majesty and his
Council, Determination of the Cities jurisdictio^.
for the determination and allowance of the Cities Jurisdiction and interest in
the River of Thames.

1. Mariae Reginae, A great number of the Fishermen of the East side of London,
present in the Court of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, Obedience commanded to the
Water-Bayliffe.
were commanded to obey the Water-Bayliffe: And that one Hunter of the
Admiraltie, should be warned to be before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, at the
next Court to be holden for the same matter.

1. Eliz. Reginae, Committees appointed about the controversy.
Certain Committees appointed to confer with the L. Admiral, touching the
controversy between his Honor and the City, concerning the conservacie of
the River of Thames.

3. Eliz. Committees for the jurisdiction of the River.
Certain Committees appointed to attend the Lord Admiral, concerning the
Jurisdiction of the River of Thames.

7. Eliz. For the same cause.
The Lord Admiral to be conferred with, touching the Cities Jurisdiction in
the River of Thames.

8. Eliz. The Cities right to the conservacy.
L. Admiral to be conferred with, touching the Cities right to the conservacy
of the River of Thames.

13. Eliz. L. Admiral to be moved, that the City may enjoy their liberties in
Thames and Medway. The Cities liberty in the River.


17. Eliz. The Cities title Eastward.
Aldermen and others, to confer with the Lord Admiral, for the Cities title
in the River eastward.

23. Eliz. The Conservacy below the Bridge.
Mr. Norton and others appointed to attend on the Lord Treasurer of England,
and to inform his Lordship touching the Cities title to the conservacie of the
River of Thames below London Bridge.

23. Eliz. Sessions appointed for the conservancie of the River of Thames,
Sessions for the conservacy Eastward.
the ninth of October at Barking in Essex, and on Wednesday following, to be
kept at Woolwith in Kent.

24. Eliz. Aldermen about the co^servacy.
Certain Aldermen appointed to treat with the Lord Admiral, touching the
conservacy.

29. Aldermen appointed to the L. Admiral, Aldermen again appointed about the
Cities right.
and to inform his Lordship touching the Cities right to the conservacie of
the River of Thames, from London Bridge, to Yenland and the Reculvers.

In the Letters Patents, The kings letters patents to the City.
granted by King James of happy memory, in the 3. year of his reign; the
Cities title to the conservacie of the River of Thames and the waters of
Medway, is recited and set down at large. And therein mention is made, that
the City has been interrupted in the said office, and a doubt conceived,
that the same did not belong to his Highness City of London. His Majesty
therefore (of his especial grace and favor to the City of London) Ad omnem
controversiam in hac part temporibus tam praesentibus quam futuris tollendam,
ac omne dubium amovendum: did by those his Letters Patents, grant, ratify and
confirm to the City of London, the conservacie of the said River of Thames,
and waters of Medway.

So much concerning the Right and Usage.

Now, Concerning the extent of the word co^servacy.
de re ipsa. This word Conservancie, does extend it self to the preservation
of the stream, and the banks of the River; as also the Fish and Fry within
the same. For by the Laws of the Land, all navigable Rivers are the high
streams of the King, Navigable Rivers are as Via Regia.
for the passage of Ships, Boats, etc. As the highway is Via Regia, for the
people to pass by. And if the banks be not kept from decaying and
incroachment: it will not only be an annoyance to the River it self, by
diverting the water, and hindering the Navigation; but will also annoy the
grounds next adjoining to the same. Due seasons for taking fish
And if the Fish be taken at undue seasons, and the Fry not kept and
preserved, the fishing will be soon destroyed.

And first touching the stream: Inquiry for the stream, Wears, Kidels,
Engines, etc. in the Rivers for hindering passage.
you are to enquire whether any person or persons have erected any Wears,
Kiddels, or Engines, or knocked any Posts, Piles, or Stakes within the Rivers,
or any part thereof, which may (in any sort) hinder the stream, or the
navigation, or passage of any Ships, Barges, Boats, or vessels within the same.
And whether any have cast any soil, dust or rubbish, or other filth
whatsoever, into the same. You are to present the persons, times, and places,
touching the committing of every such offense.

Secondly, you are to enquire of all encroachments upon the River, and the
banks of the same: For encrochme^ts on the River and banks.
and of all Bridges, Floodgates, Mill-dammes, and such like annoyances,
erected and builded upon, or near to the banks of the same River; and where,
and by whom, and when the same were done.

Thirdly, For fishing at undue seasons, and with unlawful nets, etc.
for the preservation of the Fish and Fry within the River, you are to
enquire, whether any Fishermen, or others, have fished at any undue or
prohibited seasons, or with any unlawful and prohibited Nets, or Engines: and
when, where, and by whom every such offense was committed.

Thus much for a general direction. But for your more particular instruction,
and for the ease of your memories, here are certain printed Articles, Articles
for more particular instruction.
which you shall have with you; to every one of which you shall give a
particular answer.

The like charge was given by the said Master Common Sergeant, on the next day
following, at Lee, in the County of Essex; and the like Sessions kept there for
the same purpose.

The Towne-ditch without the Wall of the CITY.
THe Ditch, which partly now remains, Lib. Dunstable.
and compassed the wall of the City, Ditch about London 200. foot broad Lib.
Trin.
was begun to be made by the Londoners, in the year 1211. and finished 1213.
the 15. of K. John: this ditch being then made of 200. foot broad, caused no
small hindrance to the Canons of the holy Trinity, whose Church stood near
Ealdgate, for that the said ditch passed through their ground from the Tower
unto Bishopsgate. This Ditch being originally made for the defense of the
City, was also long time together carefully cleansed and maintained, as need
required: but now of late neglected, and forced either to a very narrow, and
the same a filthy channel, or altogether stopped up, for Gardens planted, and
houses builded thereon, even to the Wall, and in many places upon both Ditch
and Wall, houses are builded, to what danger of the City, I leave to wiser
consideration than mine own: and can but wish that reformation might be had.

In the year of Christ 1354. 28. Ed. 3. the ditch of this City flowing over
the bank into the Tower ditch, Ditch of the City overflowed the bank, into
the Tower Ditch.
the King commanded the said ditch of the City to be cleansed and so ordered,
that the overflowing thereof, should not force any filth into the Tower ditch.

Ann. 1379. John Philpot, Mayor of London, caused this ditch to be cleansed, and
every household to pay 5. d. which was for a days work toward the charges
thereof. R. 2. in the 10. of his reign, granted a Toll to be taken of wares
sold by water or by land for 10. years, toward repairing the wall, and
clensing the ditch.

Thomas Fawconer Mayor, 1414. caused the ditch to be cleansed.

Ralph Ioseline Mayor, 1477. caused the whole ditch to be cleansed, and so from
time to time it was cleansed and otherwise reformed: namely, in 1519. the 10 of
Hen. 8. for clensing and scowring the ditch, between Ealdgate and the Posterne
next the Tower ditch: the chief ditcher had by the day 7. pence, the second
ditcher 6. pence, the other ditchers, 5. pence. And every vagabond (for so were
they then termed) one penny the day, meat and drink, at the charges of the
City.

Sum. 95. l. 3. s. 4. d.
In my remembrance also the same was cleansed, namely the Moore ditch, when Sir
William Hollies was Mayor, in the year 1540. and not long before, from the
Tower of London to Ealdgate.

It was again cleansed in the year 1549. Henry Ameotes being Mayor, at the
charges of the Companies. And again 1569. the 11. of Q. Eliz. for cleansing
the same Ditch, between Ealdgate and the Posterne, and making a new Sewere,
and Wharfe of Timber, from the head of the Posterne into the town ditch, 814.
l. 15. s. 8. d. Before the which time, the said ditch lay open, without wall or
pall, having therein great store of very good fish, Plenty of good fish in the
Town ditch.
of diverse sorts, as many men yet living, who have taken and tasted them, can
well witness: but now no such matter, the charge of cleansing is spared, and
great profit made by letting out the banks, with the spoil of the whole ditch.

I am not ignorant of two Fifteenes granted by a common Council, in the year
1595. for the reformation of this ditch, and that a small portion thereof, to
wit, between Bishopsgate and the Posterne called Mooregate, was cleansed, and
made somewhat broader than it was before: but filling again very fast, by
reason of over-raising the ground near adjoining, therefore never the better:
and I will so leave it, for I cannot help it.

Bridge of this City.
THe original foundation of London bridge, London Bridge first of ^imber.
by report of Bartholomew Linsted, alias Foul, last Prior of Saint Mary
Overees Church in Southwarke, A Ferry over the Thames between London Bridge
and Southwark.
was this: A Ferry being kept in the place where now the Bridge is builded, at
length the Ferry-man and his wife deceasing, left the same Ferry to their only
Daughter, a Maiden, named Mary, which with the goods left her by her parents,
as also with the profits rising of the said Ferry, builded an House of Sisters,
in place where now stands the East part of Saint Mary Overees Church, above
the Queere, where she was buried, unto which house she gave the oversight and
profits of the Ferry. But afterward, the said House of Sisters being converted
into a College of Priests, the Priests builded the Bridge of Timber, as all
other the great Bridges of this Land were, and from time to time kept the same
in good reparations; till at length, considering the great charges which were
bestowed in the repairing the same, there was (by aid of the Citizens and
others) a Bridge builded with stone, as shall be showed.

But first of the Timber Bridge, W. Malmes.
the Antiquity thereof being great, but uncertain: I remember to have read,
that in the year of Christ 994. Sweyn King of Denmark besieging the City of
London, both by water and by land, the Citizens manfully defended themselves,
and their King Ethelred, so as part of their enemies were slain in battle,
and part of them were drowned in the River of Thames, because in their hasty
rage they took no heed of the Bridge.

Moreover, in the year 1016. Can^tus the Dane, with a great Navy came up to
London, and on the South of the Thames, caused a Trench to be cast, through
the which his Ships were towed into the west side on the Bridge, and then, with
a deep Trench and straight siege he compassed the City about.

Also 1052. E. Goodwin, with the like Navy, taking his course up the River of
Thames, and finding no resistance on the Bridge, he sailed up the South side.
Further, 1067. Will. Conq. in his Charter to the Church of Saint Peter at
Westminster, confirmed to the Monks, serving God there, a Gate in London, then
called Buttolphs Gate, with a Wharfe, which was at the head of London Bridge.

We read likewise, that in the year 1114. the 14. of Henry the first, the
River of Thames was so dried up, and such want of Water there, that between
the Tower of London and the Bridge, and under the Bridge, Men went dry-shod
under London bridge.
not only with horse, but also a great number of men, women and children did
wade over on foot.

In the year 1122. the 22. of Hen. 1. Thomas Arden gave to the Monks of
Bermondsey, Lib. Bermond.
the Church of S. George in Southwarke, and five shillings rent by the year,
out of the Land pertaining to London Bridge.

I have also seen a Charter under seal, to the effect following:

Henry King of England, Henry 1.
to Ralfe Bishop of Chichester, and all the Ministers of Sussex, sends
greeting. Know ye, etc. I command by my Kingly authority, that the Manor
called Alceston, which my Father gave, with other Lands, to the Abbey of
Battle, be free and quiet from Shires and Hundreds, and all other Customs of
earthly servitude, as my Father held the same, most freely and quietly; and
namely, from the work of London bridge, and the work of the Castle at
Pevensey: and this I command upon my forfeiture. Witness William de
Pontlearche at Berry.

The which Charter, with the seal very fair, remains in the custody of
Joseph Holland, Gent.

In the year 1136 the first of King Stephen, Lib. Berm.
a fire began in the house of one Ailewarde, Lib. Trin.
near unto London stone, which consumed East to Ealdgate, and West to S.
Erkenwalds shrine in Paul's Church: London Bridge brent.
the Bridge of Timber over the River of Thames was also burnt, etc. but
afterward again repaired. For Fitz stephen writes, that in the Reign of
King Stephen, and of Henry the 2. when pastimes were showed on the River of
Thames, men stood in great number on the Bridge, Wharfes, and Houses, to behold.

Now in the year 1163. the same Bridge was not only repaired but new made of
timber, London Bridge of Timber new built.
as before, by Peter Cole-church, Priest and Chaplain.

Thus much for the old timber-bridge, maintained partly by the proper Lands
thereof, partly by the liberality of diverse persons, and partly by taxations in
diverse Shires, as I have proved for the space of 215. years, before the Bridge
of stone was built.

Now touching the foundation of the stone Bridge, London Bridge of stone
founded.
it follows: About the year 1176. the stone Bridge over the River of Thames
at London, was begun to be founded by the foresaid Peter of Cole-Church, near
unto the Bridge of Timber, but somewhat more toward the West: for I read,
that Buttolph-Wharfe was in the Conquerours time at the head of London Bridge.
Lib. Waverley.
The King assisted this work: A Cardinal then being Legate here, and Richard
Archbish. of Cant. gave one thousand marks toward the foundation. The course
of the River (for the time) was turned another way about by a Trench, cast for
that purpose; beginning (as is supposed) east about Radriffe, and ending in the
west about Patricksey, now termed Battersey. This work, to wit, the Arches,
Chapel, and stone Bridge over the Thames at London, London Bridge 33. years
in building.
having been 33. years in building, was in the year 1209. finished by the
worthy Merchants of London, Serle Mercer, William Almaine, and Benedict
Botewrite, principal masters of that work: for Peter Cole-Church deceased
four years before, and was buried in the Chapel on the Bridge, in the year
1205.

King John gave certain void places in London to build on, the profits thereof
to remain toward the charges of building and repayring of the same Bridge. A
Mason, being Master-workman of the Bridge, builded (from the foundation) the
large Chapel on that Bridge, Chapel on the Bridge, on the East side.
of his own charges; which Chapel was then endowed for two Priests, four
Clerks, etc. besides Chanteries; since founded by John Hatfield, and others.
After the finishing of this Chapel, which was the first building upon those
Arches, sundry houses (at times) were erected, and many charitable men gave
lands, Gifts give^ to London Bridge, in a table noted for posterity.
tenements, or sums of money toward the maintenance thereof; all which was
sometimes noted, and in a Table fair written for posterity: remaining in the
Chapel, till the same Chapel was turned to a dwelling house, and then
removed to the Bridge-house. The effect of which Table I was willing to have
published, in this Book, if I could have obtained the sight thereof: but
making the shorter work, I find by the account of William Mariner and
Christopher Eliot, Wardens of London Bridge, from Michaelmas the 22. of Hen. 7.
until Michaelmas next ensuing, by one whole year, that all the payments and
allowance came to 815. l. 17. s. 2. d. ob. as there is showed by particulars:
by which account then made, may be partly ghessed the great charges and
discharges of that Bridge at this day, when things be stretched to so great a
price. And now to actions on this Bridge.

The first action to be noted, was lamentable: Actions on London Bridge to be
noted.
for within four years after the finishing thereof, to wit, in the year
1212. on the 10. of July at night, the Borrought of Southwarke, upon the South
side of the River of Thames, as also the Church of our Lady of the Canons
there, being on fire, and an exceeding great multitude of people passing the
Bridge, either to extinguish and quench it, or else to gaze and behold it;
suddenly the North part, Liber Dunmew.
by blowing of the South wind, was also set on fire, and the people which were
even now passing the Bridge, Gua^t. Covent.
perceiving the same, W. Packe^to^.
would have returned, London Bridge perished by fire.
but were stopped by the fire; and it came to pass, that as they stayed or
protracted the time, the other end of the Bridge also, namely, the South end,
was fired; so that the people thronging themselves between the two fires, did
nothing else but expect present death. Then there came to aid them many ships
and vessels, into which the multitude so unadvisedly rushed, that the ships
being thereby drowned, they all perished. It was said, that through the fire
and shipwreck, there were destroyed above three thousand persons, whose bodies
were found in part, or half burned, besides those that were wholly burnt to
ashes, and could not be found. Five arches of London Bridge borne down.


About the year one thousand two hundred eighty two, through a great frost and
deep snow, five Arches of London Bridge were borne down, and carried away.

In the year 1289. the Bridge was so sore decayed for want of reparations,
Patent the 14. of Edw. the 2.
that men were afraid to pass thereon, and a Subsidy was granted toward the
amendment thereof, Sir John Britain being Custos of London, 1381. a great
collection or gathering was made, of all Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, for the reparations of London Bridge.

In Anno 1381. Wat Tyler, and other Rebels of Kent, by this Bridge entered the
City, as ye may read in my Summary and Annals.

In the year 1395. on S. Georges day, was a great Justing on London Bridge,
betwixt David Earl of Craford of Scotland, and the Lord Wels of England: In
the which, the Lord Wels was at the third course borne out of the Saddle: Which
History proves, that at that time the Bridge (being coaped on either side) was
not replenished with houses builded thereupon, as since it has been, and now
is.

The next year, Nine persons crowded to death on London Bridge.
on the 30. of November, the young Queen Isabel, commonly called the little,
(for she was but 8. years old) was conveyed from Kennington, beside Lambeth,
through Southwarke, to the Tower of London; and such a multitude of people went
out to see her, that on London Bridge nine persons were crowded to death, of
whom the Prior of Tiptre, a place in Essex, was one, and a Matron on Cornehill,
was another.

The Tower on London Bridge, at the North end of the drawbridge, Tower on
London Bridge builded.
(for that bridge was then readily to be drawn up, as well to give passage
for ships to Queenehith, as for the resistance of any foreign force) was
begun to be builded in the year 1426. John Rainwell being Mayor.

Another Tower there is on the said Bridge, over the Gate at the South end
toward Southwarke, whereof in another place shall be spoken.

In the year 1450. Jack Cade, Jack Cade entered the City by the Bridge
and other Rebels of Kent, by this Bridge entered the City, he struck his
sword on London stone, and said himself then to be Lord of the City; but they
were by the Citizens overcome on the same Bridge, and put to flight, as in my
Annals.

In the year 1471. Thomas the Bastard Fawconbridge besieged this Bridge,
Bastard Fawconbridge besieged the Bridge.
burned the Gate, and all the Houses to the drawbridge, being at that time 13
in number.

In the year 1481. an house, An house of the Bridge fell down.
called The common siege, on London Bridge, fell down into the Thames: through
the fall whereof five men were drawned.

In the year 1553. the third of February, Sir Thomas Wyat lay in Southwarke at
the Bridge foot.
Sir Thomas Wyat and the Kentish men, marched from Depeford toward London,
after knowledge whereof, forthwith the drawbridge was cut down and the Bridge
gates shut. The drawbridge cut down.
Wyat and his people entered Southwarke, where they lay till the 6. of Feb. but
could get no entry of the City by the Bridge, the same was then so well
defended by the Citizens, the Lord W. Howard assisting: wherefore be removed
toward Kingstone, etc. as in my Annals.

To conclude, of this Bridge over the said River of Thames, The bridge
described.
I affirm, as in other my descriptions, That it is a work very rare, having
with the drawbridge 20. arches, made of square stone, of height 60. foot, and
in breadth 30. foot, distant one from another 20. foot, compact and joined
together with vaults and cellars; upon both sides be houses builded, so that it
seems rather a continual street than a bridge: for the fortifying whereof,
against the incessant assaults of the River, it has overseers and officers,
(viz.) Wardens, as aforesaid, and others.

Fleet-bridge in the west, Fleet bridge.
without Ludgate, a bridge of stone, fair coaped on either side with iron
pikes, on the which toward the South, be also certain Lanthornes of stone,
for lights to be placed in Winter evenings, for commodity of travelers. Under
this Birdge runs a water, sometimes called (as I have said) the River of the
Wels; since, Turnemill brook; now, Fleet Dike, because it runs by the
Fleet, and sometime about the Fleet, so under Fleet-bridge into the River of
Thames.

This Bridge has been far greater in times past; but lessened, as the
watercourse has been narrowed.

It seems, this last Bridge to be made or repaired at the charges of John
Wels Mayor, in the year 1431: for on the coping is ingraved, Wels embraced by
Angels, like as on the Standard in Cheap, which he also builded. Thus much of
the Bridge: for of the watercourse and decay thereof, I have spoken in another
place.

Oldborne-bridge, Oldborne bridge.
over the said River of Wels more toward the North, was so called, of a Boorne
that sometimes randowne Oldborne Hill, into the said River: This bridge of
stone, like as Fleet-bridge, from Ludgate west, serves for passengers, with
carriage or otherwise, from Newgate toward the West and by North.

Cowbridge, more North over the same water, Cowbridge.
by Cowbridge street, or Cow-lane: this bridge being lately decayed, another of
timber is made somewhat more North, by Chicklane, etc.

Bridges over the Towne-ditch, there are diverse: Bridges over the TowneDitch.
to wit, without Ealdgate, without Bishopsgate, the Posterne called Mooregate,
the Posterne of Creplegate, without Aldersgate, the Posterne of Christ's
Hospital, Newgate and Ludgate: all these be over-paved level with the
streets. But one other there is of Timber, over the River of Wels, or Fleet
dike, between the precinct of the Black Friars, and the House of Bridewell.

There have been of old time also, Bridges over the course of Walbrooke.
diverse bridges in sundry places over the course of Walbrooke, as before I have
partly noted; besides Horshooe bridge, by the Church of S. John Baptist,
Horshooe bridge.
now called S. John's upon Walbrooke. I read that of old time, every person
having Lands on either side of the said brook, should cleanse the same, and
mend and repair the bridges so far as their Lands extended.

More, in the eleventh of Edward the third, the inhabitants upon the course of
this brook, were forced to pile and wall the sides thereof.

Also, that in the third of Henry the fifth, this watercourse had many
bridges, Walbrooke vaulted over, and paved with stone
since vaulted over with brick, and the streets where-through it passed, so
paved, that the same watercourse is now hardly discerned. For order was taken
in the second of Edw. the fourth, that such persons as had any ground lying on
either side of the River of Walbrooke, should vault and pave it over, so far
as his ground extended. And thus much for Bridges in this City may suffice.

Gates in the Wall of this City.
GAtes in the Wall of this City of old time, were four: Gates of London, 4.
East, West, North, and South.
to wit, Ealdgate, for the East, Aldersgate for the North, Ludgate for the
West, and the Bridgegate over the River of Thames for the South; but of later
times, for the ease of Citizens and passengers, diverse other Gates and
Posternes have been made, as shall be showed.

In the reign of Henry the second (says Fitzstephen) there were seven double
gates in the wall of this City, Seven double gates in the wall of this City.
but he names them not. It may therefore be supposed, he meant for the
first, the Gate next the Tower of London, now commonly called, the Posterne:
the next, to be Ealdgate; the third, Bishopsgate; the fourth, Aldersgate; the
fist, Newgate; the sixth, Ludgate; the seventh, Bridgegate. Other gates builded
beside.


Since the which time has been builded the Posterne called Mooregate, a
Posterne from Christ's Hospital toward S. Bartholomewes Hospital, etc. Now of
every of these Gates, and Posternes in the Wall, and also of certain
watergates over the River of Thames, severally somewhat may, and shall be
noted, as I find authority, or reasonable conjecture to warrant me.

The first Gate Eastward.
FOr the first, Posterne by the Tower.
now called the Posterne by the Tower of London, it shows by that part which
yet remains, to have been a fair and strong arched Gate, partly builded of
hard stone of Kent, and partly of stone brought from Cane in Normandy, since
the Conquest, and foundation of the high Tower, and served for passengers on
foot out of the East, from thence through the City to Ludgate in the West. The
ruin and overthrow of this Gate and Posterne began in the year 1190. the
second of Richard the first, when William Longshampe, Bishop of Ely, Chancelour
S. England, caused a part of the City Wall; to wit, from the said Gate toward
the River of Thames, to the white Tower, to be broken down, Wall embattelled
about the Tower of London.
for the enlarging of the said Tower, which he then encompassed far wide
about with a Wall embattelled, and is now the outer Wall. Ditch about the Tower.
He also caused a broad and deep ditch to be made without the same Wall,
intending, to have derived the River of Thames with her Tides, to have flowed
about it, which would not be. But the South side of this Gate, being then by
undermining at the foundation loosed, and greatly weakened; at length, to wit,
after 200. years and odd, Posterne sell down.
the same fell down, in the year 1440. the 18. of Henry the sixth, and was
never since by the Citizens re-edified. Such was their negligence then, which
has bred some trouble to their successors; since, they suffered a weak and
wooden building to be there made, inhabited by persons of lewd life, often by
inquest of Portsoken Ward presented, but not reformed: whereas in former times,
the said Posterne was accounted of, as other Gates of the City, and was
appointed to men of good credit. Amongst other, I have read, that in 49. Ed. 3.
John Cobbe was admitted Custos of the said Postern, and all the habitation
thereof, for term of his life, by W. Walworth, then Mayor of London, 1374.
being the first time of his Maioralty; for he was L. Mayor again in An. 1380.
More, that John Credy Esquire, in the 21. of Rich. 2. was admitted Custos of
the said Posterne and appurtenances, by R. Whittington, Mayor, the Aldermen and
Communalty, etc.

Ealdgate.
THe next Gate in the East, Ealdgate.
is called Ealdgate, of the antiquity or age thereof. This is one, and the
first of the four principal Gates, and also one of the seven double Gates,
mentioned by Fitzstephen. It has had two pair of Gates, though now but one,
the hooks of them both remain.

Also there has been two Portcloses, the one of them remained till the new
building of the Gate, the other wants, and the place of letting down was
manifest. For Antiquity of the Gate, it appears by a Charter of King Edgar,
Lib. Trinit.
to the Knights of Knighton Guild, that in his days, the said Port was called
Ealdgate, as ye may read in the Ward of Portsoken. Also Matild the Queen, wife
to Henry the first, having founded the Priorie of the Holy Trinity within
Ealdgate, gave to the same Church, to Norman, the first Prior, and the Canons
that devoutly served God there in the Port of Ealdgate, Soke or Court.
the Soke or Franches thereunto belonging, with all customs, as free as she
held the same. In the which Charter, she names the House Christ's Church, and
reports Ealdgate to be of its demaine.

More, Mat. Paris.
I read in the year 1215. that in the civil Wars between King John and his
Barons, the Londoners assisting the Barons faction, who then besieged
Northampton, and after came to Redford Castle, where they were well received by
William Beauchampe, and Captane of the same: having then also secret
intelligence, that they might enter the City of London, if they would; they
removed their Camp to Ware, from whence in the night coming to London, they
entered Ealdgate, and placing guardians or keepers of the Gates, they disposed
of all things in the City at their pleasure.

They spoiled the Friars houses, Radul. co^sh.
and searched their coffers: which being done, Robert Fitzwater, Ieffrey
Magnavile, Earl of Essex, and the Earl of Gloucester, chief Leaders of the
Army, applied all diligence to repair the Gates and Walls of this City,
with the stones taken from the Jews broken houses; namely Ealdgate, being then
most ruinous, (which had given them an easy entire) they repaired, Ealdgate
new builded.
or rather newly builded, after the manner of the Normans, strengly arched,
with bulwarks of stone, brought from Cane in Normandy, and small Brick,
called Flanders tile, was brought from thence, such as has been here used
since the Conquest, and not before.

In the year 1471. the 11. of Edward the 4. Thomas the Bastard Fawconbridge,
W. Dunthorne.
having assembled a riotous company of Shipmen and other, Thomas L.
Fawconbridge set upon Ealdgate.
in Essex and Kent, came to London with a great Navy of Ships, near to the
Tower: whereupon the Mayor and Aldermen, by consent of a common Council,
fortified all along the Thames side, from Bainards Castle to the Tower, with
armed men, Gunnes, and other instruments of war, to resist the invasion of the
Mariners, whereby the Thames side was safely preserved and kept, by the
Aldermen and other Citizens, that assembled thither in great numbers. Whereupon
the Rebels being denied passage through the City that way, set upon Ealdgate,
Bishopsgate, Creplegate, Aldersgate, London bridge, and along the River of
Thames; shooting arrows and gunnes into the City, Suburbs burnt.
fired the Suburbs, and burned more than threescore houses. And further, on
Sunday the eleventh of May, five thousand of them assaulting Ealdgate, wanne
the Bulwarks, Rebels wanne the Bulwarks of Ealdgate.
and entered the City; but the Portclose being let down, such as had entered,
were slain: and Robert Basset, Alderman of Ealdgate Ward, with the Recorder,
commanded in the Name of God to draw up the Portclose: which being done, they
issued out, and with sharp shot and fierce fight, put their enemies back so
far as Saint Buttolphus Church; by which time the Earl Rivers, and the
Lieutenant of the Tower, Lieutena^t of the Tower assisted the Citizens against
the Rebels.
was come with a fresh company; which joining together, discomfited the
Rebels, and put them to flight; whom the aforesaid Robert Basset, with other
Citizens, chased unto the Miles end, and from thence, some to Popular, some to
Stratford; flew many, and took many of them prisoners. In the mean while, the
Bastard having assaied other places upon the Water side, and little prevailing,
fled toward his Ships. Thus much for Ealdgate, as it was, and continued in
those elder days: But the new building thereof remains till I come to speak
of the Ward wherein the same Gate is situated.

Bishopsgate.
THe third and next Gate toward the North, Bishopsgate.
is called Bishopsgate: for that (as it may be supposed) the same was first
builded by some Bishop of London; though now unknown, when, or by whom: but
true it is, that this Gate was first builded for the case of passengers toward
the East, and by North; as into Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge-shire, etc. The
travelers into which parts (before the building of this Gate) were forced
(passing out at Eald-gate) to go East till they came unto the Miles end, and
then turned on the left hand to Blethenhall-greene, to Cambridge-heath, and so
North, or East and by North, as their journies lay. If they took not this way,
A further way winding about.
by the East out at Ealdgate, they must then take their way by the North out at
Aldersgate, through Aldersgatestreet, and Goswellstreet, toward Iseldon, and
by a cross of stone on their right hand, set up for a mark by the North end
of Golding-lane, to turn eastward through a long street, unto this day called
Alderstreet, to another cross then there standing, where now a Smiths forge is
placed, by Sewers ditch Church; and then to turn again North toward
Totenham, Enfield, Waltham, Ware, etc.

The eldest note that I read of this Bishopsgate, is, that Wiliam Blund one of
the Shiriffes of London, in the year 1210 sold to Serle Mercer, and william
Almaine, Procurators or Wardens of London Bridge, Lib. Trim.
all his Land, with the Garden, in the Parish of Saint Buttolph without
Bishopsgate, between the Land of Richard Casiarin, toward the North, and the
Land of Robert Crispie toward the South, and the highway called Bearewards
lane on the East, etc.

Next, Charter.
I read in a Charter, dated the year 1235. that Walter Brune, Citizen of
London, and Rosia his Wife, having founded the Priorie or new Hospital of our
blessed Lady, since called S. Mary Spittle, Bishopsgate street without.
without Bishopsgate, confirmed the same to the honor of God and our blessed
Lady, for Canons regular.

Also in the year 1247. Simeon FitzMary, Record.
one of the Shiriffes of London, in the 29. of Henry the third, founded the
Hospital of S. Mary called Bethlem, without Bishopsgate. Thus much for
antiquity of this Gate.

And now for repairing the same: Reparations of Bishopsgate.
I find, that Henry the 3. confirmed to the Merchants of the Haunce* that had
a house in the City, called Gi^^^alla Theutonicorum, certain Liberties and
Privileges: Edward the first also confirmed the same; in the tenth year of
whose reign it was found, that the said Merchants ought of right to repair
the said Gate, called Bishopsgate.

Whereupon Gerard Marbod, Bishopsgate repaired by the merchants of the Haunce.
Alderman of the Haunce, and other, then remaining in the City of London, for
themselves and all others, Merchants of the said Haunce, granted 210. marks
sterling to the Mayor and Citizens: and covenanted, that they and their
successors should (from time to time) repair the same Gate. Bishopsgate new
builded.
This Gate was again beautifully builded in the year 1479. in the reign of
Edward the fourth, by the said Hannce Merchants.

Moreover, Bishopsgate provided to have been new builded.
in the year 1551. These Haunce Merchants, having prepared stone for that
purpose, caused a new Gate to be framed, there to have been set up: but then
their liberties, through suit of our English Merchants, were seized into the
Kings hand, and so that work was stayed, and the old Gate yet remains.

Posterne of Mooregate.
TOuching the next Posterne, called Mooregate, Posterne called Mooregate.
I find, that Thomas Falconer, Mayor about the year 1415. the third of Henry
the 5. caused the Wall of the City to be broken near unto Colemanstreet, and
there builded a Posterne now called Mooregate, upon the Mooreside, where was
never Gate before. This Gate he made for ease of the Citizens, that way to
pass upon Cawseys into the Field for their recreation: The Fiold a mere
marish ground.
for the same Field was (at that time) a Marish. This Posterne was re-edified
by William Hampton, Fishmonger, Mayor, in the year 1472. In the year also
1511. the third of Hen. 8. Roger Achely Mayor, caused Dikes and Bridges to be
made, and the ground to be levelled, and made more commodious for passage;
since which time the same has been heightened so much, that the Dikes and
Bridges are covered: and it seems to me, that if it be made level with the
Battlements of the City Wall, yet will it be little the dryer, such was then
the moorish nature of that ground.

Posterne of Creplegate.
THe next is the Posterne of Creplegate, Posterne of Creplegate.
so called long before the Conquest. For I read in the History of Edmund, King
of the East Angles, Abba Floriacensis.
written by Abba Floriacensis, and by Burchard, Burchard.
sometime Secretary to Offa, King of Mertia; but since then, by John Lidgate,
Monk of Bury, that in the year 1010. the Danes spoiling the Kingdom of the
East Angles, Alwyne Bishop of Helmeham, caused the body of King Edmund the
Martyr, to be brought from Bedrisworth, (now called Bury S. Edmunds) through
the Kingdom of East Saxons, and so to London, in at Creplegate. A place, says
mine Author, so called of Cripples begging there: and at which Gate, (it was
said) the body entering, miracles were wrought, and some of the lame to go
upright, praising God. The body of King Edmund rested, for the space of three
years, in the Parish Church of Saint Gregory, near unto the Cathedral Church
of Saint Paul. Moreover, the Charter of William the Conqueror, confirming the
foundation of the College in London, Martin le grand.
called Saint Martin the great, has these words: I do give and grant to the
same Church, Liber S. Barlilmew.
and Canons serving GOD therein, all the lands, and the Moore without the
Posterne, which is called Creplegate, on either part of the Posterne. More I
read, that Alfune builded the Parish Church of S. Giles, nigh a Gate of the
City, called Porta contractorum, or Cripplesgate, about the year 1090.

This Posterne was sometime a Prison, Creplagate a prison for trespassers
whereunto such Citizens and others, as were arrested for debt, or common
trespasses, were committed, as they be now to the Compters. Which thing
appears by a Writ of Edward the first in these words: Rex Vic. London
salutem. Record.
Ex gravi querela B. capt. and detent. in prisona nostra de Criplesgate pro x.
l^. quas coram Radulpho de Sandwico, tunc Custod. Civitatis nostrae London, and
I. de Blackwell Civis recognit. debit. etc.

This Gate was new builded by the Brewers of London, Creplegate new builded.
in the year 1244. as says Fabians Manuscript.

Edmund Shaw Goldsmith, Mayor in the year one thousand four hundred eighty
three, at his decease, appointed by his Testament his Executors, with the cost
of four hundred Marks, and the stuff of the old Gate, called Cripplesgate,
to build the same Gate anew, which was performed and done in the year one
thousand four hundred ninety one.

Aldersgate.
THe next is Aeldersgate or Aldersgate, Aldersgate.
so called, not of Aldrich, or of Elders, that is to say, ancient men, builders
thereof; nor of Elderne trees, growing there more abundantly than in other
places, as some have fabuled ^^but for the very antiquity of the Gate it self,
In a book called, Bew^re the C^t.
as being one of the first four Gates of the City, and serving for the
Northern parts, as Ealdgate for the East; which two Gates being both old
Gates, are for difference sake called, the one Ealdgate, and the other
Aldersgate. This is the fourth principal Gate, and has at sundry times been
increased with buildings; namely, on the South side, or inner side, a great
frame of Timber has been added and set up, containing diverse large rooms and
lodgings. Also on the East side, is the addition of one great building of
Timber, A Well of great depth at Aldersgate.
with one large floor, paved with stone, or tile, and a Well therein curbed
with stone, of a great depth, and rising into the said Room, two stories high
from the ground: which well is the only peculiar note belonging to that Gate;
for I have not seen the like in all this City, to be raised so high. John Day
Stationer, a late famous Printer of many good Books, in our time dwelled in
this Gate, and builded much upon the Wall of the City, toward the Parish
Church of Saint Anne.

Concerning the late new building of this Gate, we shall speak more thereof,
in the description of the Ward.

Posterne out of Christ's Hospital.
THen there is also a Posterne gate made out of the Wall, (...) postern out of
Christ's Hospital.
on the North side of the late dissolved Cloister of Friars Minors, commonly of
their habit called Gray Friars, now Christ's Church and Hospital.

This Posterne was made in the sixth year of Edward the sixth, to pass from
the said Hospital of Christ's Church, unto the Hospital of Saint Bartholomew
in Smithfield: and license was given to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, to break
down so much of the Cities Wall as should suffice to make the same passage: by
virtue of an Act of common Council, made 1. Augusti, Anno 6. E. 6. in the
Maioralty of Sir Richard Dobbes, Knight.

Newgate.
THe next Gate on the West and by North, Newgate.
is termed Newgate, a latelier builded than the rest, and is the fifth
principal Gate. This Gate was first erected about the reign of Henry the
first, or of King Stephen, upon this occasion. The Cathedral Church of Saint
Paul, Paul's Church in London new builded.
being burnt about the year 1086. in the Reign of William the Conqueror,
Mauritius, then Bishop of London, repaired not the old Church, as some have
supposed; but began the foundation of a new work, such as men then judged
would never have been performed, it was to them so wonderful for height,
length, and breadth; as also in respect it was raised upon Arches or vaults, a
kind of workmanship brought in by the Normans, and never known to the
Artificers of this Land before that time, etc. After Mauritius, Richard
Beaumore did wonderfully advance the work of the said Church, purchasing the
large Streets and Lanes round about, wherein were wont to dwell many lay
people; which grounds he began to compass about with a strong wall of stone,
and Gates.

By means of this increase of the Church territory, but more by enclosing of
ground for so large a Coemitery, or Churchyard; the high and large Street,
stretching from Ealdgate in the East, to Ludgate in the West, was in this place
so crossed and stopped up, that the carriage through the City westward, was
forced to pass without the said Churchyard wall on the North side, through
Pater noster row, and then South down Ave Marie lane, and again West through
Bowyer row to Ludgate: or else out of Cheap, or Wathelingstreete, to turn
South, through the old Change, then West through Carter lane, again North up
Creed lane, and then west to Ludgate. Which passage, by reason of so often
turning, was very cumbersome and dangerous, both for horse and man. For remedy
whereof, a new Gate was made, Newgate first builded, and the cause why.
and so called, by which men and cattle, with all manner of carriages, might
pass more directly (as before) from Ealdgate, through West Cheap by Paul's, on
the North side, through S. Nicholas shambles and Newgate Market, to Newgate:
and from thence to any part Westward over Oldborne-bridge, or turning without
the Gate into Smithfield, and through Iseldon, to any part North and by West.

This Gate has of long time been a Jail or Prison for Felons and
Trespassers, as appears by Records in the reign of King John, and of other
Kings: amongst the which, I find one testifying, that in the year 1218. the
third of King Henry the third, Close Roll.
the King writes unto the Shiriffes of London, Newgate a Jail or prisonhouse.
commanding them to repair the Jail of Newgate, The King repaired it
for the safe keeping of his prisoners, promising that the charges laid out,
should be allowed unto them upon their account in the Exchequer.

Moreover, in the year 1241. the Jews of Norwich were hanged, for
circumcising a Christian child, their house called the Thor, was pulled down
and destroyed. Aaron, the son of Abraham, a Jew, at London, and the other
Jews were constrained to pay twenty thousand Marks, at two Terms in the
year, or else to be kept perpetual prisoners in Newgate of London, and in
other prisons.

1255. King Henry the third lodged in the Tower of London, upon displeasure
conceived toward the City of London, for the escape of John Offrem, a
prisoner, being a Clarke convict, out of Newgate, which had killed a Prior that
wa^, of alliance to the King, as Cousin to the Queen: he sent for the Mayor
and Sheriffs to come before him, to answer the matter. The Mayor laid the
fault from him to the Sheriffs, forasmuch as to them belonged the keeping of
all prisoners within the City, and so the Mayor returned home; but the
Sheriffs remained there prisoners, The Sheriffs of London prisoners in the
Tower, for escape of a prisosoner out of Newgate
by the space of a month and more; and yet they excused themselves, in that
the fault chiefly rested in the Bishops Officers: For whereas the prisoner was
under custody, they (at his request) had granted license, to imprison the
offender within the Jail of Newgate; but so, as the Bishops Officers were
charged to see him safely kept. The King notwithstanding all this, demanded of
the City 3000. Marks for a fine.

In the year 1326. Robert Baldocke, The Kings Chancellor prisoner in Newgate.
the Kings Chancelour, was put in Newgate the third of Edward the 3.

In the year 1237. Sir John Poultney gave four Marks by the year, to the
relief of prisoners in Newgate.

In the year 1358. William Walworth gave somewhat, to relieve the prisoners in
Newgate, so have many others since.

In the year 1414. the Gaolers of Newgate and Ludgate dyed, and prisoners in
Newgate, to the number of 64.

In the year 1418. the Parson of Wortham in Kent was imprisoned in Newgate.

The year 1412. the first of Henry 6. license was granted to John Coventre,
Ienken Carpenter, and William Grove, executors to Richard Whittington, to
re-edifie the Jail of Newgate, Newgate new builded.
which they did with his goods.

Thomas Knowels, Grocer, sometimes Mayor of London, by license of Reynold,
Prior of S. Bartholomews in Smithfield, and also of John Wakering, Master of
the Hospital of S. Bartholomew, and his brethren, conveyed the waste of water,
at the Cesterne near unto the common. Fountain, Water conveyed to Newgate
and Ludgate.
and Chapel of S. Nicholas, (situate by the said Hospital) to the Gaoles of
Newgate and Ludgate, for the relief of the prisoners.

Tuesday next after Palm Sunday, 1431. all the prisoners of Ludgate were
conveyed into Newgate, Prisoners of Ludgate removed to Newgate
by Walter Chartsey and Robert Large, Sheriffs of London. And on the 13.
April, the same Sheriffs (through the false suggestion of John Kingesell,
Jailer of Newgate) did fetch from thence 18. persons, freemen, and these were
led to the Compters pinioned, as if they had been Felons. But on the 16. of
June, Ludgate was again appointed for freemen, prisoners for debt, and the
same day, the said freemen entered by ordinance of the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commons, and by them Henry Deane Tailor, was made keeper of Ludgate.

In the year 1457. a great Fray was in the North Country, between Sir Thomas
Percie, Lord Egremond, and the Earl of Salisburies Sons, whereby many were
maimed and slain: but in the end, the Lord Egremond being taken, was by the
Kings Council found in great default, and therefore condemned in great sums
of money, to be paid to the Earl of Salisbury, and in the mean time
committed to Newgate. Not long after, L. Egremond and others, brake prison out
of Newgate.
Sir Thomas Percy Lord Egremond, and Sir Richard Percie his Brother, being in
Newgate, brake out of Prison by night, and went to the King, the other
prisoners took the Leads of the Gate, and defended it (a long while) against
the Sheriffs and all their Officers, insomuch that they were forced to call
more aid of the Citizens, whereby at last they subdued them, and laid them in
Irons. And this may suffice for Newgate.

Ludgate.
IN the West is the next; and sixth principal Gate, Ludgate.
and is called Ludgate, at first builded (says Geoffrey Monmouth) by King Lud,
a Britain, about the year before Christ's Nativity, 66. Of which building, and
also of the name, as Ludsgate or Fludsgate, has bin of late some question
among the learned, wherefore I overpasse it, as not to my purpose; only
referring the Reader to that I have before written out of Caesar's Commentaries,
Roger Windover.
and other Roman Writers, Mat. Paris.
concerning a Town or City amongst the Britains. This Gate I suppose to be
one of the most ancient; and as Ealdgate was builded for the East, so was this
Ludsgate for the West. I read, as I told you, that in the year 1215. the 17.
of King John, the Barons of the Realm, being in Arms against the King, entered
this City, and spoiled the Jews Houses: which being done, Robert Fitzwater,
and Geffrey de Magna villa, Earl of Essex, and the Earl of Gloucester, chief
leaders of the Army, applied all diligence to repair the Gates and Walls of
this City, with the stones of the Jews broken houses; especially (as it
seems) they then repaired (or rather new builded) Ludgate. Ludgate new built.
For in the year 1586. when the same Gate was taken down, to be new builded,
there was found couched within the wall thereof, a stone taken from one of the
Jews houses, wherein was graved in Hebrew Characters, Jews houses spoiled.
these words following: (...) Haec est statio Rabbi Moses, filij insignis Rabbi
Isaac: which is to say, This is the Station or Ward of Rabbi Moses, the son
of the Honorable Rabbi Isaac. And it had been fixed upon the front of one of
the Jews houses, as a note or sign that such an one dwelled there.

In the year 1260. this Ludgate was repaired, Patent.
and beautified with Images of Lud, and other Kings, as appears by Letters
Patents of license given to the Citizens of London, to take up stone for that
purpose, dated the 25. of Henry the third. These Images of Kings, in the
reign of Edward the sixth, had their heads smitten off, and were otherwise
defaced, by such as judged every Image to be an Idol; and in the reign of
Queen Mary were repaired, as by setting new heads on their old bodies, etc.
All which so remained, until the year 1586. the 28. of Queen Elizabeth,
Iudgate again new builded.
when the same Gate (being fore decayed) was clean taken down, the prisoners
in the mean time remaining in the large South-east quadrant of the same Gate
adjoining; and the same year, the whole Gate was newly and beautifully
builded, with the Images of Lud and others (as before) on the East side, and the
picture of her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth, Ludgate enlarged in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth.
on the West side. All which was done at the common charges of the Citizens,
amounting to 1500. pounds, or more.

This gate was made a free Prison in the year 1378. the first of Richard the
second, Ludgate a free prison.
Nicholas Bremer being Mayor. The same was confirmed in the year 1382. John
Northampton being Mayor, Record Guildhall.
by a Common Council in the Guildhall: by which it was it was ordained, that
all freemen of this City, should for debt, trespasses, accounts, and
contempts, be imprisoned in Ludgate; and for Treasons, Felonies, and other
criminal offenses, committed to Newgate, etc.

In the year 1439. the tenth of King Henry the 6. John Wels being Mayor, a
Court of common Council established ordinances, (as William Stanley and Robert
Chicheley, late Majors before had done) touching the Guard and government of
Ludgate, and other Prisons.

Also in the year 1463. the third of Edward the fourth, Matthew Philip being
Mayor, in a common Council, at the request of the wel-disposed, Memory of
worthy wodan.
blessed, and devout Woman, Dame Agnes Forster, Widow, late wife to Stephen
Forster, Fishmonger, sometime Mayor, for the comfort and relief of all the
poor prisoners, Articles for relief of the poor prisoners in Ludgate.
certain Articles were established. Imprimis, That the new works, then lately
edified by the same Dame Agnes, for the enlarging of the Prison of Ludgate,
from thenceforth should be had and taken, as a part and parcel of the said
Prison of Ludgate, so that both the old and new work of Ludgate aforesaid, to
be one Prison, Jail, Keeping, and charge for evermore.

The said Quadrant, The length, breadth, and largeness of the quadrant.
strongly builded of stone, by the forenamed Stephen Forster and Agnes his
Wife, containing a large walking-place by ground, of 38. foot and an half in
length, besides the thickness of the walls, which are at the least 6 foot,
makes all together 44. foot and an half; the breadth within the walls is 29.
foot and an half; so that the thicknes of the walls makes it 35. foot and an
half in breadth. The like room it has over it for lodgings, and over it
again fair Leads to walk upon, well embattelled, all for fresh air, and
ease of prisoners, to the end they should have lodging and water free without
charge; as by certain Verses graven in Copper, and fixed on the said Quadrant,
I have read, At Ludgate engraved on a Copper plate.
in form following: Devout souls that pass this way,
For Stephen Forster, late Mayor,
heartily pray,
And Dame Agnes his spouse,
to God consecrate,
That of pity, this house made
for Londoners in Ludgate.
So that for lodging and water,
prisoners here naught pay,
As their keepers shall all answer
at dreadful doomes-day.


This place, and one other of his Arms, being 3. broad Arrow-heads, taken
down with the old Gate, I caused to be fixed over the entry of the said
Quadrant: but the verses being unhappily turned inward to the wall, procured
the like in effect to be engraven outward in prose, declaring him to be a
Fishmonger, because some, upon a light ocasion (as a Maidens head in a glass
window) had fabled him to be a Mercer, and to have begd there at Ludgate, etc.
Thus much for Ludgate.

Next this, A breach in the Wall against Bridewell.
there is a breach in the Wall of the City, and a Bridge of Timber over the
Fleet-dike, betwixt Fleet-bridge and Thames, directly over against the house of
Bridewell. Thus much for the Gates in the Wall.

Water-gates on the banks of the River Thames, Watergates.
have been many, which being purchased by private men, are also put to private
use, and the old names of them forgotten. But of such as remain, from the
West, toward the East, may be said as follows.

The Black Friars stayres, Black Friars.
a free landing place.

Then a Watergate at Puddle wharfe, Puddle wharfe.
of one Puddle, that kept a wharfe on the West side thereof, and now of Puddle
water, by means of many horses watered there.

Then Paul's wharfe, also a free landing place with stayres, Paul's wharfe.
etc.

Then Broken wharfe, Broken wharfe.
and other such like.

But Ripa Regina, Queen Hith
the Queens Bank, or Queen hithe, may well be accounted the very chief and
principal Watergate of this City, being a common strand or landing place, yet
equal with, and (of old time) far exceeding Belinsgate, as shall be showed
in the Ward of Queen Hithe.

The next is Downgate, so called of the sudden descending, or down going of
that way, from Saint John's Church upon Walbroke unto the River of Thames,
whereby the water in the Channel there has such a swift course, that in the
year 1574. on the fourth of September after a strong shower of rain, A Lad of
18 years old drowned in a Channel at Downegate.
a Lad of the age of eighteen years, minding to have leapt over the Channel,
was taken by the feet, and borne down with the violence of that narrow
stream, and carried toward the Thames with such a violent swiftness, as no
man could rescue or stay him, till he came against a Cart-wheele, that stood
in the Watergate, before which time, he was drowned and stark dead.

This was sometime a large watergate frequented of ships, and other vessels,
like as the Queens Hithe, An inquisition concerning Dewnegate.
and was a part thereof, as does appear by an inquisition, made in the 28.
year of Henry the third, wherein was found, That as well corn as fish, and all
other things coming to the Port of Downgate, were to be ordered after the
customs of the Queens Hith for the Kings use. Merchants of the Hanse, landed
their corn betwixt their house and the Black Friars.
As also, that the corn arriving between the gate of the Guildhall of the
Merchants of Cullen: the (Stil-yard) which is East from Downegate, and the
house then pertaining to the Archbishop of Canterbury, west from Bainards
Castle; was to be measured by the measure, and measurer of the Queens Soke,
or Queen Hithe. I read also, in the 19. of Edward the third, That customs were
then to be paid for ships and other vessels, resting at Downgate, as if they
road at Queen Hith, and as they now do at Belinsgate. But now it is fallen
to such great decay, that not only there is no use made thereof, but also by
reason that the Water-gates are not repaired, it is very dangerous to
passengers traveling through in the night season. And thus much for Downegate
may suffice.

The next was called Wolfes gate in the Ropary, Wolfes gate in the Ropary.
in the Parish of Alhallowes the less, of later time called Wolfes lane, but
now out of use: for the lower part was builded on by the Earl of Shrewsbury,
and the other part was stopped up, and builded on by the Chamberlain of London.

The next is Ebgate, Lib. Horn.
a Watergate so called of old time, Lib. S. Albane.
as appears by diverse Records of tenements, Ebgate.
near unto the same adjoining. Lib. Trinitat.
It stands near unto the Church of Saint Laurence Pountney, Lib. S. Albane.
but is within the Parish of Saint Marten Ordegare. Record E. 3.
In place of this gate, is now a narrow passage to the Thames, and is called
Ebgate lane, but more commonly the Old Swanne.

Then is there a Watergate at the Bridge foot, Oystergate.
called Oystergate, of Oysters that were there (of old time) commonly to be
sold, and was the chiefest Market for them, and for other shell Fish. There
stands now an engine or Forcier, for the winding up of water to serve the
City, whereof I have already spoken.

Bridgegate.
THe next is the Bridgegate, so called of London Bridge, Bridge-Gate.
whereon it stands: This was one of the four first and principal Gates of
the City, long before the Conquest, when there stood a Bridge of Timber; and
is the seventh and last principal Gate mentioned by W. Fitzstephen, The
Bridg-Gate often times repaired by diverse good Benefactors.
which gate being new made, when the Bridge was builded of stone, has been
oftentimes since repaired. This Gate, with the Tower upon it, in the year
1436. fell down, and two of the farthest Arches Southwards also fell
therewith, and no man perished or was hurt thereby. To the repayring whereof,
diverse wealthy Citizens gave large sums of money, namely Robert Large,
sometime Mayor, 100. Marks, Stephen Forster, 20. l'. Sir John Crosby Alderman,
100. l'. etc. But in the year 1471. W. Dunthorne.
the Kentish Mariners, Gate at the Bridge foot burned.
under the conduct of Bastard Fauconbridge, burned the said Gate, and thirteen
houses on the Bridge, besides the Beer houses at Saint Katherines, and many
other in the Suburbs.

The next is Buttolphs gate so called of the Parish Church of S. Buttolph near
adjoining. Buttolphs Gate.
This Gate was sometime given, K. William the Conqueror his gift of the Gate.
or confirmed by William Conqueror, to the Monks of Westminster, in these
words: Will. Rex Angliae, etc. William King of England, sends greating to
the Sheriffs, and all his Ministers, as also to all his loving subjects,
French and English, of London. Know ye, that I have granted to God and Saint
Peter of Westminster, and to the Abbot Vitalis, the gift which Almundus, of
the Port of S^^nt Buttolph, gave them, when he was there made Monk: that is to
say, his Lords Court, with the houses, and one Wharfe, which is at the head of
London Bridge, and all other his lands which he had in the same City, in such
sort, as King Edward more beneficially, and amply granted the same: And I will
and command, that they shall enjoy the same well, and quietly, and honorably,
with sake and soke, etc.

The next is Belinsgate, Belinsgate.
used as an especial Port, or Harbor for small Ships and Boats coming
thereto, and is now most frequented, the Queen Hith being almost forsaken. How
this Gate took that name, or of what Antiquity the same is, 1 must leave
uncertain, as not having read any ancient Record thereof, Geffery Monmouth.
more than that Geffrey Monmouth writes, that Belin, a King of the Britans,
about 400. years before Christ's Nativity, builded this Gate, and named it
Belinsgate, after his own Name: And that when he was dead, his body being
burned, the Ashes in a Vessel of Brass, Belins Vrne of Brass.
were set upon a high pinnacle of stone over the same Gate. But Caesar, and
other Roman writers affirm of Cities, Walls and Gates, as ye have before
heard, and therefore it seems to me, not to be so ancient; but rather to
have taken that name, of some later owner of the place, happily named Beling, or
Biling, as Somars key, Smarts key, Frosh wharfe, and others there-by, took
their names of their owners: Of this Gate more shall be said, when we come to
speak of Belinsgate Ward.

Then have you a Watergate on the West side of Wool-wharfe, Watergate by the
Custom house.
or Customers key, which is commonly called the Watergate, at the South end of
Water lane.

One other Watergate, Watergate by the Tower.
there is by the Bulwark of the Tower, and this is the last and farthest Water
gate East ward on the River of Thames, so far as the City of LONDON
extends within the Walls: both which last named Water-gates be within the
Tower Ward.

Besides these common Water-gates, Wharfes and keys.
were diverse private Wharfes and Keys, all along from the East to the West of
this City, on the bank of the River of Thames; where Merchants (of all
Nations) had landing places, Warehouses, Cellars, and stowage of their goods
and Merchandises, as partly shall be touched in the Wards adjoining to the
said River. Now for the ordering and keeping of these Gates of this City in
the night time, it was appointed in the year of Christ 1258. by Henry the 3.
the 42. of his reign, that the Ports of England should be strongly kept, Mat.
Paris. Gates of London to be kept and watched.
and that the Gates of London should be new repaired, and diligently kept in
the night, for fear of French deceits, whereof one writes these verses:

Per noctem portae clauduntur Londoniarum, Moenia, ne forte fraus frangat
Francigenaru^.

Of Towers and Castles.
THE City of London (says Fitzstephen) has in the East, The Tower of London.
a very great, and a most strong Palatine Tower, whose Turrets and Walls do
rise from a deep foundation, the mortar thereof being tempred with the blood
of beasts. In the West part are two most strong Castles, etc.

To begin therefore with the most famous Tower of London, situate in the East,
near unto the River of Thames; it has been the common opinion, and some have
written, (but of none assured ground) that Julius Caesar, the first Conqueror
of the Britains, was the original Author and Founder, as well thereof, as also
of many other Towers, Castles, In my Annals.
and great buildings within this Realm. But (as I have already before noted)
Caesar remained not here so long, nor had he in his head any such matter; but
only to dispatch a conquest of this barbarous Country, and to proceed to
greater matters. Neither do the Roman Writers make mention of any such
buildings erected by him here.

And therefore leaving this, and proceeding to more grounded authority, I find
in a fair Register Book, containing the acts of the Bishops of Rochester,
Edmund de Hadenham.
set down by Edmund de Hadenham: that William the first, surnamed Conqueror,
builded the Tower of London; Tower of London built by W. Co^querour, namely the
white Tower.
to wit, the great white and square Tower there, about the year of Christ,
1078. appointing Gundulph then Bishop of Rochester to be principal Surveyor
and Overseer of that work; who was (for that time) lodged in the house of
Edmere, a Burgess of London. The very words of which mine Author are these in
Latin:

Gundulphus Episcopus, mandato Willielmi Regis magni praefuit operi magnae
Turris London, quo tempore hospitatus est apud quenda^ Edmerum, Burgensem
London, qui dedit unum Were Ecclesiae Roffen.

Ye have before heard, that the wall of this City was all round about
furnished with Towers and Bulwarks, in due distance every one from other, and
also that the River of Thames, with her ebbing and flowing, on the South Side,
had subverted the said Wall, and Towers there. Wherefore King William, for
defense of this City, in place most dangerous, and open to the enemy, having
taken down the second Bulwark in the East part of the Wall, from the Thames,
builded this Tower, which was the great square Tower, now called the white
Tower; and has been since (at diverse times) enlarged with other buildings
adjoining, as shall be showed. This Tower was bytempest of wind sore shaken,
(...). Huntington.
in the year 1092. the 4. of Will. W. Malmes.
Rufus, Mat. Paris.
and was again, by the said Rufus and Henry the first repaired. Ioh. London.
They also caused a Castle to be built under the said Tower; Castle by the
Tower builded.
namely, on the South Side toward the Thames, and also incastellated the same
round about.

Henry Huntington, libro sexto, has these words: William Rufus challenged the
investure of Prebates, he pilled and shaved the people with Tribute, especially
to spend about the Tower of London, and the great Hall at Westminster.

Othowerus, First Constables of the Tower
Acolinillus, Otto; and Geffrey Magnaville Earl of Essex, were 4. the first
Constables of this Tower of London by succession: all which held by force, a
portion of Land (that pertained to the Priorie of the holy Trinity within
Ealdgate) that is to say, Eastsmith field a Vineyard.
Eastsmith field, near unto the Tower, making thereof a Vineyard, and would
not depart from it, Ex Charta.
till the second year of King Stephen, when the same was adjudged and restored
to the Church.

This Geffrey Magnaville was Earl of Essex, Geffrey Magnaville Earl of Essex,
Constable of the Tower and Sheriff of London.
Constable of the Tower, Shiriffe of London, Middlesex, Essex, and
Hertfordshire, as appears by a Charter of Maude the Empress, 1141. He also
fortified the Tower of London against King Stephen; but the King took him in
his Court at S. Albanes, and would not deliver him, till he had rendered the
Tower of London, with the Castles of Walden and Plashey in Essex.

In the year 1153. the Tower of London and the Castle of Windsore were by the
King delivered to Richard de Lucie, Richard de Lucy Custos of the Tower.
to be safely kept.

In the year 1155. Thomas Becket, being Chancellor to Henry the second, Roger
Windover.
caused the Flemmings to be banished out of England, their Castles lately
builded, to be pulled down, and the Tower of London to be repaired.

About the year 1190. the second of Richard the first, John Bever.
William Longshampe, Bishop of Ely, Chancelour of England, for cause of
dissension betwixt him and the Earl John, the Kings Brother, that was Rebel;
The Tower of London compassed about with a wall and a ditch.
enclosed the Tower and Castle of London with an outward wall of stone
embattailed; and also caused a deep Ditch to be cast about the same, thinking
(as I have said before) to have environed it with the River of Thames. By
making of this enclosure and ditch in Eastsmithfield, the Church of the holy
Trinity in London, lost half a mark rent by the year; and the Mill was
removed, that belonged to the poor brethren of the Hospital of S. Katherine,
S. Katherins Mill stood where is now the Iron gate of the Tower.
and to the Church of the holy Trinity aforesaid; which was no small loss and
discommodity to either part. And the Garden, which the King had hired of the
brethren for six marks the year, for the most part was wasted and marred by
the ditch. Recompense was often promised, but never performed, till King Edward
coming after, gave to the Brethren five Marks and an half, for that part
which the ditch had devoured: and the other part thereof without he yielded
them again, which they hold; and of the said rent of five Marks and an half,
they have a Deed, by virtue whereof they are well paid to this day.

It is also to be noted, and cannot be denied, but that the said enclosure and
ditch, took the like or greater quantity of ground from the City within the
Wall; namely, on that part called the Tower Hill, besides breaking down of
the City Wall, from the white Tower to the first Gate of the City, called
the Posterne. Yet have I not read of any quarrel made by the Citizens, or
recompense demanded by them for that matter; because all was done for good of
the Cities defense thereby, and to their good likings.

But Matthew Paris writes, Mat. Paris.
that in the year 1239. King Henry the third fortified the Tower of London to
another end; Bulwarks of the Tower builded.
wherefore the Citizens fearing, lest that was done to their detriment,
complained, and the King answered: That he had not done it to their hurt; But
(says he) I will from henceforth do as my brother does, in building and
fortifying Castles, who bears the name to be wiser than I am.

It followed in the next year, West gate and Bulwarks of the Tower fell down
(says mine Author) the said Noble buildings of the stone Gate and Bulwark,
which the King had caused to be made by the Tower of London, on the West side
thereof, was shaken as it had been with an Earthquake, and fell down; which
the King again commanded to be built in better sort than before, which was
done.

And yet again, in the year 1241. the said Wall and Bulwarks that were newly
builded, Wall and Bulwarks again fall down, and new builded.
wherein the King had bestowed more than twelve thousand Marks, were
unrecoverably quite thrown down, as before: for the which chance, the Citizens
of London were nothing sorry: for they were threatened, that the said wall and
Bulwarks were builded, to the end, that if any of them would contend for the
liberties of the City, they might be imprisoned: And that many might be laid
in diverse prisons, many lodgings were made, that no one should speak with
another.

Thus much Matthew Paris avoucheth for this building.

More of Henry the third his dealings against the Citizens of London, we may
read in the said Author, in 1245. 1248. 1249. 1253. 1255. 1256. etc. But
concerning the said Wall and Bulwark, the same was finished, though not in his
time. For I read, That Edward the first, in the second of his reign, commanded
the Treasurer and Chamberlain of the Exchequer, to deliver out of his
Treasury, unto Miles of Andwarp, 200. Marks, of the fines taken of diverse
Merchants, Ditch made about the Bulwark, without the West gate of the Tower.
or Usurers of London (for so be the words of the Record) toward the work of
the ditch, then new made about the said Bulwark; now called the Lion Tower.

I find also recorded, that Henry the third, in the 46. of his reign, wrote to
Edward of Westminster, commanding him, H. 3. his Orchard by the Tower.
That he should buy certain Perie Plants, and set the same in the place
without his Tower of London, the ninth of Edward the second.

Edward the fourth in place whereof builded a wall of Brick. But now for the
Lion-Tower, and Lions in England, the original, as I have read, was thus:

Henry the first builded the Manor of Woodstocke, First Park in England.
with a Park which he walled about with stone, seven miles in compass,
destroying for the same, diverse Villages, Churches and Chapels, and this was
the first Park in England; the words of the Record are these following: He
appointed therein (beside great store of Decre) diverse strange beasts, to be
kept and nourished, such as were brought to him from far Countries; as Lions,
Leopards, Lions in Woodstocke Park.
Linxes, Porpentines, and such other: For such was his estimation among
outlandish Princes, that few would willingly offend him.

More I read, that in the year 1235. Frederick the Emperor sent to Henry the
third, three Leopards, Lions sent to Hen. 3. and kept in the Tower.
in token of his regal Shield of Arms, wherein three Leopards were pictured:
since which time, those Lions, and others, have been kept in a part of this
Bulwark, now called the Lion Tower, and their keeper there lodged. King Edward
the second, in the twelfth year of his reign, commanded the Sheriffs of
London, to pay the keeper of the Kings Leopards in the Tower of London, 6. d
the day, for the sustenance of the Leopards; and three halfe-pence a day, for
diet of the said keeper, out of the fee-farme of the said City.

More, the 16. of Edward the third, one Lion, one Lioness, one Leopard, and
two Cattes Lions, in the said Tower, were committed to the custody of Robert,
the son of John Bower.

Edward the fourth fortified the Tower of London, Edw. the 4. builded bulwarks
without the Tower*
and enclosed with Brick (as is aforesaid) a certain piece of ground, taken
out of the Tower hill, west from the Lion Tower, now called the Bulwark. His
Officers also, in the fifth of his reign, set upon the said Hill both Scaffold
and Gallows, Seaffold and Gallows first set on Tower Hill.
for the execution of offenders; whereupon the Mayor and his brethren
complained to the King, and were answered, that the same was not done in
derogation of the Cities Liberties; and therefore caused proclamation to be
made, etc. as shall be showed in Towerstreet.

Richard the third repaired and builded this Tower somewhat. Rich. 3. repaired
the Tower.


Henry the 8. in 1532. repaired the white Tower, White Tower repaired by Hen. 8.
and other parts thereof.

In the year 1548. the second of Edward the sixth, on the 22. of November, in
the night, a Frenchman lodged in the round Bulwark, betwixt the West Gate and
the Posterne, or draw bridge, called the Warders Gate, by setting fire on a
barrel of Gunpowder, A bulwark of the Tower blown up.
blew up the said Bulwark, burnt himself, and no more persons. This Bulwark
was again forthwith new builded.

And here, because I have (by occasion) spoken of the west gate of this Tower;
the same (as the most principal) is used for the receipt and delivery of all
kinds of carriages; Gates and Posterne^ of the Tower.
without the which Gate, be diverse Bulwarks and Gates, turning toward the
North, etc. Then near within this West gate, opening to the South, is a strong
Posterne for passengers, by the Ward-house, over a drawbridge, let down for
that purpose. Next, on the same South side, toward the East, is a large
watergate, for receipt of Boats and small vessels, partly under a stone
bridge, from the River of Thames. Beyond it is a small Posterne, with a
drawbridge, seldom let down, but for the receipt of some great persons,
prisoners. Then toward the East is a great and strong Gate, commonly called
the Iron gate, but not usually opened. And thus much for the foundation,
building, and repairing of this Tower, with the Gates and Posternes, may
suffice. And now somewhat of accidents in the same, shall be showed.

In the year 1196. Actions of the Tower
William Fitzosbert, a Citizen of London, seditiously moving the common people
to seek liberty, and not to be subject to the rich and more mighty; at length
was taken, and brought before the Archbishop of Canterbury in the Tower,
Justices sat in the Tower.
where he was by the Judges condemned, and by the heels drawn thence to the
Elmes in Smithfield, and there hanged.

1214. King John wrote unto Geffrey Magnaville, Patent the 15. of King John.
to deliver the Tower of London, with the Prisoners, Armor, and all other
things sound therein, belonging to the King; to William, Archdeacon of
Huntington.

The year 1216. the first of Henry the third, Mat. Paris.
the said Tower was delivered to Jews of France, and the Barons of England.

In the year 1206. Plees of the Crown were pleaded in the Tower: Plees of the
crown pleaded in the Towers
likewise in the year 1220. and likewise in the year 1224. and again in the
year 1243. before William of York, Richard Passelew, Henry Brahe, Jerome of
Saxton, Justicers.

In the year 1222. the Citizens of London having made a tumult against the
Abbot of Westminster; Mat. Paris.
Hubert of Burgh, chief Justice of England, came to the Tower of London, and
called before him the Mayor and Aldermen, of whom he inquired for the
principal Authors of that sedition: Amongst whom, Constantine Fitz Aelulfe
hanged
one named Constantine Fitz Aelulfe avowed, that he was the man, and had done
much less than he thought to have done. Whereupon, the Justice sent him (with
two other) to Falks de Brent, who with armed men brought them to the Gallows,
where they were hanged.

In the year 1244. Griffith of Wales fell from the Tower.
Griffith the eldest son of Leoline, Prince of Wales, being kept prisoner in
the Tower, devised means of escape; and having (in the night) made of the
hangings, sheets, etc. a long line, he put himself down from the top of the
Tower. But in the sliding, the weight of his body, being a very big and a fat
man, brake the Rope, and he fell on his neck, and brake his neck withal:
whose miserable carkas, being found in the morning by the Tower wall, was a
most pitiful sight to the beholders: for his head and neck were driven into
his breast, between both the shoulders. The King hearing thereof, punished the
watchmen, and caused Griffiths son, that was imprisoned with his Father, to
be more straightly kept.

In the year 1253. Sheriffs of London prisoners in the Tower.
King Henry the third imprisoned the Sheriffs of London in the Tower more than
a month, for the escape of a prisoner out of Newgate, as ye may read in the
Chapter of Gates.

In the year 1260. King Henry, K. Henry lodged in the Tower and held his
Parliament there.
with his Queen (for fear of the Barons) were lodged in the Tower. The next
year he sent for his Lords, and held his Parliament there.

In the year 1263. when the Queen would have removed from the Tower by water,
Citizens of London despised the Qu. Wife to Hen. 3.
toward Windsore, sundry Londoners got them together to the Bridge, under the
which she was to pass, and not only cried out upon her with reproachful
words, but also threw mire and stones at her, by which she was constrained to
return for the time. But in the year 1265. the said Citizens were feign to
submit themselves to the King for it, and the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs
were sent to diverse prisons, and a Custos also was set over the City; to wit,
Othon, Constable of the Tower, etc.

Leoline Prince of Wales, Leoline, Prince of Wales, his head set on the Tower.
came down from the Mountain of Snowdon, to Mountgomery, and was taken at
Bluith Castle: where using reproachful words against the Englishmen, Roger le
Strange ran in upon him, and with the Sword wherewith he was girt, cut off his
head, leaving his dead body on the ground. Sir Roger Mortimer caused the head
of this Leoline to be set upon the Tower of London, crowned with a wreath of
Ivy. Such was the end of Leoline, betrayed by the men of Bluith: And this was
the last Prince of the Britains blood, that bare rule and dominion in Wales.

In the year 1290. diverse Justices, Justices of the bench sent to the Tower.
as well of the Bench, as of the Assizes, were sent prisoners to the Tower,
which with great sums of money redeemed their liberty.

Sir Thomas Weyland had all his goods, Adam Meri. chro. Dun. Rad. Bald. Sca.
Chro. Io. Rouse.
both moveable and unmovable, confiscated, and himself banished. Sir Rafe
Hengham, chief Justice of the higher Bench, offered seven thousand Marks: Sir
John Lovelet, Justice of the lower Bench, three thousand Marks. Sir William
Bromtone, Justice, six thousand Marks. Of their Clerks, for their
redemption; of Robert Littlebury, 1000. Marks; and of Roger Leicester, 1000.
Marks: And of a certain Clarke of the Courts, called Adam de Straton, 32000.
Marks, of old money and new; beside Jewels (without number) and precious
vessels of Silver, which were found in his house, and a Kings Crown, which some
men said was King John's. Moreover, the King constrained the Justices to swear,
that (from thenceforth) they should take no pension, see or gift of any man,
except only a breakfast or such like present.

Edward 2. the 14. of his reign, appointed for prisoners in the Tower, a
Knight, 2. d. the day, an Esquire, 1. d. the day, to serve for their diet.

In the year 1320. the Kings Justices sat in the Tower, Justices sat in the
Tower.
for trial of matters: whereupon, John Gissors, late Mayor of London, and many
other, fled the City, for fear to be charged of things which they had
presumptuously done.

In the year 1321. the Mortimers yielding themselves to the King, he sent
them prisoners to the Tower, where they remained long, and were judged to be
drawn and hanged.

But at length, Roger Mortimer of Wigmore, Mortimer made an escape out of the
Tower.
by giving his Keepers a sleepy drink, escaped out of the Tower, and his
Uncle Roger being still kept, there dyed about five years after.

In the year 1326. the Citizens of London wanne the Tower, Citizens of London
wrested the keys of the Tower from the Constable.
wresting the keys out of the Constables hands, delivered all the prisoners,
and kept both the City and Tower to the use of Isabel. the Queen, and Edward
her son.

In the year 1330. Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, Mortimer drawn from the
Tower to the Elmes, and there hanged.
was taken and brought to the Tower, from whence he was drawn to the Elmes,
and there hanged on the common Gallows, where he hung two days and two
nights by the Kings commandment, and then was buried in the Gray Friars
Church. He was condemned by his Peers, and yet never was brought to answer
before them. For it was not then the custom, after the death of the Earls of
Lancaster, Winchester, Gloucester, and Kent: wherefore this Earl had that law
himself, which before he had appointed for others.

In the year 1344. King Edward the third, in the 18. year of his reign, A
Mint in the Tower, Florences of gold coined there.
commanded Florences of Gold to be made, and coined in the Tower; that is to
say, a penny a piece, of the value of 6. shillings and eight pence; the
halfepenny piece, of the value of 3. shillings and four pence; and a farthing
piece, worth 20. pence. Percevall de Port of Lake, being then Master of the
coin. And this is the first coining of Gold in the Tower, whereof I read, and
also the first coynage of Gold in England.

I find also recorded, that the said King, The Kings exchange in Buckles bury.
in the same year, ordained his Exchange of money to be kept in Sernes Tower,
a part of the Kings house in Buckles Bury. And here, to digress a little (by
occasion offered) I find, that in times before passed, all great sums were
paid by weight of gold or silver, as so many pounds, Round plates, called
blanks, delivered by weighr, Argent. and Pecunia, after called Easterling.
or marks of silver, or so many pounds or marks of gold, cut into blankes,
and not stamped, as I could prove by many good authorities, which I overpasse.
The smaller sums also were paid in starlings, which were pence so called: for
other coins they had none.

The antiquity of this starling penny usually in this Realm, is from the
reign of Henry the second: notwithstanding the Saxon coins (before the
Conquest) were pence of fine silver, the full weight and somewhat better than
the latter starlings, as I have tried by conference of the pence of Burghrede
King of Mercia, Aelfred, Edward, and Edelred, Kings of the West Saxons,
Plegmond Archbishop of Canterbury, and others.

William the Conquerours penny also was fine silver, of the weight of the
Easterling, and had on the one side stamped, IV. Conqueror did wear no beard.
an armed head, with a beardlesse face, (for the Normans ware no beards) with a
Scepter in his hand. The Inscription in the circumference, IV. Malmesbury.
was this, Le Rei Wilam. On the side, a cross double to the Ring, between 4.
rowels of six points.

King Henry the first his penny was of the like weight, finenesse, form of
face, cross, etc.

This Henry, in the eighth year of his reign, ordained the penny which was
round, so to be quartered by the cross, that they might easily be broken into
half pence and farthings.

In the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth of King Richard the first his
reign, R. Hoveden.
and afterward, I find commonly Easterling money mentioned, and yet ofttimes
the same is called Argent, as before, and not otherwise.

The first great sum that I read of to be paid in Easterlings, was in the fifth
of Richard the first, when Robert Earl of Leicester, being prisoner in France,
proffered for his ransom a thousand marks Easterlings; notwithstanding, the
Easterling pence were long before.

The weight of the Easterling penny may appear by diverse Statutes, namely, of
weights and measures, made in the 51. year of Henry the third, in these words:
Weight of starling pence 32. grains of wheat.
Thirty two grains of Wheat, dry and round, taken in the midst of the ear,
should be the weight of a starling penny; twenty of those pence should weigh
one ounce, twelve ounces a pound Troy. It follows in the Statute, Eight pound
to make a gallon of Wine, and eight gallons, a bushel of London measure, etc.
Notwithstanding which Statute, I find in the eighth of Edward the first,
Gregory Rokesley, Mayor of London, being chief Master or Minister of the
Kings Exchange or Mints, a new coin being then appointed, the pound of
Easterling money should contain (as before) 12. ounces, to wit, fine silver,
such as was then made into foil, and was commonly called silver of Guthurons
lane; 11. ounces, two Easterlings, and one ferling or farthing, and the other
17. pence halfepenny farthing to be lay. Also the pound of money ought to weigh
20. shillings 3. pence by account; so that no pound ought to be over 20.
shillings 4. pence, nor less than 20. shillings 2. pence by account; the ounce
to weigh 20. pence, the penny weight 24. grains. Which 24. by weight then
appointed, were as much as the former 32. grains of Wheat: a penny force, 25.
grains and an half; the penny deble or feeble, 22. grains and an half, etc.

Now for the penny Easterling, The penny Easterling how it took the name.
how it took that name, I think good briefly to touch. It has been said,
that Numa Pompilius, the second King of the Romans, commanded moneys first to
be made, of whose name they were called Numi; and when copper pence, silver
pence, and gold pence were made, (because every silver penny was worth ten
copper pence, and every gold penny worth ten silver pence) the pence were
therefore called in Latin, Denarij; and oftentimes, the pence are named of the
matter or stuff of gold or silver. But the Money of England was called of the
workers and makers thereof: as the Floren of gold is called of the Florentines,
H. 2. made a new coin in the third of his reign.
that were the workers thereof; and so the Easterling pence took their name of
the Easterlings, which did first make this money in England, in the reign of
Henry the second.

Thus have I set down, according to my reading in Antiquity, of money matters;
Starling money, when it took beginning in this Land.
omitting the imaginations of late Writers; of whom some have said, Easterling
money to take that name of a star stamped in the border or ring of the penny:
othersome, of a bird, called a Stare or Starling, stamped in the circumference:
and other (more unlikely) of being coined at Strivelin or Starling, a Town in
Scotland. etc.

Now concerning halfepence and farthings, Of half pence and farthings.
the account of which is more subtiler than the pence, I need not speak of them
more, than that they were only made in the Exchange at London, and no where
else: First, pointed to be made by Edward the first, in the eighth of his
reign: and also at the same time, the said Kings coin was some few groats of
silver, but they were not usual. The Kings Exchange at London was near unto
the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, and is to this day commonly called, the Old
Change; The Old Change.
but in Evidences, the Old Exchange.

The Kings Exchanger in this place, was to deliver out to every other Exchanger
throughout England, or other the Kings Dominions, their Coining Irons, that is
to say, one Standard or Staple, and two trussels, or Punchions: and when the
same were spent and worn, to receive them with an account, what sum had been
coined, and also their Pix, or Box of assay, and to deliver other Irons new
graven, etc. I find that in the 9. of King John, Mints in England. Patent 9.
John.
there was, besides the Mint at London, other Mints, at Winchester, Excester,
Chichester. Canterbury, Rochester, Ipswich, Norwich, Linne, Lincoln, York,
Carleil, Northampton, Oxford, S. Edmondsbury, and Durham. The Exchanger,
Examiner and Tryer, Diminishing of coin.
buyeth the silver for coynage: answering for every hundred pound of silver,
bought in Bolion, or otherwise 98. l. 15. s. for he takes 25. s. for coynage.

King Edward the first, in the 27. of his reign, Starling money forbidden to be
transported.
held a Parliament at Stebunbeth, in the house of Henry Waleis, Mayor of
London, wherein amongst other things there handled, the transporting of
starling money was forbidden.

In the year 1351. William Edington, Bishop of Winchester, Thom. Walls.
and Treasurer of England, a wise man, but loving the Kings commodity more,
than the wealth of the whole Realm and common people (says mine Author)
Caused new coin, First groats and half coined.
called a Great and half a Groat to be coined and stamped, the Groat to be
taken for 4. d. and the half Groat for 2. d. not containing in weight
according to the pence called Easterling, but much less, to wit, by 5. s. in
the pound: by reason whereof, victuals and merchandises became the dearer
through the whole Realm.

About the same time also, the old coin of gold was changed into a new; but
the old Floren or Noble, then so called, was worth much above the taxed rate of
the new. And therefore the Merchants engrossed up the old, and conveied them
out of the Realm, to the great loss of the Kingdom. Coyns of gold enhaunced.
Wherefore a remedy was provided, by changing of the stamp.

In the year 1411. King Henry the fourth caused a new coin of Nobles to be
made, of less value than the old, by 4. d. in the Noble, so that fifty Nobles
should be a pound, Troy weight.

In the year 1421. was granted to Henry the fifth a fifteen to be paid at
Candlemas, and at Martinmasse, of such money as was then current gold, or
silver, not overmuch clipped or washed, to wit, That if the Noble were worth 5.
s. 8. d. then the King should take it for a full Noble, of 6. s. 8. d. And if
it were less of value, than 5. s. 8. d. then the person that gold, to make it
good to the value of 5. s. 8. d. the King always receiving it for an whole Noble
of six shillings 8. d. And if the Noble so paid were better than 5. s. 8. d.
the King to pay again the surplusage, that it was better than 5. s. 8. d. Also
this year was such scarcity of white money, More plenty of coin in gold than in
silver.
that though a Noble were so good of gold, and weight, as six shillings eight
pence; men could get no white money fro them.

In the year 1465. King Edward the fourth caused a new coin, both of gold and
silver to be made, Coins of gold allayed, and also raised in value.
whereby he gained much, for he made of an old Noble, a Royal: which he
commanded to go for ten s. Nevertheless to the same Royal was put 8. d. of
allay, and so weyed the more, Rose Nobles.
being smitten with a new stamp, to wit, a Rose. He likewise made half
Angels of 5. s. And farthings of 5. s. 6. d. Angelets of 6. s. 8. d. And half
Angels 3. s. 4. d. He made silver money of three pence, a groat, and so of
other coins after that rate, to the great harm of the Commons.

W. Lord Hastings the Kings Chamberlain, being Master of the Kings Mints,
says the Record, undertook to make the moneys under form following: to wit,
of gold a piece of 8. s. 4. d. starling, which should be called a Noble of
gold, of the which there should be fifty such pieces in the pound weight of the
Tower. Another piece of gold, 4. s. 2. d. of starling, and to be of them an
hundred such pieces in the pound. And a third piece of gold, 2. s. 1. d.
starling, two hundred such pieces in the pound, every pound weight of the Tower
to be worth 20. l', 16. s. 8. d. of starlings, the which should be 23. Carits,
3. grains, and half 5. etc. and for silver, 37. s. 6. d. of starlings, the
piece of 4. pence, to be 112. Groats, and 2. pence in the pound weight.

In the year 1504. King Henry the seventh appointed a new coin; Half faced
groats.
to wit, a Groat, and half a Groat, which bare but half faces. The same time
also was coined a Groat, which was in value 12. d. but of those but a few,
after the rate of forty pence the ounce.

In the year 1526. the 18. of Hen. the eight, the Angel Noble, being then the
sixth part of an ounce Troy, so that six Angels were just an ounce, which was
40. shillings starling, and the Angel was also worth two ounces of silver; so
that six Angels were worth 12. ounces of silver, Gold and silver enhaunced.
which was 40. s. A Proclamation was made on the 6. of September, that the
Angel should go for 7. s. 4. d. the Royal for 11. s. and the Crown for 4.
s. 4. d. And on the 5. of November following, again by Proclamation, the
Angel was enhaunced to 7. s. 6. d. and so every ounce a gold to be 45. s. and
the ounce of silver at 3. 9. d. in value.

In the year 1544. the 35. of Henry the 8. on the 16. of May, Base moneys
coined and current in England.
Proclamation was made, for the enhauncing of gold to 48. shillings, and silver
to 4. shillings the ounce. Also the King caused to be coined base moneys,
towi, pieces of 12. d. 6. d. 4. d. and 1. d. in weight as the late starling, in
show good silver, but inwardly Copper. These pieces had whole or broad faces,
and continued current after that rate, till the 5. of Edward the 6. when they
were on the 9. of July called down, the shilling to 9. d. the Groat to 3. d.
etc. and on the 17. of August from 9. d. to 6. d. etc. And on the 30. of
October, was published new coins of silver and gold to be made, Crowns and
half Crowns of silver coined.
a piece of silver 5. s. starling, a piece 2. s. 6. d. of 12. d. of 6. d. a
penny with a double Rose, a half penny a single Rose, and a farthing with a
Portclose. Coyns of fine Gold, a whole Sovereign of ^0. s. an Angel of 10. s.
an Angeler of 5. s. Of Crown gold, a Sovereign 20. S. half Sovereign 10. s.
5. s. 2. s. 6. d. and base moneys to pass as before, which continued till the
2. of Queen Elizabeth then called to a lower rate, taken to the Mint, and
refined, the silver whereof being coined with a new stamp of her Majesty, the
dross was carried to foul highwaies, to heighten them. This base moneys (for
the time) caused the old starling moneys to be hoorded up, Starling moneys
hoorded up, 21. c. current, given for an Angel of gold.
so that I have seen 21. s. current, given for one old Angel to gild withal.
Also rents of lands and tenements, with prices of victuals, were raised far
beyond the formerrates, hardly since to be brought down. Thus much for base
moneys, coined and current in England have I known: But for Leather moneys, as
many people have fondly talked, I find no such matter. Philip Comin.
I read that King John of France, being taken prisoner, by Edward the black
Prince, at the Battle of Poytiers, paid a ransom of 3. Millions of
Florences, whereby, he brought the Realm of France into such poverty, Leather
money in France.
that many years after they used Leather money, with a little stud or nail of
silver in the midst thereof. Thus much for Mint, and coynage, by occasion of
this Tower (under correction of other more skillful) may suffice. And now to
other accidents there.

In the year 1360. the peace between England and France being confirmed,
French K. prisoner in the Tower.
King Edward came over into England, and straight to the Tower, to see the
French King then prisoner there, whose ransom he assessed at 3. Millions of
Florences, and so delivered him from prison, and brought him with honor to the
Sea.

In the year 1381. and the fourth year of the reign of King Richard the
second, A grievous tax and tallage granted to the King, which caused a great
rebellion in England.
was granted to the King a grievous tax and tallage of his subjects, both
spiritual and temporal: through the which was raised in England a shipwreck
of great troubles. For diverse Courtiers, desirous to enrich themselves with
other men's goods, informed the King and his Court, that the tallage was not
gathered up faithfully to the Kings use by the Collection. Whereupon, they
offered to the King, that they would pay a great sum of money for the farm
of that, which they would gather over and above that which had been paid, if
they might be by the King thereunto authorized.

Some of them getting the Kings Letters and Authority, The people misused in
very base manner.
sat in diverse places of Essex and Kent, and handled the people sore and
uncourteously, almost not to be spoken, for the levying of the said sum of
money: which some of the people taking in evil part; they secretly took
counsel together, gathered assistants, and resisted the exactors, rising
against them, of whom, some they slew, some they wounded, and the rest fled.

This tumult began principally in Kent, The Kentish men arise in a tumult,
for there the mischief began.
and after this manner, as I find the same set down in a Chronicle of S.
Albans: One of the Collectors of the Groats, or pole money, coming to the
house of John (others say Watt) Tylar, in the Town of Dartford in Kent,
demanded of the Tylars wife, for her Husband, for her self, for her servants,
and for their daughter (a young maiden) every one of them a Groat; The pole
groat called (by some) the groape groat.
which the Tylars wife denied not to pay, saving for her daughter; who (she
said) was a child, and not to be accounted as a woman. That will I soon wete
(answered the Collector) and taking the young maiden dishonestly turned her up
to search whether she were under-growne with hair, or not; for in many places
they had made the like shameful trial. Whereupon, The husband comes home
hastily from his work.
her mother cried out, which caused neighbors to come in, and her husband
(being at work in the same Town, tyling of an house) when he heard thereof,
caught his Lathingstaffe in his hand, and ran presently home: where reasoning
with the Collector; who made him to be so bold? The Collector answered with
stoutwords, and struck at the Tylar. But the Tylar avoiding the blow, The
Collector slain by the Tylar.
smotethe Collector with his Lathing-staffe, that the brains flew out of his
head: where-through great noise arose in the streets, and the poor people
being glad, every one prepared to support the said John Tylar.

Thus the Commons being drawn together, The Commons flock together in the
Tylars defense.
went to Maidstone, and from thence back again to Black Heath, and so (in
short time) they stirred all the Country (in a manner) to the like commotion.
Then, besetting the ways that led to Canterbury, arrested all passengers,
compelling them to swear: An oath exacted by the Rebels on all passengers.
First, that they should keep allegiance to King Richard, and to the Commons:
And that they should accept no King that was named John: in envy they bare unto
John Duke of Lancaster, who named himself King of Castile: And that they
should be ready whenever they were called, and that they should agree to no
tax, to be levied (from thenceforth) in the Kingdom, nor consent to any,
except it were a fifteen.

The Fame of these doings spread into Sussex, Evil news do always quickly
spread themselves.
Hertford, Essex, and Cambridgeshires, Norfolk, suffolk, etc. And when such
assembling of the common people daily took increase, and that their number was
now made almost infinite, so that they feared no man to resist them: they began
to show some such desperate Acts, as they had rashly considered on in their
minds: And took in hand to behead all men of Law, Justice, Lawyers, and Jurors
beheaded.
as well Apprentices, as utter-Baristers, and old Justices, with all the Jurors
of the country, whom they might get into their hands. They spared none whom
they thought to be learned, especially, if they found any to have a Pen and
Inke-horne about him: they pulled off his Hood, and all with one voice crying,
Hale him out, and cut off his head. Bondmen of Essex join with them of Kent.
The bondmen and other of Essex, being joined with them of Kent on Black Heath,
there came Knights to them from the King, to enquire the cause of their
assembly: to whom they made answer, That for certain causes, they were come
together, to have talk with the King: And therefore willed the Knights to tell
him, that he must needs come unto them, that he might understand the desire of
their hearts.

The King was counseled by some, to make haste unto them: Ex Chron. Dun.
but Simon Sudbury, Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor, and Robert Hales
of Saint John's, Treasurer, affirmed: that it was not meet for the King to go
to such a rude company, but rather some order to be taken for their
suppression. Insolent fury is easily moved.
Which when the Commons heard, being moved to a furious rage, they swore, that
they would go seek the Kings Traitors, to take off their heads. Forthwith
they took their journey toward London, and came to Southwarke, where they
felled all the places of that Borough, and in the Country about. The Palace of
the Archbishop at Lambeth spoiled.
They spoiled the Archbishops Palace at Lambeth, for despite they bare him.
The Lord Mayor of London and Aldermen (fearing the Cities spoil) decreed to
shut up the Gates: But the Commons of the City, especially the poorer people,
favoring the Commons of the Country; would not suffer the Mayor to shut them
out, but threatened death to them that went about it.

All the night following, to wit, Corpus Christi Even, The Commons of London
hartned on by the Rebels.
the Rebels enjoyed free ingate and outgate, and encouraged the Commons of
London, as also of all the Realm, to favor their cause. For, said they, their
purpose was but to search out the Traitors of the Land, and so to cease. The
more credit was given to speeches, because they took nothing from any man, but
at a just price: and if they found any man which theft, they beheaded him. The
morrow after, to wit, on Corpus Christi day, coming into the City, talking
with the Commons of procuring liberty to them, and apprehending of Traitors (as
they termed them) especially the Duke of Lancaster: they shortly got all the
poorer Citizens to conspire with them. The poorer Citizens join with the
Rebels, and burn the Savoy, the Duke of Lancasters house.
And the same day after it was waxen somewhat warm, and that they had tasted
diverse Wines (for the Citizens did set open their Cellers for them, to enter at
their pleasure) they exhorted each other, that going to the Savoy, the Duke of
Lancasters house (to the which there was none in the whole Realm to be
compared, for beauty and stateliness) they might set it on fire, and burn it
down to the ground.

Straightway they ran thither, and setting fire on it round about, applied
their travel to destroy it. And that it might appear to the Communalty, that
they did not any thing for avarice: they caused to be proclaimed, that none
(upon pain of losing his head) should presume to convert to his own use, The
Rebels would have nothing to any private man's use.
any thing that was there; but that they should break such Plate, and vessels
of Gold and Silver (as was there in great plenty) into small pieces, and then
to throw the same into the Thames, and to all (whatsover) was destroyed. But
one of the Rebels (says Henry Kniton) contrary to the Proclamation, Ex Hen.
Kniton.
took a goodly silver piece, and hid it in his bosom: but another that espied
him, told his fellows, who (forthwith) hurled him and the piece of Plate into
the fire, The Rebels burn one of these fellows.
saying, We be zealous of Truth and Justice, and not thieves or robbers. Also,
two and thirty of those Rebels entered a Celler of the Savoy, Two and thirty
Rebels mured up in a Celler.
where they drank so much of sweet Wines, that they were not able to come out
again in time: but were shut in with wood and stones, that mured up the door,
where they were heard crying and calling seven days after, but none came to
help them our, till they were all dead.

These things being done, The new Temple of London burnt, in anger to Sir
Robert Hales.
they brake down the place called the new Temple at the Bar, in which place,
Apprentices at the Law were lodged: for anger which they had conceived against
Sir Robert Hales, Master of Saint John's Hospital, unto which Hospital of St.
John's the Temple belonged, where many Monuments, which the Lawyers had in their
custody, were consumed with fire. After a number of them had sacked this
Temple: what with weariness of labor, and what with Wine, being overcome, The
Rebels murder one another.
they lay down under the walls and housing, and were slain like Swine; one of
them killing another for old grudges, and other also made quick dispatch of
them.

Another troop (in the mean time) set fire on the noble house of Saint John
at Clarkenwell, The Priory of Saint John beyond Smithfield burnt.
causing it to burn by the space of seven days together, not suffering any to
quench it. On Friday, they burned the Manor of Highburie, The Manor of Highbury
burnt.
the whole number of the Common people (being at that time) divided into three
parts. Of the which division, The Rebels divided into 3. bands.
one part was attending to destroy the Manor of Highbury, and other places
belonging to the Priory of Saint John. Another company lay at the Miles-end,
East of the City. The third kept at the Tower Hill, There to spoil the King of
such victuals, as were brought toward him. The company that were assembled on
the Miles-end, sent to command the King, that he should come to them without
delay, The Rebels command the King, and he goes to them to the Miles-end.
unarmed, or without any force: which if he refused to do, they would pull
down the Tower, neither should he escape alive. The King taking counsel, with
a few unarmed, went toward them in great fear on Horseback: and so the Gates
of the Tower being set open, a great multitude of them entered into it.

There was (at the same time) within the Tower 600. Armed valiant persons, The
Rebels entered into the Tower of London, and their impudent behavior there.
and expert in Arms, and six hundred Archers: all which did quail in
stomach, and stood as men amazed. For the basest of the Rusticks (not many
together, but every one by himself) durst presume to enter the Kings Chamber,
and his Mothers, with their weapons, to put in fear each of the men of War,
Knights and other. Many of them went into the Kings Privie-Chamber, and played
the wantons, in sitting, lying and sporting them on the Kings Bed. And that
which is much more sawcily, Their bold insolence to the Kings Mother.
invited the Kings Mother, to kiss with them: yet durst none of those men of
War (strange to be said) once withstand them: they went in and out like
Masters, that were but base slaves, and of most vile condition.

While these rude wretches sought for the Archbishop, The Rebels sought for the
Archbishop of Canturbury.
running up and down with terrible noise and fury: at length, finding one of
his servants, they charged him to bring them where his Master was, whom they
named Traitor. The servant not daring to displease them, brought them to the
Chapel: where, after Mass had been said, and having received the Communion,
the Archbishop was busy in his prayers: for, The Archbishop dreadlesse of the
Rebels cruelty, and his speeches with them.
not unknowing of their coming and purpose, he had passed the last night in
confessing of his sins, and in devout prayers. When therefore he heard that
they were come, with great constancy, he said to his men: Let us now go,
surely it is best to dye, when it is no pleasure to live. The Archbishop is
fetched out of the Tower, and dragged to the Tower hill.
And with that, the tormentors entering, cried, Where is the Traitor? The
Archbishop answered: Behold, I am the Archbishop, whom you seek, not a
Traitor. They therefore laid hands on him, and dragging him out of the Chapel,
they drew him forth of the Tower gate, to the Tower Hill, where being compassed
about with many thousands, and seeing swords about his head drawn in excessive
manner, threatening death to him, he spoke unto them in these words.

What is it (dear brethren) you purpose to do? The Archbishops words to the
Rebels on Tower hill.
What is mine offense committed against you, for which you will kill me? You
were best to take heed, that if I be killed, who am your Pastor, there come not
on you the indignation of the just Revenger, or (at the least) for such a fact,
all England be not put under interdiction. Uneath could he pronounce these
words, before they cried out with an horrible noise: That they neither feared
the interdiction, nor allowed the Pope to be above them. The Archbishop seeing
death at hand, with comfortable words (as he was an eloquent man, and wise,
beyond all the wise men of the Realm) spoke fairly to them. The Archbishop of
Canturbury most cruelly beheaded by the Rebels.
Lastly, after forgiveness granted to the executioner, that should behead him,
kneeling down, he offered his neck to him that should imite off his head.
Being stricken in the neck, but not deadly, he putting his neck, said, Aha,
it is the hand of God. He had not removed his hand from the place where the
pain was, but that being suddenly stricken again, his fingers ends being cut
off, and part of the Arteries, he fell down, but yet he dyed not, till being
mangled with 8. several strokes in the neck and head, he fulfilled most
worthy Martyrdom. The inhumanity to his body after he was dead
There lay his body unburied all that Friday, and the morrow till afternoon,
none daring to deliver his body to Sepulture. His head those wicked villains
took, and nayling thereon his Hood, they fixed it on a pole, and set it on
London Bridge, in place where before stood the head of Sir John Minstarworth.

This Archbishop, Simon Tibald, alias Sudbury, A further relation concerning
this worthy Archbishop, and his religious actions.
Son to Nicholas Tibald, Gentleman, borne in the Town of Sudbury in Suffolk,
Doctor of both Laws, was eighteen years Bishop of London, in the which time,
he builded a goodly College, in place where his Fathers house stood, and
endued it with great possessions: furnishing the same with secular Clarks, and
other Ministers, being valued at the suppression, at 122. l. 16. s. in Lands by
the year. He builded the upper end of St. Gregory's Church at Sudbury.
Afterward, being translated to the Archbishopricke of Canturbury, The Walls of
Canturbury re-edified by this Archbishop.
in An. 1375. he re-edified the Walls of that City, from the Westgate (which he
builded) to the Northgate: which had been destroyed by the Danes, before the
Conquest of King Williane the Bastard.

He was slain, as you have heard, and afterward buried in the Cathedral
Church of Canturbury. The Lord Prior of Saint John's beheaded with the
Archbishop.
There died with him Sir Robert Hales, a most valiant Knight, Lord of Saint
John's, and Treasurer of England, and John Degge, one of the Kings Sergeants at
Arms, and a Franciscane Friar, named W. Apledore, the Kings Confessor. Richard
Lions also, a famous Lapidary and Goldsmith, late one of the Sheriffs of
London, was drawn out of his house, Many beheaded both Flemmings and English to
fulfill the headstrong cruelty of the commons.
and beheaded in Cheap. Many that day were beheaded, as well Flemmings, as
Englishmen, for no cause; but only to fulfill the cruelty of the rude Commons.
For it was a solemn pastime to them, if they could take any that was not
sworn to them, to take from such a one his Hood, with their accustomed
clamours, and forthwith to behead him. Neither did they show any reverence to
sacred places; for in the very Churches they did kill any whom they had in
hatred. They fetched 13. Flemmings out of the Augustines Friars Church in
London, and 17. out of another Church, and 32. in the Vintry, and so in other
places of the City, as also in Southwarke, all which they beheaded: except
they could plainly pronounce Bread and Cheese. The villains made a pastime of
putting men to death.
For if their speech sounded any thing on Brot or Cawse, off went their heads,
as a sure mark that they were Flemmings.

The King coming to the Miles-end, the place before recited, was greatly
afraid, beholding the mad-headed Commons: who (with froward countenances)
required many things, which they had put in writing, and to be confirmed by the
Kings Letter Patents.

The demands made by the Rebels to the King at Miles-end.
THat all men should be free from servitude and bondage; The first Article.
so as (from thenceforth) there should be no bondmen.

That he should pardon all men, The second Article.
of what estate soever, all manner actions and insurrections committed, and all
manner of Treasons, Felonies, transgressions and extortions, by any of them
done, and to grant them peace.

That all men (from thenceforth) might be enfranchised to buy and sell in
every County, The third Article.
City, Borough, Town, Fair, Market and other place within the Realm of
England.

That no Acre of Land, The fourth Article.
holden in bondage or service, should be holden but for four pence: And if it
had been holden for less in former time, it should not hereafter be inhaunsed.

These, and many other things they required: Reprehension of the Kings
government.
And told him moreover, that he had been evilly governed till that day: but
from that time forward he must be governed otherwise.

The King perceiving that he could not escape, A hard extremity for a king.
except he granted to their request, yielded to the same: and so, craving
Truce departed from them, The Essex men returned home.
and the Essex men returned homeward. On the morrow, being Saturday, and the
15. of June, the King (after dinner) went from the Wardrobe in the Royal in
London, to Westminster, to visit the Shrine of Saint Edward the King, The King
goes to Westminster.
and to see if they had done any mischief there. Then went he to the Chapel,
called our Lady in the Piew, where he made his prayers: and returning by the
Suburbs of West Smithfield, he found all that place full of people, to wit,
the Kentish men. The King sends to the Kentish men.
Wherefore he sent to show them, that their fellows the Essex men were gone
home, and that he would grant to them the like form of Peace, if it liked
them to accept thereof.

Their chief Captain, named John, or, Walter Hilliard, alias, Tylar their
chiere Captain.
as other affirm, Walter Hilliard, alias Tylar, being a crafty fellow, and of
an excellent wir, but wanting grace, answered, That he desired peace, but with
conditions to his liking, meaning, to seed the King with fair words until
next day, that he might in the night time have compassed his purpose. For they
thought (the same night) to have spoiled the City, The wicked and bloody
intent of the Rebels in the night time.
the King being first slain, and the great Lords that were about him: then to
have burnt the City, by setting fire in four parts thereof. But God that
resists the proud, did suddenly disappoint him. For whereas the form of
peace was written in three several Charters, and thrice sent to him: none of
them could please him. Wherefore at length, The King sends Sir John Newton to
Wat Tylar about his own demands.
the King sent to him one of his Knights, named Sir John Newton, not so much to
command, as to entreat him (for his pride was well enough known) to come and
talk with him, about his own demands, to have them put into his Charter: of
which demands I will set down one, that it may plainly appear, how contrary
to reason all the rest were.

First, One of Wat Tylars arrogant demands made to the King.
he would have a Commission to behead all Lawyers, Escheators, and others
whatsoever, that were learned in the Law, or communicated with the Law, by
reason of their office. For he had conceived in his mind, that this being
brought to pass, all things afterward should be ordered, according to the
fancy of the Common people. And indeed it was said, that he had (but the day
before) made his vaunt, putting his hand to his own lips: A hold brag of a
Rebel.
that before four days came to an end, all the Laws of England should proceed
from his mouth. When Sir John Newton was in hand with him for dispatch, he
answered with indignation: If thou art so hasty, thou may get thee to thy
Master, for I will come when it pleases me. Notwithstanding, he followed on
horseback a slow pace: and by the way, John Tickle the Doubblet maker his
coming to Wat Tylar, and what answer he made him.
there came to him a Doublet maker, who had brought to the Commons threescore
Doublers, which they bought and wore, and he demanded thirty Marks for them,
but could have no payment, Wat Tylar ansered him, saying, Friend, appease thy
self, thou shall be well paid before this day be ended: keep thee near to
me, I will be thy Creditor.

Setting spurs to his horse, he departed from his company, Wat Tylar his
coming to the King, and his audacious words to him.
and came so near to the King, that his horse had touched the crooper of the
Kings horse, and the first words he spoke, were these: Sir King, see thou all
yonder people? Yea truly, quoth the King, wherefore say thou so? Because
(said he) they be all at my commandment, and have sworn to me their faith
and truth, to do all that I will have them. In good time, replied the King, I
believe it well. Then said Wat Tylar, beleevest thou, King that these people, A
lamentable case when a King should be in such distress.
and as many more as be in London, at my command, will depart from thee thus,
without having thy Letters? No, said the King, ye shall have them, they be
ordained for you, and shall be delivered to every one of them.

At these words, Wat Tylar seeing the Knight Sir John Newton near to him on
horseback, bearing the Kings sword, was offended, and said, Wat Tylars words
to Sir John Newton who did hear the Kings sword.
It had become him better to be on foot inhis presence. The Knight (not having
forgot his old accustomed manhood) answered, That it was no harm, seeing
himself was also on horseback. Which words so offended Wat, that he drew his
Dagger, and offered to strike the Knight, calling him Traitor. The Knight
answered, that he lied, and drew his Dagger likewise. Wat Tylar, not suffering
such an indignity to be done him, and before his rustic companions, made as if
he would have run upon the Knight. The Knight commanded to alight on foot
before the Rebel.
The King therefore, seeing the Knight in danger, to assuage the rigor of Wat
for the time, commanded the Knight to alight on foot, and to deliver his Dagger
to Wat Tylar. But when his proud mind could not be so pacified, but he would
also have his Sword: the Knight answered, It was the kings sword, and (quoth
he) thou art not worthy to have it, nor durst thou ask it of me, if here were
no more but thou and I. By my faith, said Wat Tylar, I shall never eat, until
I have thy head, and would have run in upon the Knight.

At that very instant came to the King William Walworth, The coming of William
Walworth L. Mayor of London to checking and his worthy words to him.
Lord Mayor of London, a bold, courageous and brave minded man, with many
Knights and Squires to assist the King, and he said; My Liege, it were a great
shame, and such as never had before been heard of, if in that presence, they
should permit a Noble knight to be shamefully murdered, and before the face of
their Sovereign: wherefore he ought to be rescued, and Tylar the Rebel to
be ararrested. Which words being heard, the king, although he were but of
tender years, taking boldness and courage to him, commanded the Mayor of
London to lay hand upon him. The Mayor, being a man of an incomparable spirit
and boldness, without any further delay or doubting, straight arrested him with
his Mace upon the head, William Walworth Lord Mayor of Land. arrested VVat
Tylar and felled him to the ground.
and in such sort, that he fell down at the feet of his horse. By and by, they
which attended on the king, environed him round about, whereby he was not seen
of his company. And an Esquire of the Kings, called John Cavendish, alighted
from his horse, and thrust his Sword into Wat Tylars belly: albeit more
opinions do hold, that the Mayor did it with his Dagger, and many beside did
thrust him in, in many places of his body, and then drew him from among the
people, VVat Tylar the Rebel slain in Smithfield.
into the Hospital of Saint Bartholomew. Which when the Commons perceived,
they cried out, that their Captain was traitorously slain, heartning one
another to fight, and to revenge his death, bending their Bows. But the King
rode to them, saying, The kings kind words to the rude multitude
What a work is this, my men? What mean you to do? Will you shoot at your
king? Be not quarrellous, or sorry for the death of a Traitor and Ribald: I am
your king, I will be your Captain and Leader: follow me into the Field, there
to have whatsoever you will require.

This the king did, lest the Commons, being bitterly bent in mind, should set
fire on the houses in Smithfield, where their Captain was slain. They therefore
followed him into the open Field, They followed the King into the field.
and the Soldiers that were with him, not knowing as yet, whether they would
kill the king, or be in rest, and depart home with the kings Charter. In the
mean while, worthy Walworth, the (for ever) famous Mayor of London, to second
his first piece of service, that fell out to so good purpose, only with one
servant, riding speedily into the City, began to cry, You good Citizens, come
to help your king, Another worthy action performed by the Lord Mayor.
that is in doubt to be murdered, and succor me your Mayor, that am in the
like danger: Or if you will not succor me, yet leave not the king destitute.
When the Citizens heard this, in whose hearts the love of the king was
ingrafted, suddenly, and very seemly prepared, A Noble and loyal forwardness
in true-hearted Citizens, for the succor of their king, being in great
distress.
(to the number of a thousand) they tarried in the streets, for some one of the
knights to lead them (with the Lord Mayor) to the king. And by good fortune,
Sir Robert Knowles, a Freeman of the City, came in the very instant, whom they
all required to be their Leader. He gladly undertook part of them; and
Perducas Dalbert, the Lord Mayor, and some other knights, led on the rest to
the kings presence. The king, and all that were with him, rejoicing not a
little at the unhoped for coming of these brave armed Citizens, suddenly
compassed the whole multitude of the Commons.

There might a man have seen a wonderful change of Gods right hand, A
wonderful alteration among the Rebels
how the Commons did now throw down their weapons, and fall to the ground,
beseeching pardon; who lately before did glory that they had the kings life in
their power; and now were glad to hide themselves in caves, ditches,
cornefields, etc. The knights therefore, desirous to be revenged, besought the
king to permit them to take off the heads of and hundred or two ofthem. Great
wisdom and discretion in the king being so young.
But the king would not condescend to their request, but commanded the Charter
which they had demanded, written and sealed, to be delivered to them for the
time, to avoid any more mischief: As knowing well, that Essex was not yet
pacified, nor Kent stayed, the Commons and Rusticks of which Countries were
ready to rise again, if he did not satisfy them the sooner. The Commons having
got the Charter, departed homeward, and the rude people being disperted and
gone, the king called for his valiant Mayor of Land. W. Walworth, VV VValworth,
L. Mayor of London knighted in the field and other Aldermen with him.
whom (with great honor) he knighted there in the field, and as he had very
worthily deserved. The like he did to Nicholas Brember, Ioh. Philpot, Robert
Lawnd, John Standish, Nicholas Twiford, and Adam Frances, Aldermen. Afterward,
the king, with his lords and his company, orderly entered into the City of
London with great joy, and went to his royal Mother, who was lodged in the
Tower Royal, called then the Queens Wardrobe, and there she had remained two
days and two nights, very much abashed and amazed. But when she saw the king
her son, she was highly comforted, and said, Ah fair Son, what great
sorrow have I suffered for you this day! The comfortable words of the King to
his mother.
The king answered, and said: Certainly, Madame, I know it well: but now
rejoice, and thank God, for I have this day recovered mine Heritage, and the
Realm of England, which I had neere-hand lost. The Archbishops head was taken
off the Bridge, and Wat Tylars head set up in the place.

Here we are further to consider, that for an eternal remembrance of this
happy day, The Arms or London augmented by addition of a Dagger.
and the Cities honor withal, the king granted, that there should be a Dagger
added to the Arms of the City, in the right quarter of the shield, for an
augmentation of the same Arms, and a memory of the Lord Mayor his valiant act,
as does appear unto this day. For till that time, the City bare only the
Cross without the Dagger.

And whereas it has been far spread abroad by vulgar opinion, Concerning
vulgar mistaking the Captains name of the Rebels
that the Rebel smitten down so manfully by Sir William Walworth, the then
worthy Lord Mayor of London, was named Jack Straw, and not Wat Tylar: I thought
good to reconcile this rash conceived doubt, by such testimony as I find in
ancient and good Records. The principal Leaders and Captains of the Commons,
were Wat Tylar, The name of the chief Captains and ringleaders in the
rebellion.
as the first man that took himself to be offended. The second, was John or
Jack Straw: the third, was John Kirkby: the fourth, Allen Thredder: the fifth,
Thomas Scot: the sixth, Ralfe Rugge. These and many other were Leaders of the
Kentish and Essex men. At Mildenhall and Bury in Suffolk, was Robert
Westbrome, that made himself a king; and was most famous, next to John Wrawe,
who being a Priest, could not set Crown upon Crown: but left the name of king
and Crown to the same Robert. At Norwich, John Litester a Dyer, exercised the
name and power of a king, till he was taken and hanged for his pains. Thus
dangerously had this Rebellion dispersed it self abroad. The rebellion had
extended it self into many places.
But the happy and prosperous success at London, with other good care for them
further off, gave a gracious issue to all in the end. After the death of Wat
Tylar, and Jack Straw being taken, with diverse other, as chief actors in this
monstrous disorder: the forenamed Lord Mayor sat in judgment upon the
offenders, and pronounced the sentence of death upon them. The Lord Mayor sat
in judgment on the Rebels, and his words that he used to Jack Straw.
At which time, the Lord Mayor spoke openly to him thus: John (quoth he)
behold, thy death is at hand without all doubt, and there is no way through
which thou may hope to escape: wherefore, for thy souls health, without
making any lie, tell us what you purposed to have done among you, and to what
end you did assemble the Commons. When he had stayed a while, as doubtful
what to say, the Mayor began thus again to him: Surely thou know, John,
that the thing which I demand of thee, if thou do it truly, it will redound
to thy souls health, etc. He therefore, animated by the Lord Majors good
words, began as follows:

The Confession of Jack Straw, to the Lord Mayor of London, before his death.
NOw it booteth not to lie, neither is it lawful to utter any untruth:
especially, understanding that my Soul is to suffer more straiter torments if
I should so do. And because I hope for two commodities by speaking the truth:
first, that what I shall speak, may profit the Commonwealth: and secondly,
after my death, I trust by your suffrages to be succored, according to your
promises, which is to pray for me: I will speak faithfully, and without any
deceit.

At the same time as we were assembled upon Black Heath, What they intended to
do at Black heath.
and had sent to the King to come unto us: our purpose was, to have slain all
such Knights, Squires and Gentlemen, Their intent for keeping the King.
as should have given their attendance thither upon him: And as for the King,
we would have kept him among us, to the end that the people might more boldly
have repaired to us: since they would have thought, that whatsoever we did, the
same had been done by his authority. Finally, when we had gotten power enough,
that we needed not to fear any force which might be made against us, we would
have slain all such Noblemen as might either have given counsel, or made any
resistance against us: especially, we would have slain the Knights of the
Rhodes or Saint John's, The killing of all Noblemen. Killing the King and all
that had any possessions.
and lastly, were would have killed the King himself, and all men of
possessions: with Bishops, Monks, Canons, and Parsons of Churches. Only Friars
Mendicants we would have spared, that might have sufficed for Ministration of
the Sacraments.

When we had made a riddance of all those, Laws devised by themselves.
we would have devised Laws, according to which Laws the subjects of the
Realm should have lived. For we would have created Kings, Creation of kings
among the^.
as Wat Tylar in Kent, and other in other Countries. But because this our
purpose was disappointed by the Archbishop of Canturbury, Their malice to the
Archbishop.
that would not permit the King to come to us: we sought by all means to
dispatch him out the way, as at length we did. Moreover, the same evening that
Wat Tylar was killed, we were determined (having the greatest part of the
Commons of the City bent to join with us) to have set fire in four corners of
the City, Their intent to burue London.
and so to have divided among our selves, the spoil of the chiefest riches
that might have been found at our (...) pleasure. And this (said he) (...), as
God may help me now at (...).

After this confession ^^de he was beheaded, and (...) ^ad set on London
bridge by Wat Tylars, and many other.

In the year 1387. King Richard held his feast of Christmas in the Tower.
Richard the 2. prisoner in the Tower.
And in the year 1399. the same King was sent prisoner to the Tower.

In the year 1414. Sir John Oldcastle brake out of the Tower. Porter of the
Tower beheaded.
And the same year a Parliament being holden at Leicester, a Porter of the
Tower was drawn, hanged and headed, whose head was sent up, and set over the
Tower Gate, for consenting to one Whitlooke, that brake out of the Tower.

In the year 1419. Friar Randulph was sent to the Tower, and was there slain
by the Parson of Saint Peter's in the Tower.

In the year 1426. there came to London a lewd fellow, A counter, feit
Physician his head set on the Tower of London.
feining himself to be sent from the Emperor, to the young king Henry the
sixth, calling himself the Baron of Blackamoore, and that he should be the
principal Physician in this Kingdom: but his subtilty being known, he was
apprehended, condemned, drawn, hanged, headed and quartered, his head set on
the Tower of London, and his quarters on toure Gates of the City.

In the year 1458. in Whitson-week, the Duke of Somerset, with Anthony Rivers,
lusting in the tower.
and other four, kept Iusts before the Queen in the Tower of London against
three Esquires of the Queens, and others.

In the year 1465. King Henry the sixth was brought prisoner the Tower, where
he remained long.

In the year 1470. the Tower was yielded to Sir Richard Lee Mayor of London
and his Brethren the Aldermen, who forthwith entered the same, delivering King
Henry of his imprisonment, Henry the 6 murdered in the Tower.
and lodged him in the Kings lodging there, but the next year he was again
sent thither prisoner, and there murdered.

In the year 1478. George Duke of Clarence, Duke of Clarence drowned in the
Tower.
was drowned in a Butte of Malmesey in the Tower: and within 5. years after
King Edward the fifth, with his Brother, Edward the 5. murdered in the Tower.
were said to be murdered there.

In the year 1485. John Earl of Oxford was made Constable of the Tower,
Pacent 1. of Henry the 7. Just and turneying in the Tower.
and had custody of the Lions granted him.

In the year 1501. in the month of May, was royal Turney of Lords and
Knights in the Tower of London before the king.

In the year 1502. Queen Elizabeth, wife to Henry the 7. died of Childbirth in
the Tower.

In the year 1512. the Chapel in the high white Tower was burned. In the
year 1546. Queen Anne Bullein was beheaded in the Tower. 1541. Lady Katherine
Howard, wife to king Henry the eighth, was also beheaded there.

In the year 1546. the 27. of April, William Foxley slept in the Tower 14.
days and more without waking.
being Tuesday in Easter week William Foxley, Potmaker for the Mint of the
Tower of London, fell asleep, and so continued sleeping, and could not be
wakened with pricking, cramping, or otherwise burning whatsoever, till the
first day of the term, which was full 14. days, and 15. nights, or more, for
that Easter term begins not before 17. days after Easter. The cause of his
thus sleeping could not be known, though the same were diligently searched
after by the Kings Physicians, and other learned men: yea, the king himself
examined the said Will. Foxley, who was in all points found at his wakening, to
be as if he had slept but one night, and he lived more than forty years after
in the said Tower, to wit, until the year of Christ, 1587. and then deceased
on Wednesday in Easter week.

Thus much for these accidents: and now to conclude thereof in summary. This
Tower is a Cittadell, to defend or command the City: Use of the Tower to
defend the City.
a Royal place for assemblies and treaties: a Prison of Estate, for the most
dangerous offenders: The only place of coynage for all England at this time:
the Armorie for warlike provision: the Treasury of the Ornaments and Jewels of
the Crown, and general conserver of the most Records of the kings Courts of
Justice at Westminster.

Tower on London Bridge.
THe next Tower on the River of Thames, Tower at the north end of the
Drawbridge.
was on London Bridge, at the north end of the Drawbridge. This Tower was new
begun to be builded 1426. John Reynwell, Mayor of London, laid one of the first
cornerstones in the foundation of this work; the other three were laid by the
Sheriffs and Bridge-masters: upon every of these four stones was engraven in
fair Roman letters, the name of Ihesus. And these stones I have seen laid in
the Bridge Storehouse, since they were taken up, when that Tower was of late
newly made of timber.

This Gate and tower was at the first strongly builded up of stone, and so
continued until the year 1577. in the month of April, when the same stone
arched gate and tower, being decayed, was begun to be taken down, and then
were the heads of the traitors removed thence, and set on the tower over the
gate at the Bridge foot, toward Southwarke. This said tower being taken
down, a new foundation was drawn, and Sir John Langley, Lord Mayor, laid the
first stone, in the presence of the Sheriffs and Bridge masters.

On the 28 of August, and in the month of September, the year 1579. the same
tower was finished, a beautiful and chargeable piece of work, all above the
Bridge being of timber.

Tower on the South of London Bridge.
ANother tower there is on London Bridge, Tower at the south end of the bridge.
to wit, over the gate at the South end of the same Bridge, toward Southwarke.
This gate, with the tower thereupon, and two Arches of the Bridge fell down,
and no man perished by the fall thereof, in the year 1436. Toward the new
building whereof, diverse charitable Citizens gave large sums of moneys: which
Gate being then again new builded, W. Dunthorne.
was, with thirteen houses more on the Bridge, The fourth gate on London
bridge burned.
in the year 1471. burned by the Mariners and Sailors of Kent, Bastard
Fawconbridge being their Captain.

Baynards Castle.
IN the west part of this City (says Fitzstephen) are two most strong
Castles, Baynards Castle.
etc. Also Gervasim Tilbury, Fitzstephen.
in the Reign of Henry the second, Gervas. Tilbery.
writing of these Castl^ (...) to this effect: Two Castles (says he) (...)
built with walls and rampires, whereof one is in right of possession Baynards:
the other, the Barons of Mountfitchet. The first of these Castles, banking on
the River Thames, was called Baynards Castle, of Baynard, a Nobleman that came
in with the Conqueror, and then builded it, and deceased in the reign of
William Rufus: after whose decease Geffrey Baynard succeeded, and then William
Baynard, in the year 1111 who by forfeiture for Felony, lost his Baronry of
little Dunmow, and king Henry gave it wholly to Robert, the son of Richard,
the son of Gilbert of Clare, and to his heirs, together with the honor of
Baynards Castle. This Robert married Maude de Sent Licio, Lady of Bradham, and
deceased 1134. was buried at Saint Needs by Gilbert of Glare his Father:
Walter his son succeeded him, he took to wife Matilde de Bocham; and after
her decease, Matilde the daughter and coheyre of Richard de Lucy, on whom he
begat Robert, and other: he deceased in the year 1198. and was buried at
Dunmow: after whom succeeded Robert Fitzwater, a valiant knight.

About the year 1213. there arose a great discord betwixt king John and his
Barons, Lib. Dunmow.
because of Matilda, surnamed the fair, daughter to the said Robert Fitzwater,
whom the king unlawfully loved, but could not obtain her, nor her Father would
consent thereunto: whereupon, and for other like causes, ensued war through
the whole Realm. The Barons were received into Land. where they greatly
endamaged the King, but in the end, the king did not only (therefore) banish
the said Fitzwater amongst other, Robert Fitzwater banished.
out of the Realm, but also caused his Castle, called Baynard, and other his
houses to be spoiled. Baynards Castle destroyed.
Which then being done, a Messenger being sent unto Matilda the fair,
Virginity defended with the loss of worldly goods and life of the body, for
life of the soul.
about the kings suit, whereunto she would not consent, she was poisoned:
Robert Fitzwater, and other being then passed into France and some into
Scotland, etc.

It happened in the year 1214. king John being then in France with a great Army,
that a truce was taken betwixt the two kings of England and France, for the
term of five years, and a River, or arm of the Sea (...) then betwixt
either host. There was a Knight in the English host, that cried to them of the
other side, willing some one of their Knights, to come and just a course or
twain with him: whereupon, without stay, Robert Fitzwater, being on the French
part, made himself ready, ferried over, and got on horseback, without any man
to help him, and showed himself ready to the face of his challenger, whom at
the first course, he struck so hard with his great Spear, that horse and man
fell to the ground: and when his Spear was broken, he went back again to the
king of France. Which when the king had seen, by Gods tooth, King John's oath.
quoth he (after his usual oath) he were a king indeed, that had such a
Knight. The friends of Robert hearing these words, kneeled down and said:
Robert Fitzwater restored to the Kings favor.
O king, he is your knight; it is Robert Fitzwater, and thereupon the next day
he was sent for, and restored to the kings favor: By which means, peace was
concluded, Baynards Castle again builded.
and he received his livings, and had license to repair to his Castle of
Baynard, and other Castles.

The year 1216. the first of Henry the third, the Castle of Hartford, being
delivered to Jews the French, and the Barons of England, The keeping of
Hertford Castle belonged to Robert Fitzwater.
Robert Fitzwater requiring to have the same; because the keeping thereof did
by ancient right and title pertain to him, was answered by Jews; That English
men were not worthy to have such holds in keeping, because they did betray
their own Lord, etc. This Robert deceased in the year 1234. and was buried at
Dunmow, and Walter his son succeeded him, 1258. and his Barony of Baynard,
was in the ward of King Henry in the nonage of Robert Fitzwater. This Robert
took to his second wife, Aelianor, daughter and heir to the Earl of Ferrars,
in the year 1289. and in the year 1303. on the 12. of March. Before John
Blondon, Mayor of London, he acknowledged his service to the same City, and
swear upon the Evangelists, that he would be true to the liberties thereof, and
maintain the same to his power, and the counsel of the same to keep, etc.

The rights that belonged to Robert Fitzwater, Chastilian and Banner-bearer of
London, Lord of Wodeham were these.
THe said Robert and his heirs, Robert Fitzwater, Castilian and Banner bearer
of London.
ought to be, and are chief Bannerers of London, in fee for the Chastilary,
which he and his ancestors had by Castle Baynard, in the said City. In time
of war, the said Robert and his heirs ought to serve the City in manner as
follows: that is;

The said Robert ought to come, he being the twentieth man of Arms on
horseback, covered with cloth, or Armor, unto the great West door of St.
Paul, with his Banner displaied before him, of his Arms. And when he is come
to the said door, mounted and apparelled, as before is said, the Mayor with
his Aldermen and Sheriffs, armed in their Arms, shall come out of the said
Church of Saint Paul unto the said door, with a Banner in his hand all on
foot, Banner of S. Paul.
which Banner shall be Gules, the Image of Saint Paul gold: the face, hands,
feet, and sword of silver: and as soon as the said Robert shall see the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Sheriffs come on foot out of the Church, armed with such a
Banner, he shall alight from his horse, and salute the Mayor, and say to him;
Sir Mayor, I am come to do my service, which I owe to the City.

And the Mayor and Aldermen shall answer:

We give to you, as to our Banneret of fee in this City, the Banner of this
City to bear and govern, to the honor and profit of this City, to your
power.

And the said Robert and his heirs shall receive the Banner in his hands, and
shall go on foot out of the gate, with the Banner in his hands; and the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Shiriffes shall follow to the door, and shall bring an horse to
the said Robert, worth twenty pound, which horse shall be saddled with a
saddle of the Arms of the said Robert, and shall be covered with sindals of
the said Arms.

Also they shall present to him twenty pounds starling money, and deliver it to
the Chamberlain of the said Robert, for his expenses that day. Then the said
Robert shall mount upon the horse which the Mayor presented to him, with the
Banner in his hand, and as soon as he is up, he shall say to the Mayor, that
he cause a Marshall to be chosen for the host, one of the City; which Marshall
being chosen, the said Robert shall command the Mayor and Burgesses of the
City, to warn the Commons to assemble together, and they shall all go under
the Banner of S. Paul, and the said Robert shall bear it himself unto
Ealdgate, and there the said Robert and Mayor shall deliver the said Bauner of
Saint Paul from thence, to whom they shall assent or think good. And if they
must make any issue forth of the City; then the said Robert ought to choose
two forth of every Ward, the most sage personages, to foresee to the safe
keeping of the City, after they be gone forth. And this counsel shall be
taken in the Priorie of the Trinity near unto Ealdgate. And again, before
every Town or Castle, which the host of London shall besiege, if the siege
continue a whole year, the said Robert shall have for every siege, of the
Communalty of London, one hundred shillings for his travel, and no more.

These be the rights that the said Robert has in the time of war. Rights
belonging to Robert Fitzwater in the time of peace.
Rights belonging to Robert Fitzwater and to his heirs in the City of London
in the time of peace, are these; that is to say, The said Robert has a Soke or
Ward in the City; that is, a wall of the Canonrie of Saint Paul, as a man
goes down the street before the Brewhouse of Saint Paul, unto the Thames, and
so to the side of the Mill, which is in the water that comes down from the
Fleetbridge, and goes so by London walls, betwixt the Friars preachers and
Ludgate, and so returns back by the house of the said Friars, unto the said
wall of the said Canonrie of Saint Paul; that is, all the Parish of Saint
Andrew, which is in the gift of his Ancestors, by the said Signiority: and so
the said Robert has appendant unto the said Soke, all these things
underwritten: That he ought to have a Sokeman, and to place what Sokeman he
will, so he be of the Sokemanrie, or the same Ward; and if any of the Sokemanry
be impleaded in the Guildhall, of any thing that touches not the body of the
Mayor that for the time is, or that touches the body of no Sheriff, it is not
lawful for the Sokeman of the Sokemanrie of the said Robert Fitzwater, to
demand a Court of the said Robert; and the Mayor and his Citizens of London
ought to grant him to have a Court, A Court to be granted Robert Fitzwater for
his Sokeman.
and in his Court he ought to bring his judgments, at it is assented and
agreed upon in the Guildhall, that shall be given them.

If any therefore be taken in his Soke. manry, he ought to have his Stocks and
imprisonment in his Soke; and he shall be brought from thence to the Guildhall,
before the Mayor, and there they shall provide him his judgment that ought to
be given of him: but his judgment shall not be published till he come into the
Court of the said Robert, and in his liberty.

And the judgment shall be such, Judgment for diversity of offence^.
that if he have deserved death by treason, he to be tied to a post in the
Thames at a good Wharfe, where Boats are fastened, two ebbings and two flowings
of the water.

And if he be condemned for a common thief, he ought to be led to the Elmes,
and there suffer his judgment as other Thieves. And so the said Robert and his
heirs has honor, that he holds a great Franches within the City, that the
Mayor of the City and Citizens are bound to do him of right; that is to say,
that when the Mayor will hold a great Council, he ought to call the said
Robert and his heirs, to be with him in council of the City; and the said
Robert ought to be sworn, to be of counsel with the City, against all
people, saving the King and his heirs. And when the said Robert comes to the
Hustings in the Guild hall of the City, the Mayor or his Lieutenant ought to
rise against him, and set him down near unto him, and so long as he is in
the Guild Hall, all the judgments ought to be given by his mouth, according to
the Record of the Recorders of the said Guild Hall. And so many waifes as come
so long as he is there, he ought to give them to the Bayliffes of the Town, or
to whom he will, by the counsel of the Mayor of the City.

These be the Franchises that belonged to Robert Fitzwater in London, in time
of peace, which, for the antiquity thereof, I have noted out of an old Record.

This Robert deceased in the year 1305 leaving issue, Walter Fitzrobert, who
had issue, Robert Fitzwalter, unto whom, in the year 1320. the Citizens of
London acknowledged the right, which they ought to him and his heirs for the
Castle Baynard. He deceased 1325. unto whom succeeded Robert Fitzrobert,
Fitzwalter, etc. More of the Lord Fitzwater may ye read in my Annals, in the
51 of Edward the third. But how this honor of Baynards Castle, with the
appurtenances, fell from the possession of the Fitzwaters, I have not read:
only I find, that in the year 1428. the seventh of Henry the sixth, Baynards
Castle perished by fire.
a great fire was at Baynards Castle, and that Humfrey Duke of Gloucester
builded it new. By his death and attaindor, Humfrey, Duke of Gloucester, new
builded it.
in the year 1446. it came to the hands of Henry the sixth, and from him to
Richard Duke of York, of whom we read, Richard, Duke of York, owner of
Baynards Castle.
that in the year 1457. he lodged there as in his own house.

In the year 1460. the 28 of February, the Earls of March and of Warwick,
with a great power of men, (but few of name) entered the City of London, where
they were of the Citizens joyfully received; and upon the third of March, being
Sunday, the said Earl caused his people to be mustred in S. John's field:
where, unto that host was showed and proclaimed, certain Articles and points,
wherein King Henry, as they said, had offended, and thereupon it was demanded
of the said people, whether the said Henry was worthy to raingne as King any
longer, or not: whereunto the people cried, nay. Then it was asked of them,
whether they would have the E. Edward the 4 elected in S. John's field.
of March for their King: and they cried, yea, yea. Whereupon certain
Captains were appointed to bear report thereof to the said Earl of March,
then being lodged at his Castle of Baynard. Whereof when the Earl was by them
advertised, he thanked God, and them for their election: notwithstanding, he
showed some countenance of insufficiency in him, to occupy so great a charge,
till by exhortation of the Archbishop of Canturbury, Edward the 4. took on him
the Crownein Baynards Castle.
the Bishop of Excest. and certain Noblemen, he granted to their petition: and
on the next morrow at Paul's, he went on Procession, offered, and had Te Deum
sung. Then was he with great Royalty conveyed to Westminster, and there in the
great Hall, set in the Kingss Seat, with Saint Edwards Scepter in his hand.

In the seventh year of King Edwards reign, Ex lib. Erswick. Treason surmised
against many men
many men were arrested of treason, surmised against them, wherethough many of
them were put to death, and other escaped for great sums of money. Amongst whom
were, Sir Thomas Cook, Diverse Aldermen unjustly charged with treason.
Sir Johan Plummer, Knights, Humfrey Heyward, and other Aldermen of London
arrested, and charged with treason: whereof they were acquitted, but they lost
their goods to the King, to the value of 40000. Marks, or more, as some have
written. And for example, Sir Thomas Cook, lately before L. Mayor of London,
was by one, named Hawkins, appeached of Treason, for which he was committed to
the Tower, his place in London seized on by the Lord Rivers; and his Lady and
servants clearly put out thereof, the cause being thus:

The forenamed Hawkins came (upon a time) to the said Sir Thomas Cook, The
reason of Sir Thomas Cook his troubles.
requesting him to lend him a thousand Marks upon good surety; whereunto he
answered, that he would first know for whom it should be: At length
understanding that it should be for the use of Queen Margaret, he answered;
he had no current wares, whereof any shift might be made, without too much
loss, and therefore required Hawkins to move him no further, for he intended
not to deal therewithal. Yet the said Hawkins requested but one hundred
pounds at length, and went away without it, or the value of one penny, and
never after came again to move him; which rested so for two or 3. year after,
till the said Hawkins was committed to the Tower; and brought at length to the
Brake or Rack, commonly called, The Brake or Rack in the Tower, usually
called the Duke of Excesters Daughter
the Duke of Excesters daughter, because he was the deviser of that torture.
By means of which pain, he revealed many things: and among the rest, the
motion, which he had made to Sir Thomas Cook, was one. In regard whereof, the
said Sir Thomas was troubled, as you have heard, and a Jury, by the means of
Sir John Fogge, endighted him of treason. After which, an Oyer determiner was
held in the Guildhall, An Oyer determiner for the trial of Sir Thomas Cook.
where sat the Lord Mayor, the Duke of Clarence, the Earl of Warwick, the
Lord Rivers, Sir John Fogge, with other of the kings Council.

To this place was the said Sir Thomas brought, and there arraigned upon life
and death: where he was acquitted of the said endightment, Sir Thomas Cook
acquitted by the Jury.
and sent to the Counter in Breadstreet, and from thence to the Kings Bench.
Being thus acquitted, his Wife got possession again of his house, the which
she found in a very evil plight: for the servants of Sir John Fogge, and of
the Lord Rivers, had made havocke of what they listed. Also, at his place at
Giddy Hall in Essex, When men are in distress much spoil is made of them.
another sort had destroyed the Dear in his Park, his Conies and Fish, and
spared not Brass, Pewter, Bedding, and all that they could carry away; for
which, never a penny might be gotten back again in recompense, nor Sir Thomas
Cook be delivered, until he had paid 8000. pounds to the King, and 800.
pounds to the Queen. And because that Sir John Markham knight, then chief
Justice of the Pleas, determined somewhat against the kings pleasure (that the
offense done by Sir Thomas Cook was no treason, but misprision, the which was
no desert of death, but to be fined at the kings pleasure: Sir John Markham
Lord chief Justice lust his Office for doing Justice.
) the Lord Rivers, and the Duchess of Bedford his wife, procured, that he lost
his Office afterward.

Edward the fourth being dead, leaving his eldest son Edward, and his second
son Richard, both infants; Richard Duke of Gloucester, Richard the third took
on him the Crown in Baynards Castle.
being elected by the Nobles and Commons in the Guildhall of London, took on
him the title or the Realm and kingdom, as imposed upon him in this Baynards
Castle, as ye may read pended by Sir Thomas Moore, and set down in my Annals.

Henry the seventh, Of Baynards Castle.
about the year 1501. the 16. of his reign, repaired or rather new builded
this house, not imbattelled, or so strongly fortified Castle-like* but far
more beautiful and commodious for the entertainment of any Prince or great
Estate: he also kept a Royal Turney, and Iusts in the Tower of London, for
his Lords, knights and other. In the seventeenth of his reign, he with his
Queen were lodged there, and came from thence to Fauls Church, where they made
their offering, dined in the Bishops Palace, and so returned.

The 18, of his reign he was lodged there, Henry the lodged in Baynards Castle.
and the Ambassadors from the King of the Romans, were thither brought to his
presence, and from thence the king came to Paul's, and was there sworn to the
King of the Romans, as the said King had sworn to him.

The twenty of the said King, Henry the seventh and Knights of the Garter rode
in then habits from the Tower to Pault Church.
he with his Knights of the Order, all in their habits of the Gatter, rode from
the Tower of London through the City, unto the Cathedral Church of St. Paul's,
and there heard Evensong, and from thence they rode to Baynards Castle, where
the king lodged, and on the next morrow, in the same habit they rode from
thence again to the said Church of St. Paul's, went on Procession, heard the
divine Service, offered and returned. The same year the King of Castile was
lodged there.

In the year 1553. the 19. of July, the Council, The counsel assembled at
Baynards Castle, and proclaimed Queen Mary.
partly moved with the right of the Lady Mary's cause, partly considering, that
the most of the Realm was wholly bent on her side, changing their mind from
Lady Jane, lately proclaimed Queen; assembled themselves at this Baynards
Castle, where they communed with the Earl of Pembrooke and the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and Sir John Mason, Clerk of the Council, sent for the Lord
Mayor, and then riding into Cheap to the Cross, where Garter King at Arms
(Trumpets being sounded) proclaimed the Lady Marie, Daughter to King Henry the
eight, and Queen Katharine, Queen of England, etc.

This Castle now belongs to the Earl of Pembrooke.

Next adjoining to this Castle, was sometime a Tower, the name thereof I have
not read, but that the same was builded by Edward the second, is manifest by
this that follows:

King Edward the third, A Tower by Baynards Castle builded by Edward the second.
in the second year of his reign, gave unto William de Ros, of Hamelake in
Yorkshire, a Tower upon the water of Thames, by the Gastle Baynard, in the
City of London, which Tower his Father had builded, he gave the said Tower and
appurtenances to the said William Hamesake, and his heirs, for a Roseyeerely
to be paid for all service due, etc.

This Tower as it seems to me, was since called Legates Inn, the 7. of
Edward the fourth.

Tower of Mountfiquit.
THe next Tower or Castle, Tower of Mountfiquit.
banking also on the river of Thames, was (as is before showed) called
Mountfiquits Castle, belonging to a Nobleman, Baron of Mountfiquit, the first
builder thereof, who came in with William the Conqueror, and was afterward
named, William le Sir Monntfiquit. This Castle he builded in a place, not far
distant from Baynards, toward the West. The same William Mountfiquit lived in
the reign of Hen. the 1. and was witness to a Charter then granted to the
City for the Shiriffes of London, Richard Mountfiquit lived in king John's
time, and in the year 1213. was by the same king banished the Realm into
France, when (peradventure) king John caused his Castle of Mountfiquit, amongst
other Castles of the Barons, to be overthrown. The which, after his return,
might be by him again re edified; for the total destruction thereof, was
about the year 1276. when Robert Kilwarby, Archbishop of Canturbury, began the
foundation of the Friars Preachers Church there, commonly called, the Black
Friars, as appears by a Charter, in the fourth of Edward the first, in these
words.

Gregory Rokesley, Cant. Record ex Charta. The preaching Friars Church founded
by Baynards Castle; before which time their Church was in Oldborne.
Lord Mayor, and the Barons of London, granted, and gave to the Archbishop of
Canturbury Robert Kilwarby, two lanes or ways, lying next to the street of
Baynards Castle, and the Tower of Mountfiquit, or Mountfichet to be destroyed.
In the which place, the said Robert builded the late new Church of the Black
Friars, with the rest of the stones that were left of the said Tower. For the
best and choice stones the Bishop of London had obtained of King William
Conqueror, to re-edifie the upper part of Saint Paul's Church, which was then
(by chance of fire) decayed.

One other Tower there was also, Tower on the Thames
situate on the River of Thames, near unto the said Black Friars Church, on
the West part thereof, builded at the Citizens charges, by license and
commandment of Edward the first, and of Edward the second as appears by
their grants. Which Tower was then finished, and so stood for the space of 300.
years; and was at the last taken down by the commandment of John Sha, Mayor
of London, in the year 1502.

Another Tower or Castle also was there, Tower or Castle on the west of London
by Saint Brides Church.
in the West part of the City, pertaining to the king. For I read, that in the
year 1087. the 20. of William the first, the City of London, with the Church
of Saint Paul, being burned, Mauritius then Bishop of London, afterward began
the foundation of a new Church, whereunto king William (says mine Author) gave
the choice stones of his Castle, standing near to the bank of the River of
Thames, at the west end of the City. In vita Arkenwald.
After this Mauritius, Richard his successor purchased the streets about Paul's
Church, compassing the same with a wall of stone, and gates, King Henry the
first gave to this Richard, so much of the Moat or wall of the Castle, on the
Thames side to the South, as should be needful to make the said wall of the
Churchyard, and so much more as should suffice to make a way without the wall
on the North side.

This Tower or Castle being thus destroyed, stood, as it may seem, in place
where now stands the House called Bridewell. For notwithstanding the
destruction of the said Castle or Tower, the house remained large, so that the
Kings of this Realm long after were lodged there, The kings house by S. Brides
in Flceistreet.
and kept their Courts. For until the 9. year of Henry the third, the Courts
of Law and Justice were kept in the Kings house, wheresoever he was lodged, and
not elsewhere. And that the Kings have been lodged, and kept their Law Court
in this place, I could show you many, authors of record; but for a plain
proof, this one may suffice: Haec est finalis concordia, facta in Curia Dom.
Lib. Barton super Trent.
Regis apud Sanct. Bridgid. Land. a die Sancti Michaelis in 15. dies Anno regni
Regis Iohannis 7. Cora^ G. Fill. Petri, Eustacio de Fauconberg, Iohanne de
Gestlinge, Osbart filio Hervey, Walter de Crisping, Iusticiar. and aliis
Baronibus Domini Regis. More (as Matthew Paris has) about the year 1210. King
John, Mat. Paris Manuscrip. Parliament at S. Brides.
the 12. of his reign, summoned a Parliament at S. Brides in London, where he
exacted of the Clergy and religious persons, the sum of one hundred thousand
pounds, and besides all this, the white Monks were compelled to cancel their
privileges, and to pay 40000. l. to the King, etc. This house of S. Birds of
later time being left, and not used by the Kings, fell to ruin, insomuch that
the very platform thereof remained (for great part) waste, and as it were, but
a lay-stall of filth and rubbish, only a fair Well remained there. A great
part of this house, namely on the west, as has been said, was given to the
Bishop of Salisbury; Bridewell builded by King Henry the eighth.
the other part toward the East remained waste, until King Henry the 8.
builded a stately and beautiful house thereupon, giving it to name, Bridewell,
of the Parish and Well there. This house he purposely builded for the
entertainme^t of the Emp. Charles the 5. who in the year 1522. came into this
City, as I have showed in my Summarie, Annals, and large Chronicles.

On the North-west side of this City, near unto Redcrosse-street, there was a
Tower, commonly called Barbican, Barbican or Burhkenning
or Burhkenning, for that the same, being placed on an high ground, and also
builded of some good height, was (in old time) used as a Watchtower for the
City, from whence a man might behold and view the whole City toward the
South, and also into Kent, Suffex and Surrey, and likewise every other way,
East, North, or West.

Some other Burhkennings or Watch-Towers there were of old time, in and about
the City, all which were repaired, yea and others new builded, by Gilbert de
Clare, Earl of Gloucester, in the reign of King Henry the third, when the
Barons were in Arms, and held the City against the King. But the Barons being
reconciled to his favor, in the year 1267. he caused all their Burhkennings,
Watch-Towers, and Bulwarks, made and repaired by the said Earl, to be plucked
down, and the ditches to be filled up, so that naught of them might seem to
remain. The destruction of the Barbicun.
And then was might seem to remain. And then was this Burhkenning, amongst
the rest, overthrown and destroyed: and although the ditch near thereunto,
then called Hounds-ditch, was stopped up, yet the street (of long time after)
was called Hounds-ditch, and of late time (more commonly) called Barbican. The
plot or feat of this Burhkening or watchtower, King Edward the third, in the
year 1336. the tenth of his reign, gave unto Robert Vfford, Earl of
Suffolk, by the name of his Manor of Base-court, in the Parish of S. Giles
without Creplegate of London, commonly called the Barbican.

Tower Royal was of old time the kings house, Tower Royal.
King Stephen was there lodged; but since called the Queens Wardrobe. The
Princess, mother to King Richard the 2. in the 4. of his reign, was lodged
there, being forced to fly from the Tower of London, when the Rebels possessed
it. But on the 15. of June, (says Frosard) Wat Tylar being slain, Job. Frosard
the King went to this Lady Princess his mother, then lodged in the Tower
Royal, called the Queens Wardrobe, where she had tarried two days and two
nights: which Tower (says the Record of Edward the third, the thirty sixth
year) was in the Parish of the Saint Michael de Pater noster, etc.

In the year 1386. King Richard with Queen Anne his wife, Lib. S. in Eborum.
kept their Christmas at Eltham, whither came to him Lion King of Ermonie, The
King of Ermonie came into England.
under pretense to reform peace betwixt the Kings of England and France; but
what his coming profited, he only understood. For, besides innumerable gifts
that he received of the King and of the Nobles, the King lying then in this
Tower Royal, Richard 2. lodged in the Tower Royal.
or the Queens Wardrobe in London, granted to him a Charter, of a thousand
pounds by year during his life. He was, as he affirmed, chased out of his
Kingdom by the Tartarians. More concerning this Tower shall you read, when you
come to the Vintry Ward, in which is stands.

Sernes Tower in Bucklersberie, Sernes Tower in Bucklersbery.
was sometimes the Kings house. Edward the third, in the eighteenth year of
his reign, appointed his Exchange of moneys therein to be kept, and in the two
and thirtieth, he gave the same Tower to his free Chapel of S. Stephen at
Westminster.

Of Schools and other Houses of Learning.
IN the reign of King Stephen, Famous schools of Philosophy by privilege in
London.
and of Henry the second, (says Fitzstephen) there were in London 3. principal
Churches, which had famous Schools, either by privilege and ancient dignity,
or by favor of some particular persons, as of Doctors, which were ^^ceounted
notable and renowned, for knowledge in Philosophy. And there were other
inferior Schools also.

Upon Festival days, Solemn meetings and disputing of scholars Logically and
demonstratively.
the Masters made solemn meetings in the Churches, where their Scholars
disputed Logically and demonstratively: some bringing Enthimems, other, perfect
Syllogismes: some disputed for show; others to trace out the truth; and cunning
Sophisters were brave scholars, when they flowed with words. Others used
fallacies: Rhetoricians spoke aptly to persuade, observing the precepts of Art,
and omitting nothing that might serve their purpose. The Boys of diverse
Schools did cap or pot verses, and contended of the principles of Grammar.

There were some, Grammar schools and scholars their exercises.
which (on the other side) with Epigrams and Rimes, nipping and quipping their
fellows, and the faults of others, though suppressing their names, moved
thereby much laughter among their Auditors.

Hitherto Fitzstephen, for schools and scholars, and for their exercise in the
City in his days,: sithence the which time, as to me it seems, by increase
of Colleges of students in the Vaiversities of Oxford and Cambridge, the
frequenting of schools, and exercises of scholars in the City, as had been
accustomed, very much decreased.

The three principal Churches which had these famous shooles by privileges,
must needs be the cathedral Church of S. Paul for one: seeing that by a
general Council, Mat. Paris. Every Cathedral Church had his school for
poor scholars.
holden in the year 1176. at Rome, in the Patriarchie of Laterane, it was
decreed, that every Cathedral Church should have his schoolmaster, to teach
poor scholars, and others, as had bin accustomed, and that no man should take
any reward for license to teach. The second, as most ancient, may seem to have
been the Monastery of S. Peter's at Westminster, whereof Ingulphus, Abbot of
Crowland, in the reign of William the Conqueror, writes thus: 1 Jngulphus, an
humble servant of God, borne of English parents, in the most beautiful City
of London, Free school at Westminster in the reign of Edward the Confessor.
for to attain to learning, was first put to Westminster. and after to study at
Oxford, etc. And writing in praise of Queen Agitha, wife to Edward the
Confessor: I have seen (faith he) often, when being but a Boy, I came to see
my Father, dwelling in the Kings Court, and often coming from School, when I
met the Queen, she would oppose me touching my learning and lesson. And
falling from Grammar to Logic, wherein she had some knowledge, she would
subtly conclude an Argument with me. And by her handmaiden give me three or
four pieces of money, and send me unto the Palace, where I should receive
some victuals, and then be dismissed.

The third School seems to have been in the Monastery of S. Savior, at
Bermondsey in Southwarke. For other Priories, as of Saint John by Smithfield,
Saint Bartholomew in Smithfield, Saint Mary Overie in Southwarke, and that of
the Holy Trinity by Ealdgate, were all of later foundation, and the Friars
Colleges, and Hospitals in this City, were raised since them, in the reigns
of Henry the 3. Edward the 1, 2, and 3. etc. All which houses had their
Schools, though not so famous as these first named.

But touching Schools more lately advanced in this City, I read, that King
Henry the fifth, having suppressed the Priories Aliens, Priories Aliens.
whereof some were about London, namely, Our Lady of Rouncivall by
Charing-Crosse: one other Hospital in Oldborne: one other without Creplegate;
and the fourth without Aldersgate: besides other that are now worn out of
memory, and whereof there is no monument remaining, more than Rouncivall,
converted to a Brotherhood, which continued till the reign of Henry the
eighth, or Edward the 6. This, I say, and other of their Schools, being broken
up and ceased, King Henry the 6. in the 24. of his reign, Henry the sixth
appointed Grammar Schools.
by Patent appointed, that there should be in London Grammar-Schooles, besides
S. Paul's, at S. Martins le grand, S. Mary le Bow, in Cheap, S. Dunstans in the
west, and S. Anthonies. And in the next year, to wit, 1394. the said King
ordained by Parliament, Grammar schools appointed by Parliament.
that four other Grammer-Schooles should be erected, to wit, in the Parishes
of Saint Andrew in Oldborne, Alhallowes the great, in Thames street, Saint
Peter's upon Cornhill, and in the Hospital of Saint Thomas of Acons in west
Cheap. Since the which time, as diverse Schools, by suppressing of religious
houses (whereof they were members in the reign of Henry the eighth, have been
decayed: so again have some others been newly erected and founded for them.
Paul's School new builded.
As namely, Paul's school, in place of an old ruined house, was builded in most
ample manner, and largely endowed in the year 1512. by John Collet, Doctor of
Divinity, and Deane of Paul's, for 153. poor men's children: for which there was
ordained a Master, Submaster or Usher, and a Chaplain. Free schools in Christ's
Hospital.
Again, in the year 1553. after the erection of Christ's Hospital, in the
late dissolved house of the Gray Friars, a great number of poor children being
taken in, a school was also ordained there, at the Citizens charges.

Also in the year 1561. the Merchant Tailors of London, Free schools founded
by the Merchant Tailors.
founded one notable free Grammar-schoole, in the Parish of Saint Laurence
Poultney, by Candle-weeke street; Richard Hills, late Master of that Company,
having given 500. pound toward the purchase of an House, called the Manor of
the Rose, sometime the Duke of Buckinghams, wherein the school is kept.

As for the meeting of Schoolemasters on festival days, at festival
Churches, and the disputing of their scholars Logically, etc. whereof I have
before spoken, the same was long since discontinued. But the arguing of
schoole-boies about the principles of Grammar, has been continued even till
our time: for I my self (in my youth) have yearly seen, on the Eve of Saint
Bartholomew the Apostle, the scholars of diverse Grammar-schooles, Scholars
disputed in S. Bartholomews Churchyard.
repair unto the Churchyard of Saint Bartholomew the Priory in Smithfield,
where, upon a bank boorded about under a Tree, some one scholar has stepped
up, and there has apposed and answered, till he were by some better scholar
overcome and put down. And then the overcommer taking the place, did like as
the first: and in the end, the best opposers and answerers had rewards, which I
observed not: but it made both good schoolemasters, and also good scholars
(diligently against such times) to prepare themselves for the obtaining of this
Garland.

I remember there repaired to these exercises, (amongst others) the Masters and
scholars of the free schools of S. Paul's in London, of Saint Peter's at
Westminster, of Saint Thomas Acons Hospital, and of Saint Anthonies Hospital:
whereof the last named, commonly presented the best Scholars, and had the prize
in those days.

This Priorie of Saint Bartholomew being surrendered to Henry the eighth, those
disputations of Scholars in that place surceased, Disputation of scholars in
Christ's Hospital.
and was again, only for a year or twain, in the reign of Edward the
sixth, revived in the Cloister of Christ's Hospital, where the best Scholars,
(then still of S. Anthonies School) were rewarded with Bows and Arrows of
silver, given to them by Sir Martin Bows, Goldsmith.

Nevertheless, howsoever the encouragement failed, the Scholars of Paul's,
meeting with them of Saint Anthonies, would call them Saint Anthonies Pigs,
Anthonies Pigs.
and they again would call the other Pigeons of Paul's; Pigeons of Paul's.
because many Pigeons were bred in Paul's Church, and S. Anthony was always
figured with a Pig following him: and mindful of the former usage, did for a
long season, disorderly in the open street, provoke one another, with Salve tu
quoque, placet tibi mecum disputare? placet. And so proceeding from this to
questions in Grammar, they usually fell from words to blows, with their
fatchels full of books, many times in great heaps, that they troubled the
streets and passengers: so that finally they were restrained with the decay of
Saint Anthonies School.

Out of this School have sprung diverse famous persons, whereof although time
has buried the names of many, yet in mine own remembrance may be numbered
these following: Sir Thomas Moore, Knight, Lord Chancellor of England: Doctor
Nicholas Heath, sometime Bishop of Rochester, after of Worcester, and lastly,
Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor of England: Doctor John Whitgift,
Bishop of Worcester, and after Archbishop of Canturbury, etc.

Of later time, Lecture in Chirurgerie.
in the year of Christ 1582. there was founded a public Lecture in
Chirurgerie, to be read in the College of Physicians in Knight-riders-street,
to begin in the year 1584. on the sixth of May, and so to be continued for
ever twice a week, on Wednesdsy and Friday, by the honorable Baron, John, Lord
Lombley, and the learned Richard Chadwell, Doctor in Physic: the Reader
whereof to be Richard Forster, Doctor of Physic, during his life.

Furthermore, Mathematical Lecture read.
about the same time, there was also begun a Mathematical Lecture, to be read
in a fair old Chapel, builded by Simon Eayre, within the Leaden Hall;
whereof a learned Citizen borne, named Thomas Hood, was the first Reader. But
this Chapel, and other parts of that Hall, being employed for stowage of
goods, taken out of a great Spanish Caracke, the said Lecture ceased any more
to be read, and was then in the year 1588. read in the house of Master Thomas
Smith in Grasse-street, etc.

Last of all, Sir Thomas Gresham.
Sir Thomas Gresham knight, Agent to Queen Elizabeth, by his last Will and
Testament, made in the year 1579. gave the Royal Exchange, and all the
buildings thereunto appertaining; that is to say, the one moity to the Mayor and
Communalty of London, and their successors, upon trust, that they perform as
shall be declared: and the other moity to the Mercers, Lectures to be read in
London.
in like confidence. The Mayor and Communalty are to find four, to read
Lectures of Divinity, Astronomy, Music and Geometry, within his dwelling
house in Bishopsgate-street, and to bestow the sum of two hundred pound; to
wit, fifty pound apeece, etc. The Mercers likewise are to find three Readers;
that is, in Civil Law, Physic and Rhetoric, within the same dwelling
house, the sum of 150. pound, to every Reader 50. pound, etc. Which gift was
(since that time) confirmed by Parliament, to take effect, and began after
the decease of the Lady Anne Gresham, which happened in the year 1596. and so is
to continue for ever.

Whereupon, Names of the 7. first Lecturers.
the Lectures were accordingly chosen, and appointed to begin their Readings in
the Month of June, 1597. Whose names were, Master Anthony Wotton, for
Divinity; Master Doctor Matthew Gwyn, for Physic; Doctor Henry Mountlow, for
the Civil Law; Doctor John Bull, for Music; Master Breerewood, for
Astronomy; Master Henry Bridges, for Geometry; and Master Caleb Willis, for
Rhetoric. These Lectures are read daily, Sundaies excepted, in the Termetimes,
by every one upon his day, in the morning betwixt nine and ten, in Latin: in
the afternoon betwixt two and three, in English; save that Doctor Bull was
dispensed with to read the Music Lecture in English only, and upon two
several days, Thursday and Saturday in the afternoons, betwixt 3. and 4. of
the clock.

The Readers of the seven Liberal Sciences at Gresham College, June 27. 1631.
were these following:

First, Master Richard Holdsworth, Reader of Divinity, on Monday.

Doctor Eaton, Reader of Civil Law, on Tuesday.

Doctor Winston, Reader of Physic, on Saturday.

Master John Taverner, Reader of Music, on Saturday.

Master Henry Gilibrand, Reader of Astronomy, on Wednesday.

Master John Greaves, Reader of Geometry, on Thursday.

And Master Edward Wilkinson, Reader of Rhetoric, on Friday.

Houses of Students in the Common Law.
But beside all this, An University of Students in and about this City.
there is in and about this City, a whole University, as it were, of
Students, practisers or pleaders, and Judges of the Laws of this Realm, not
living of common stipends, as in other Universities it is for the most part
done, but of their own private maintenance, as being altogether fed, either by
their places, or practice, or otherwise by their proper Revenues, Houses of
Students of the Common Law, and Judges.
or exhibition of parents and friends: for that the younger sort are either
Gentlemen or the sons of Gentlemen, or of other most wealthy persons. Of
these Houses there be at this day fourteen in all, whereof nine do stand
within the Liberties of this City, and five in the Suburbs thereof: Within the
Liberties. Of every of these Innes, ye may read more in their several places
where the stand

For Judges and Sergeants only.
Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, Sergeants Inn in Chancery Lane,
In Fleetstreet, Houses of Court.
The Inner Temple, The middle Temple,
Houses of Chancerie.
Cliffords Inn in Fleetstreet, Thavies Inn in Oldborne, Furnevals Inn in
Oldborne, Barnards Inn in Oldborne, Staple Inn in Oldborne,

Without the Liberties.
Houses of Court.
Grayes Inn in Oldborne, Lincolnes Inn in Chancerielane, by the old Temple.
Houses of Chancerie without Temple bar, in the liberty of Westminster.
Clements Inn, New Inn, Lions June,



There was sometime an Inn of Sergeants in Oldborne, A Sergeants Inn in
Oldborne
as ye may read of Scroopes Inn, over against Saint Andrews Church.

There was also one other Inn of Chancerie, Chesters Inn, or Strand Inn, in
place whereas stands Sommerset House.
called Chesters Inn, for the neerenesse to the Bishop of Chesters house, but
more commonly termed Strand Inn, for that it stood in Strand street, and near
unto Strand bridge without Temple Bar, in the liberty of the Duchy of
Lancaster. This Inn of Chancery, with other houses adjoining, were pulled down
in the reign of Edw. the 6. by Edward Duke of Sommerset, who in place thereof
raised that large and beautiful house, called Sommerset House.

There was moreover, in the reign of King Henry the sixth, a tenth House of
Chancery, mentioned by Justice Fortescue, in his book of the Laws of England:
but where it stood, or when it was abandoned, I cannot find, and therefore I
will leave it, and return to the rest.

The Houses of Court be replenished, Houses of Court, what they be.
partly with young students, and partly with Graduates and practisers of the
Law: but the Innes of Chancerie, being (as it were) provinces, severally
subjected to the Innes of Court, be chiefly furnished with Officers,
Atturneys, Solliciters and Clerks, that follow the Courts of the Kings Bench,
or Common Pleas. And yet there want not some other, being young students, that
come thither sometimes from one of the Universities, Some students coming from
the Universities.
and sometimes immediately from Grammar Schools, and these having spent some
time in studying upon the grounds of the Law, and having performed the
exercises of their own houses, (called Boltas Mootes, and putting of cases)
they proceed to be admitted, and become students in some of these four houses
or Innes of Court, where continuing by the space of seven years, or
thereabouts, they frequent Readings, Meetings, Boltings, and other learned
exercises, whereby growing ripe in the knowledge of the Laws, and approved
withal, The preferment of students according to their deserving.
to be of honest conversation, they are either by the general consent of the
Benchers, or Readers, (being of the most ancient, grave, and judicial men of
every Inn of the Court, or by special privilege of the present Reader there,
selected and called to the degree of Utter Barristers, and so enabled to be
common Counselors. and to practice the Law, both in their Chambers, and at the
Bars.

Of these, after that they be called to a further step of preferment, called
the Bench, there are two (every year) chosen among the Benchers of every Inn
of Court, Readers in every Inn of Court.
to be Readers there, who do make their Readings at two times of the year
also: that is, one in Lent, and the other in the beginning of August.

And for the help of young Students in every one of the Innes of Chancerie,
they do likewise choose out of every one Inn of Court a Reader, being no
Bencher, but an Utter Barrister there, in ten or twelve years continuance,
and of good profit in study. Now from these of the said degree of
Counselors, or Utter Barristers, having continued therein the space of
fourteen or fifteen years at the least, the chiefest and best learned are
(by the Benchers) elected to increase the number, as I said, of the Bench
amongst them; and so in their time do become, first single, and then double
Readers, to the students of those houses of Court.

After which last Reading, they be named Apprentices at the Law, Apprentises
at Law.
and in default of a sufficient number of Sergeants at Law, these are, at the
pleasure of the Prince, to be advanced to the places of Sergeants.

Out of which number of Sergeants also, Sergeants and Judges.
the void places of Judges are likewise ordinarily filled, albeit (now and
then) some be advanced by the special favor of the Prince, to the estate,
dignity, and place both of Sergeant and Judge, as it were in one instant. But
from thence-forth, they hold not any room in those Innes of Court, by being
translated to one of the said two Innes, called Sergeants Innes, where none but
the Sergeants and Judges do converse.

Of Orders and Customs.
OF Orders and Customs in this City, Fitzstephen (in his time) said as
follows: Men of all Trades in dictinct places.
Men of all Trades, sellers of all sorts of Wares, laborers in every work,
every morning are in their distinct and several places. Wine in Ships, and
Wine in Taverns.
Furthermore, in London, upon the River side, between the wine in Ships, and
the wine to be sold in Taverns, Cooks row in Thames street.
is a common Cookery, or Cooks Row, where daily for the season of the year,
men might have meat, roast, sod, orfryed fish, flesh, fowls, fit for rich and
poor. If any come suddenly to any Citizen from afar, weary, and not willing
to tarry till the meat be bought, and dressed, while the servant brings water
for his masters hands, and fetches bread, he shall have immediately (from the
Rivers side) all viands whatsoever he desires, What multitude soever, either
of Soldiers, or strangers do come to the City, whatsoever hour, day or
night, according to their pleasures, may refresh themselves, and they which
delight in delicateness, may be satisfied with as delicate dishes there, as
may be found elsewhere. And this Cooks row is very necessary to the City: and
according to Plato in Gorgius; next to Physic is the office of Cooks, as part
of a City.

Without one of the Gates is a plain field, both in name and deed, Smithfield
for a plain smooth ground, is called smeth and smothie.
where every Friday, unless it be a solemn bidden Holyday, is a notable show
of horses to be sold, Earls, Market for horses and other cattle.
Barons, Knights and Citizens repair thither to see, or to buy: there may you
of pleasure see amblers, pacing it delicately: there may you see trotters, fit
for men of arms, setting more hardly: there there may you have not able young
horses not yet brokene may you have strong steeds, well limmedgeldings, who^
the buiers do especially regard for pace, and swiftness. The boys which ride
these horses, sometime two, sometime three, do run races for wagers, with a
desire of praise, or hope of victory. In another part of that fieldare to be
sold all implements of husbandry, as also fat swine, milch kine, Merchants of
all Nations traded at this City, and had their several keys and wharfes.
sheep and Oxen: there stand also Mares and Horses, fit for Ploughes and
Teames, with their young Colts by them. At this City, Merchant strangers of all
Nations, had their keys and wharses: the Arabians sent gold: the Sabeans spice
and Frankincense: The Authors opinion of this City, the antiquity thereof.
the Scythian Armor, Babylon oil, Indian purple garments, Egypt precious
stones, Norway and Russia Ambexgreece and sables, and the Frenchmen wine.
According to the truth of Chronicles, this City is ancienter than Rome, built
by the ancient Trojans and by Brute, This City divided into Wards more than
400. years since, and also had then both Aldermen and Sheriffs.
before that was built by Romulus and Remus; and therefore uses the ancient
customs of Rome. This City, even as Rome, is divided into Wards. It has
yearly Shriffes, in stead of Consuls. It has the diginity of Senators, in
Aldermen. It has Underofficers, Common Sewers, and Conducts in streets,
Customs of London.
according to the quality of causes. It has general Courts and assemblies
upon appointed days. I do not think that there is any City, wherein are
better customs, in frequenting the Churches, in serving God, in keeping
Holy Days, in giving alms, in entertaining strangers, in solemnizing
Marriages, in furnishing banquets, celebrating funerals, and burying dead
bodies.

The only plagues of London, Casualties of fires when houses were covered with
church.
is immoderate quaffing among the foolish sort, and often casualties by fire.
Most part of the Bishops, Abbots, and great Lords of the land, have houses
there, whereunto they resort and bestow much, when they are called to
Parliament by the King, or to counsel by their Metropolitan, or otherwise by
their private business.

Thus fur Fitzstephen, of the estate of things in his time, whereunto may be
added the present, by conference whereof, the alteration will easily appear.
Change of place and tradesmen.


Men of trades and sellers of wares in this City have oftentimes since changed
their places, as they have found their best advantage. For whereas Mercers, and
Haberdashers used wholly then to keep their shops in west Cheap; of later
time, they held them on London bridge, where some of them do as yet remain.
The Goldsmiths of Gutherons lane, and the Old Exchange, are now (for the most
part) removed into the South side of West Cheap. The Pepperers and Grocers of
Sopers lane, are now in Bucklesbury, and other places disperced. The Drapers of
Lombard Street, and of Cornehill, are seated in Candleweeke street, and
Watheling street. The Skinners from St. Mary Pellipers, or at the Axe; into
Budgerow and Walbrook. Stockfish monger row, old Fish street, and new Fish
street.
The Stockfishmongers in Thames street: wet Fishmongers in Knightriders street,
and Bridge-street. The Ironmongers of Ironmongrs lane, and Old Jury, into
Thames street. The Vintners, from the Vinetree, into diverse places. But the
Brewers (for the most part) remained near to the friendly water of Thames. The
Butchers in Eastcheap, St. Nicholas Shambles, and the Stocks Market. The
Hosiers (of old time) in Hosier lane, near unto Smithfield, are since then
removed into Cordwayner street, the upper part thereof by Bow-Church, and last
of all, into Burchoverlane by Cornhill. The Shoomakers and Curriors of
Cordwayner street, removed, the one to Saint Martins legrand, the other to
London Wall, near to Mooregate. The Founders remain by themselves in
Lothbury. Cooks or Pastelars, (for the most part) were in Thames street, the
others dispersed into diverse parts. Poulters of late removed out of the
Poultrie, betwixt the Stocks and the great Conduit in Cheap, into
Grassestreet and S. Nicholas shambles. Bowyers from Bowyers row by Ludgate,
into diverse parts, and almost worn out with the Fletchers. Pater
noster-makers, of old time, or Bead-makers, and Text-writers, are gone out of
Pater noster row, and are called Stationers of Paul's Churchyard.
Patten-makers, of Saint Margaret Pattens Lane, clean worn out. Laborers,
every worke-day to be found in Cheap, about Sopers lane end. Horse-coursers,
and sellers of Oxen, sheep, swine, and such like, remain in their old Market
of Smithfield, etc.

That Merchants of all Nations had their Keys and Wharfes at this City,
Mercha^ts of all nations.
whereunto they brought their Merchandises, before, and in the reign of Henry
the second, mine Author wrote (of his own knowledge) to be true, though for the
Antiquity of the City, he took the common opinion. Also, that this City was
(in his time, and before) divided into Wards; had yearly Sheriffs and
Aldermen, general Courts and assemblies, and such like notes by him set down,
in commendation of the Citizens, whereof there is no question. He wrote
likewise of his own experience, as being borne and brought up amongst them.

And to confirm his opinion, concerning Merchandises then hither transported,
whereof happily may be some argument; Tho. Clifford.
Thomas Clifford (before Fitzstephens time) writing of King Edward the
confessor, says to this effect: King Edward, intending to make his Sepulcher
at Westminster, for that it was near to the famous City of London, and the
River of Thames, which brought in all kind of Merchandises from all parts of
the world, etc. And William of Malmesbury, that W. Malmesb.
that lived in the reign of William the first and second, Henry the first, and
King Stephen, calls this A Noble City, full of wealthy Citizens, frequented
with the trade of Merchandises from all parts of the world. Also I read in
diverse Records, that (in old time) No woad was stowed or harbored in this
City, but all was presently seld in the Ships, except by license purchased of
the Sheriffs; till of more later time, to wit in the year 1236. Andrew
Bokerell, being Mayor, by assent of the principal Citizens, the Merchants of
Amiens, Nele and Corby, purchased Letters ensealed with the common seal of the
City, that they, when they came, might harborow their Woads, and therefore
should give the Mayor every year 50. Marks starling. And the same year they
gave an hundred pound toward conveying of water from Tyborn to this City, as
already has been related.

Also the Merchants of Normandy made fine, for license to harbor their Woads,
till it was otherwise provided, in the year 1263. Thomas Fitzthomas being
Mayor, etc. Which proves, that then (as before) they were here, among other
Nations, privileged.

It follows in Fitzstephen; Plagues of London, immoderate quaffing, and
casualties by fire.
That the plagues of London (in that time) were immoderate quaffing among
fools, and often casualties by fire.

For the first, to wit, of quaffing, it continues still as before, or rather,
is mightily increased, though greatly qualmed among the poorer sort, not of any
holy abstinency, but of mere necessity: Ale and Beer being small, and Wines
in price above their reach.

As for prevention of casualties by fire, the houses in this City (being then
builded all of timber, and covered with thatch of straw or reed;) Lib. Constit.
it was long since thought good policy in our fore-father, Lib. Horn.
wisely to provide; Lib. Clarke^well.
namely, in the year of Christ, 1189. the first of Richard the first, Henry
Fitzalwine, (being then Mayor) that all men in this City should build their
houses of stone up to a certain height, and to cover them with slate or baked
tile. Since which time, thanks be given to God, there has not happened the
like often consuming fire in this City, as before.

But now in our time, instead of these enormities, Purprestur in and about this
City.
others are come in place, no less meet to be reformed, namely, Purprestures,
or encrochments on the highwayes, lanes, and common grounds, in and about this
City. Whereof a learned Gentleman, W. Paucns.
a grave Citizen, has (not many years since) written and exhibited a Book to
the Mayor and communalty, which Book, whether the same has been by them read,
and diligently considered upon, I know not; but sure I am, nothing is reformed
since concerning this matter.

Then the number of Cars, Draies, Carts, Carts and Drayes not well governed in
this City dangerous.
and Coaches, more than has been accustomed, the streets and lanes being
straightened, must needs be dangerous, as daily experience proves.

The Coachman rides behind the horse tails, lasheth them, and looks not
behind him. The Dray-man sits and sleeps on his Dray, and lets his
horse lead him home. L. S. Mary Aborum.
I know, that by the good Laws and Customs of this City, shod Carts are
forbidden to enter the same, except upon reasonable causes, as service of the
Prince, or such like, they be tolerated. Also that the fore-horse of every
carriage should be led by hand: but these good orders are not observed. Of old
time, Coaches were not known in this Island, Riding in Whirlicotes.
but Chariots or Whirlicotes, then so called, and they only used for Princes
or great Estates, such as had their footmen about them. And for example to
note, I read that Richard the second being threatened by the Rebels of Kent,
rode from the Tower of London to the Miles-end, and with him, his Mother,
because she was sick and weak, in a Whirlicote, the Earls of Buckingham,
Kent, Warwick, and Oxford, Sir Thomas Percie, Sir Robert Knowles, the Mayor of
London, Sir Aubery de Vere that bare the Kings sword, with other Knights and
Esquiers attending on horseback. It followed in the next year, that the said
King Richard, who took to wife Anne, daughter to the King of Boheme, that then
was, first brought hither the riding upon side Saddles, Riding on side Saddles,
that were wont to ride a stride.
and so was the riding in those Whirlicotes and Chariots forsken; except at
Coronations and such like spectacles. But now of late years, the use of
Coaches, brought out of Germany, Riding in Coaches.
is taken up, and made so common, as there is neither distinction of time, nor
difference of persons observed: for the world runs on wheels with many,
whose Parents were glad to go on foot.

Last of all, W. Fitstephen.
mine Author, in this Chapter has these words: Most part of the Bishops,
Abbots, and great Lords of the land, as if they were Citizens and Freemen of
Land. had many fair houses to resort unto, and many rich and wealthy Gentlemen
spent their money there. And in another place, he has these words: Every
Sunday in Lent, a fresh company of young men comes into the fields on
horsbacke, and the best horsemen conduct the rest, then march forth the
Citizens Sons, and other young men with disarmed Lances and Shields, and
practice feats of War. Many Courtiers likewise, and attendants on Noblemen,
repair to this exercise, and whilst the hope of victory does inflame their
minds; they do show good proof, how serviceable they would be in Martial
affairs, etc. Again he says, This City, in the troublesome time of King
Stephen, showed at a Muster 20000. armed horsemen, and 40000. footmen,
serviceable for the Wars, etc. All which sayings of the said Author well
considered, do plainly prove, that in those days, the inhabitants and
repaireres to this City (of what este soever, spiritual or temporal) having
houses here, lived in amity with the Citizens, every man observing the customs
and orders of the City, and chose to be contributary to charges here, rather
than in any part of the land whersoever. The causes of greater shows and
musters in this City of old time, more than of late.
This City being the heart of the Realm, the Kings Chamber, and Princes seat,
whereunto they made repair, and showed their forces, both of Horses and of
men, which caused in troublesome time, as of King Stephen, the Musters of this
City to be so great in number.

Great Families of old time kept.
ANd here to touch somewhat of great Families and households, Great families of
old time kept.
kept in former times by Noble men, and great estates of this Realm, according
to their honors and dignities. I have seen an account made by Henry Leicester,
Cofferer to Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Tho. Earl of Lancaster, his
housekeeping and charge thereof for one year.
for one whole years expenses in the Earls house, from the day next after
Michaelmasse, in the seventh year of Edward the second, until Michaelmasse in
the eight year of the same King, amounting to the sum of seven thousand,
Record of Pontfract, as I could obtain of M. Cudnor.
nine hundred, fifty seven pound, thirteen shillings, four pence half penny,
as follows.

To wit, in the Pantry, Buttry, and Kitchen, 3405. l. etc.

For 184. Tuns, 1. pipe of Red or Claret wine, and one Tun of White wine,
bought for the house 104. l. 17. s. 6. d.

For Grocery ware, 180. l. 17. s.

For six Barrels of Sturgeon, nineteen pound.

For 6800. Stockfishes, so called, and for dried fishes, of all sorts, as
Lings, Haberdines, and other, 41. l. 6. s. 7. d.

For 1714. pound Wax, with Vermilion and Turpentine to make red Wax, 314. l.
7. s. 4. d. ob.

For 2319. pound of Tallow candles for the household, and 1870. of lights for
Paris candles, called Perchers, 31. l. 14. s. 3. d.

Expenses on the Earls great Horses, and the Keepers wages, 486. l. 4. s. 3.
d. ob.

Linen cloth for the Lord and his Chaplains, and for the Pantry 43. l. 17. d.

Fro 129. dozen of Parchment, with Ink, 4. l. 8. s. 3 ob.

Sum. 1230. l'. 17. d. 7. d. ob.

Item, for two clothes of Scarlet for the Earl against Christmasse, 159.
Cloths in Liveries against Christmas.
one cloth of Russet, for the Bishop of Anjou, 70. cloths of blew for the
Knights, (as they were then termed) 15. clothes of Medley for the Lords
clerks, 28. cloths for the Esquire, 15. cloths for Officers, 19. clothes for
Grooms, 3. clothes for Archers, 4. clothes for Minstrels and Carpenters, with
the sharing and carriage for the Earls Liveries at Christmas, 460. l. 15. d.

Item, for 7. Furs of variable Miniver (or powdered Ermin) 7. Hoods of purple,
395. Furs of Budge, for the Liveries of Barons, Knights, and Clerks, 123.
Furs of Lamb, for Esquires, bought at Chrismas, 147. l. 17. s. 8. d.

Item, 65. clothes Saffron color, 104. cloths in Liveries in summer.
for the Barons and Knights: in summer, 12. red clothes mixed, for Clerks, 26
clothes ray, for Esquires, one cloth ray, for Officers coats in summer, and
four clothes ray, for carpets in the Hall, 345. l. 13. s. 8. d.

Item, 100. pieces of green silk for the Knights, 14. Budge Furs for
surcotes, 13. hoods of Budge for Clerks, and 75. Furs of Lambs, for the Lords
liveries in summer, with Canvas and cords to trusse them, 72. l. 19. s.

Item, Saddles for the Lords liveries in summer, 51. l. 6. s. 8. d.

Item, for one Saddle for the Earl, of the Princes arms 40. s.

Sum. 1079. l. 18. s. 3. d.

Item, for things bought, whereof nothing can be read in my note, 241. l. 14.
s. 1. d. ob.

For horses lost in service of the Earl 8. l. 6. s. 8. d.

Fees paid to Earls, Barons, Knights, and Esquires, 623. l. 15. s. 5. d.

In gifts to Knights of France, the Queen of Englands Nurces, to the Countess
of Warren, Esquires, Minstrels, Messengers and riders, 92. l. 14. s.

Item, Northern Russt half yard and half quarter broad, I have seen sold for
four pence the yard, and was good cloth of a mingled color.
168. yards of Russet cloth, and 24. coats for poor men, with money given to
the poor on Maundy Thursday, 8. l. 16. s. 7. d.

Item, 24 silver Dishes, so many sawcers, and so many Cups for the Buttry, one
pair of Pater nosters, and one silver coffen bought this year, 103. l. 5. s.
6. d.

To diverse Messengers about the Earls business, 34. l. 19. s. 8. d.

In the Earls Chamber 5. l.

To diverse men for the Earls old debts, 88. l. 16. s. ob. q.

Sum. 1270. l. 7. s. 11. d. ob. q.

The expenses of the Countess at Pickering, for the time of this account, as
in the Pantry, Buttry, Kitchen, and other places concerning these Offices, two
hundred, fourscore and 5. pounds thirteen shillings, half penny.

In Wine, Wax, Spices, Clothes, Furs, and other things for the Countesses
Wardrobe, an hundred fifty four pounds, seven shillings, four pence, half
penny.

Sum. 439. l. 8. s. 6. d. q. Summa totalis of the whole expenses, 7957 l' 13.
s. 4. d. ob.

This much for this Earl of Lancaster.

More, Record Tower.
I read that in the 14. of the same Edward the second, Hugh Spencer the elder,
his provision for housekeeping, which shows a great family to be kept in
household.
Hugh Spencer the elder (condemned by the comunalty) was banished the Realm,
at which time, it was found by inquisition, that the said Spencer had in sundry
shires. 59. Manors, He had 28000. sheep, 1000. Oxen and Streeres, 1200. Kine
with their Calves, 40. Mares with their Colts, 160. drawing horse, 2000.
Hogs, 300. Bullocks, 40. Tuns of Wine, 600. Bacons, 80. Carkases of
Martilmasse Beef, 600. Muttons in Larder, 10. Tuns of Sidar. His Armor, plate,
jewels, ready money, better than 10000. pound, 36. sacks of Wool, and a Library
of Books. Thus much the Record: which provision for household, shows a great
Family there to be kept.

Nearer to our time, Rob. Fabian manuscript.
I read in the 36. of Henry the sixth, that the greater estates of the Realm
being called up to London.

The Earl of Salisbury came up to London with 500. men on horseback, and was
lodged in the Herber.

Richard Duke of York with 400. men lodged at Baynards Castle.

The Duke of Excester and Sommerset with 800. men.

The Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Egremont, and the Lord Clifford, with
1500. men.

Richard Nevell, Nevell Earl of Warwick his house keeping.
Earl of Warwick, with 600. men all in red Iackets, Imbrodered with ragged
staves before and behind, and was lodged in Warwick lane: in whose house
there was oftentimes six Oxen eaten at a breakefast, and every Tavern was
full of his meat, for he that had any acquaintance in that house might have
there so much of sodden and roast meat, as he could prick and carry upon a
long Dagger.

Richard Redman, Richard Redman Bishop of Ely.
Bishop of Ely, 1500. the 17. of Henry the seventh, besides his great family,
housekeeping, Alms dish, and relief to the poor, wheresoever he was lodged.
In his travaiing, when at his coming, or going to or from any Town, the Bells
being rung, all the poor would come together, to whom he gave every one six
pence at the least.

And now to note of our own time somewhat. The worthy house keeping of Thomas
Woolsey Lord Archbishop of York.
Not omitting in this Thomas Woolsey, Archbishop of York, and Cardinal. You
shall understand, that he had in his hall (continually) three tables or
boords, kept with three principal Officers, to wit, a Steward, who was always
a Priest, a Treasurer a Knight, and a Controler an Esquire. Also a Cofferer,
being a Doctor, three Marshals, three Yeomen Vshers in the Hall: besides two
Grooms and Almners. Then in the Hall kitchen, two Clerks of the kitchen, a
Clerk controler, a Survevor of the dressor, a clark of the Spicery: all which
(together) kept also a continual Mess in the Hall. Officers for the Hall
kitchen.
Also, in his Hall-kitchin, he had of Master cooks two, and of other cooks,
laborers, Master-Cookes and other.
and children of the kitchen, twelve persons: four Yeomen of the ordinary
scullery, four Yeomen of the silver scullery, two Yeomen of the Pastry, with
two other Pastelers under the Yeomen.

In the Privy kitchen, For the Privy kitchen.
he had a Master cook, who went daily in Velvet and Satin, with a chain of
Gold about his neck, and two other Yeomen, and a Groom. Scalding house,
Pantry, Buttry.
In the scalding house, a Yeomen and two Grooms. In the Pantry, two Yeoman. In
the Buttery, two Yeomen, Chandery.
two Grooms, and two Pages. Wafary.
In the Chandery two Yeomen. In the Wafary two Yeomen. Wardrobe of beds.
In the Wardrobe of Beds, the Master of the Wardrobe, and ten other persons
attending. Laundery.
In the Laundery a Yeoman, a Groom, thirty Pages, two Yeomen Purveyors,
Bakehouse
and one Groom. In the Bake-house a Yeoman and 2 Grooms. In the Wood-yard a
Yeoman and a Groom. VVood-yard.
In the Barn one. Barn.
In the Garden a Yeoman and two Grooms: Garden.
A Yeoman of his Barge; Barge.
a Master of his Horse, a Clerk of the Stable, Stable.
a Yeoman of the same; the Saddler; the Farriar; a Yeoman of his Chariot; a
Sumpterman,; a Yeoman of his Stirrup; a Muleter, and sixteen Grooms of his
Stable, every one of them keeping 4. Geldings. Porters at his gate, Porters.
two Yeomen and two Grooms. In the Almnorie, a Yeoman and a Groom.

In his Chapel he had a Deane, The order of his Chapel.
a great Divine, and a man of excellent learning: a Subdeane, a repeater of the
Quire, a Gospeller, a Pisteler, of singing Priests ten, a master of the
children, twelve Seculars, being singing-men of the Chapel; ten singing
children, with a servant to attend upon the children. In the Revestry, a Yeoman
and two Grooms; over and beside diverse retainers, that came thither at
principal Feasts.

For the furniture of his Chapel, The rich furniture of his Chapel.
it exceeds my cpacity to declare, or to speak of the number of costly
ornaments and rich Jewels that were used in the same continually. There has
bin seen in procession about the Hall, four and forty very rich Coaps worn,
all of one suit; besides the rich Crosses and Candlesticks, and other ornaments
belonging to the furnishment of the same. He had two Crosse-bearers, and two
Pillar-bearers in his great Chamber. Crosse-bearers and pillar-bearers.
And in his Privie-chamber these persons: First, the chief Chamberlain and
Vice-chamberlaine. His privy chamber.
Of Gentlemen Vshers (beside one in his Privie-chamber) he had twelve daily
waiters: and of Gentlemen waiters, Gentlemen waiters.
in his Privie-Chamber, Lords and their attendants.
he had six; of Lords nine or ten, who had (each of them) two men allowed to
attend upon them: except the Earl of Darby, who always was allowed 5. men.
Then had he of Gentlemen, Cupbearers, Carvers, Sewers, both of the Privy
chamber and of the great chamber, For the privy and great chamber.
with Gentlemen (daily waiters there) 40. persons. Of Yeomen Vshers 6. of
Grooms in his chamber, 8. of Yeomen in his chamber 45. daily. He had also
Almes-men, sometime more in number than at other times.

There was attending on his Table daily, Daily attenda^ts on his Table.
of Doctors and Chaplains, (beside them of his Chapel) 16. A Clerk of his
Closet, two Secretaries, 2 Clerks of his Signet; and four Counselors,
learned in the Laws. And forasmuch as it was necessary to have diverse Officers
of the Chancery to attend upon him; Officers of the Chancerie.
that is to say, the Clerk of the Crown, a riding Clerk, a Clerk of the
Hamper, and a Clerk of the Wax; then a Clerk of the Check, (as well upon the
Chaplains, as on the Yeomen of his chamber,) he gave allowance to them all.
His Footmen.
He had also four Footmen, who were clothed in rich running coats, whenever
he rode on any journey. Then had he an Herald at Arms, A Herald and Sergeant
at Arms.
a Sergeant at Arms, a Physician, an Apothecarie, four Minstrels, a keeper of
his Tents, an Armorer, an instructor of his Wards, two Yeomen of his Wardrobe
of Robes, and a keeper of his chamber continually in the Court. He had also in
his house the Survey or of York, Surveyor of York, and Clerk of the
Greene-cloth.
and a Clerk of the Green cloth. All these were daily attending, down lying
and uprising; as we use to say, and at meals. He kept in his great chamber, a
continual Table for the Chamberers and Gentlemen Officers: having with them a
Mess of the young Lords, Young Lords and Gentlemen
and another of Gentlemen. And besides all these, there was never an Offices,
Gentleman, or other worthy person, but he was allowed in the house, Attenda^ts
allowed in the house.
some three, some two, and all other, one at the least, which grew to a great
number of persons.

Thus far out of the Checke-roll: besides other Officers, servants and
retainers, and Suitors, that most commonly dined in the Hall.

Nicholas West, Lib. Ely.
in the year 1532. kept continually in his house 100. servants, West, Bishop
of Ely
giving to the one half of them 53. s. 4. d. apiece yearly: to the other
half, each 40. s. apiece: to every one for his winter Gown, four yards of
broadcloath, and for his Summer Coat three yards and an half. He daily gave at
his Gates, besides bread and drink, warm meat to two hundred poor people.

The housekeeping of Edward late Earl of Darby is not to be forgotten,
Edward, Earl of Darby.
who had 220. men in check-roll: his feeding aged persons twice every day, 60.
and odd, beside all comers, thrice a week appointed for his dealing days,
and every Good Friday, 2700. with meat, drink, and money.

Thomas Audley, Thomas Lord Audley.
Lord Chancellor, his family of Gentlemen before him, in coats guarded with
velvet, and chains of gold, his Yeomen after him, in the same Livery not
guarded.

William Powlet or Pawlet, Every Livery coat had three yards of bread cloth.
Lord great Master, Marquess of Winchester, kept the like number of Gentlemen
and yeomen, in a Livery of Reading tawny, and great relief at his gate.

Thomas Lord Cromwell, Tho. Lord Cromwell.
Earl of Essex, kept the like or greater number in a Livery of gray Marble;
the Gentlemen guarded with Velvet, the Yeomen with the same cloth, yet their
skirts large enough for their friends to sit upon them.

Edward, Duke of Sommerset.
Duke of Sommerset was not inferior in keeping a number of tall and comely
Gentlemen and Yeomen, though his house was then in building, and most of his
men were lodged abroad.

The Earl of Oxford has been noted within these fifty years, Earl of
Oxford.
to have ridden into this City, and so to his house by London-stone, with
fourscore Gentlemen in a Livery of Reading Tawny, and chains of gold about
their necks, before him; and one hundred tall Yeomen in the like Livery to
follow him, without Chains, but all having his Cognizance of the blew Bore,
embroydered on their left shoulder.

Of charitable Alms in old time given.
THese, as all other of their times, gave great relief to the poor. I my
self, in that declining time of charity, Alms given at the Lord Cromwels gate.
have often seen at the Lord Cromwels gate in London, more than 200 persons,
served twice every day with bread, meat and drink sufficient; for he observed
that ancient and charitable custom, as all Prelates, Noblemen, or men of
honor and worship his predecessors, had done before him: whereof somewhat to
note for example: Venerable Bede writes; that Prelates of his time, having
peradventure but wooden Churches, had (notwithstanding) on their board at
their meals, one Alms dish, into the which was carved some good portion of
meat, out of every other dish brought to their Table, all which was given to
the poor, besides the fragments left. Insomuch as in a hard time, a poor
Prelate wanting victuals, has caused his Alms dish, being silver, to be
divided amongst the poor, therewith to shift as they could, till God should
send him better store.

Such a Prelate was Ethelwald, Bishop of Winchester, in the reign of King
Edgar, about the year of Christ, 963. He in a great famine, sold away all the
sacred vessels of his Church, Bishop of Winchester his saying touching the
relief (...) the poor.
for to relieve the almost starved people, saying: That there was no reason
that the senseless Temples of God should abound in riches, and lively Temples
of the Holy Ghost to lack it.

Walter de Suffilde, Bishop of Norwich, was of the like mind, Bishop of
Norwich sold his plate.
about the year 1245. In a time of great dearth, he sold all his Plate, and
distributed it to the poor every penniworth.

Robert Winchelsey, Archbishop of Canturbury his charity
Archbishop of Canturbury, about the year 1293. besides the daily fragments of
his house, gave every Friday and Sunday to every beggar that came to his gate,
a loate of bread sufficient for that day, and there were usually every such
alms day in time of dearth, to the number of 5000. and otherwise 4000 at the
least. More, he used every great Feastivall day, to give 150. pence to so many
poor people, and sent daily meat, bread, and drink, to such as by age, or
sickness, were not able to fetch his Alms, and did send meat, money and
apparel to such as he thought needed it.

I read in 1171. that Henry the second, Pater de Ioh^^. Ten thousand poor
people daily fed and sustained by Henry the third.
after his return into England, did penance for the slaughter of Thomas
Becket, by whom (a sore dearth then increasing) ten thousand persons, from the
first of April; till new corn was inned, were daily fed and sustained.

More I find recorded, that in the year 1236. the 20. of Henry the third,
Record of the Tower Hen. 3. fed 6000. poor people in one day.
William de Haverhull, the Kings Treasurer, was commanded, that upon the day of
the Circumcision of our Lord, 6000. poor people should be fed at Westminster,
for the state of the King, Queen, and their children. The like commandment
the said King Henry gave to Hugh Gifford, and William Brown, that upon Friday
next after the Epiphanie, they should cause to be fed in the great Hall at
Windsore, at a good fire, all the poor and needy children that could be found,
and the Kings children being weighed and measured, their weight and measure to
be distributed for their good estates. These few examples for charity of Kings
may suffice.

I read in the reign of Edward the 3. that Richard de Berry, Richard de Berry,
Bishop of Durham.
Bishop of Durham, did weekly bestow for relief of the poor, eight quarters
of wheat made into bread, besides his Alms dish, fragments of his house, and
great sums of money given to the poor when he journied. And that these
Alms dishes were as well used at the Tables of Noblemen, as of the Prelates,
one note may suffice in this place.

I read in the year 1452. that Richard Duke of York then claiming the Crown,
the Lord Rivers should have passed the Sea about the Kings business, but staying
at Plinouth till his money was spent, and then sending for more; Duke of
Gloucesters Alms dish contained a great quantity of silver.
the Duke of Somerset sent him the Image of S. George in silver and gold, to be
sold, with the Alms dish of the Duke of Gloucester, which was also of great
price: for coin had they none.

To end the Orders and Customs in this City, as also of great families kept
by honorable persons thither repairing, and of charitable Alms of old time
given: I say, for conclusion, that all Noble persons, and other of honor and
worship, in former times lodging in this City, or liberties thereof, did
without grudging, bear their parts in charges with the Citizens, according to
their estimated estates, as I have before said, and could prove it by examples.

But let men call to mind Sir Thomas Cromwell, Tho. Cromwell at the great
Muster.
then Lord Privy Seal, and Vicar general, lying in the City of London, he
bare his charges to the great Muster there, consisting of 15000, besides
Whisslers and other waiters, all in bright harness, with coats of white silk
or (...), and chains of gold, in three great battles.

In Anno 1539. he sent his men (in great number) to the Miles end, and after
them their Armor in Carres, with their coats of white cloth, and the Arms of
this City, to wit, a red cross and a sword, on the breast and back, which
Armor and Coats they ware amongst the Citizens, without any difference, and
marched through the City to Westminster.

Sports and Pastimes of old time used in this City.
LEt us now (says Fitzstephen) come to the Sports and Pastimes, Of sports and
pastimes in this City.
seeing it is fit that a City should not (...) be commodious and serious,
Every thing has his time, a time to weep, a time to laugh, a time to mourn,
and a time to dance. Eccles. 3.
but also merry and sportfull. Whereupon, in the seals of the Popes, until
the time of Pope Leo, on the one side was Saint Peter fishing, with a key over
him, reached as it were by the hand of God out of Heaven, and about it this
verse: Tu pro me nave^ liquisti, suscipe clavem.

And on the other side was a City, and this inscription on it, Aurea Roma.
Likewise to the praise of Augustus Caesar and the City, in respect of the
shows and sports, was written, Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectaculs mane, etc.
All night it raines, and shows
at morrow-tide return again;
And Caesar with almighty Jove
has matched an equal reign.


But London for the shows upon Theaters, Stageplayes.
and Comicall pastimes, has holy plays, representations of miracles, which
holy Confessors have wrought; or representations of torments, wherein the
constancle of Martyrs appeared.

Every year also on Shrove-Tuesday, (that we may begin with childrens
sports, seeing we all have been children:) the Schoole-boyes do bring Cocks
of the game to their Master, and all the fore-noone they delight themselves in
Cock-fighting. Cocke-fighting.
After dinner, all the youths go into the fields to play at the Ball.
Ball-play.


The scholars of every School have their Ball, or bastion in their hands: the
ancient and wealthy men of the City come forth on horseback, to see the sport
of the Youngmen, and to take part of the pleasure, in beholding their agility.

Every Friday in Lent, Exercises of warlike feats on horseback with disarmed
Lances.
a fresh company of young men comes into the field on horseback, and the best
horsemen conduct the rest. Then march forth the Citizens sons, and other
young men with disarmed Lances and Shields, and there they practice feats of
War.

Many Courtiers likewise, when the King lies near, and attendants on
Noblemen, do repair to these exercises, and while the hope of victory does
inflame their minds, they show by good proof how serviceable they would be in
Martial affairs.

In Easter Holidays, Battle on the water.
they fight battles on the water, a Shield is hanged upon a pole, fixed in the
midst of the stream; a Boat is prepared without Oars, to be carried by
violence of the water, and in the forepart thereof stands a young man, ready
to give charge upon the Shield with his Lance. If so be he break his Lance
against the Shield and does not fall, he is thought to have performed a worthy
deed. If so be without breaking his Lance, he runs strongly against the
Shield, down he falls into the water; for the Boat is violently forced with
the Tide; but on each side of the Shield ride two Boats, furnished with
yong-men, which recover him that falls, as soon as they may. Upon the
Bridge, Wharfes and houses by the Rivers side, stand great numbers to see, and
laugh thereat.

In the Holydaies all the Summer, the youths are exercised in leaping, dancing,
shooting, wrestling, casting the stone, and practicing their Shields: the
Maidens trip with their Timbrels, Fighting of Bores, baiting of Bears and Bulls.
and dance as long as they can well see. In Winter, every Holiday before
dinner, the Bores prepared for brawne are set to fight, or else Bulls or Bears
are baited.

When the great Fenne or Moore, which waters the walls of the City on the
North side is frozen, many young men play upon the Ice; some striding as wide as
they may, do slide swiftly: others make themselves seats of Ice, as great as
Milstones. One sits down, many (hand in hand) do draw him, and one slipping
on a sudden, all fall together. Some tie bones to their feet, and under their
heels, and shoving themselves by a little piked staff, do slide as swiftly
as a bird flies in the air, or an arrow out of a Crosse-bow, Sometime two
run together with poles, and hitting one the other, either one or both do
fall, not without hurt: some break their arms, some their legs: but youth
(desirous of glory in this sort) exercises it self against the time of war.
Hawking and hunting
Many of the Citizens do delight themselves in Hawks and Hounds, for they
have liberty of hunting in Middlesex, Hertfordshire, all Chiltron, and in Kent
to the water of Cray. Thus far Fitzstephen of sports.

These or the like exercises have been continued til our time, namely in
Stageplayes, whereof ye may read, in Anno 1391. a Play by the Parish Clerks of
London at the Skinners Well besides Smithfield; A stageplay that continued 3.
days, A stageplay that lasted 8. days.
which continued three days together, the King, Queen, and Nobles being
present. And of another in the year 1409. which lasted eight days, and was of
matter from the Creation of the World, whereat was present most part of the
Nobility, and Gentry of England.

Of late time, Theater and Curten for Comedies and other shows,
in stead of those Stageplayes, have been used Comedies, Tragedies,
Enterludes, and Histories, both true and sained: for the acting whereof,
certain public places have been erected. Also Cocks of the game are yet
cherished by diverse men for their pleasures, much money being laid on their
heads, when they fight in pits, whereof some be costly, made for that purpose.

The Ball is used by Noblemen and Gentlemen in Tennis-courts, The Ball at
Tennis play.
and by people of meaner sort in the open fields and streets.

The marching forth of Citizens sons and other young men on horseback, with
disarmed Lances and Shields, there to practice feats of war, man against
man, has long since been left off, but in their City they have used on
horseback, to run at a dead mark, called a Quinten.

For note whereof, Running at the Quinten, for prizes, Mat. Paris.
I read, that in the year of Christ 1253. the 38 of Hen. 3. the youthful
Citizens, for an exercise of their activity, set forth a game to run at the
Quinten, and whosoever did best, should have a Peacocke, which they had prepared
as a prize.

Certain of the Kings servants, because the Court lay then at Westminster,
came, The kings servants deriding the Citizens, were fore beaten, but the
Citizens were fined by the King.
as it were, in despite of the Citizens, to that game, and giving reproachful
names to the Londoners, which for the dignity of the City, and the ancient
privilege which they ought to have enjoyed, were called Barons: the said
Londoners being wrongfully abused, fell upon the Kings servants, and beat them
shrewdly, so that upon complaint made to the King, he fined the City to pay a
thousand Marks. This exercise of running at the Quinten, was practiced by the
youthful Citizens, as well in summer as in winter; namely, in the feast of
Christmas. I have seen a Quinten set upon Cornhill, Quinten upon Cornhill.
by the Leaden Hall, where the attendants of the Lords of merry disports have
run, and made great pastime: for he that hit not the broad end of the
Quinten, was of all men laughed to scorn; and he that hit it full, if he rode
nor the faster, had a sound blow in his neck with a bag full of sand, hanged
on the other end.

I have also in the Summer season, seen some upon the River of Thames, Running
with staves on the Thames.
rowed in Whirries, with staves in their hands, flat at the fore-end, running
one against another, and for the most part, one or both overthrown, and well
dowked.

On the Holy Days in Summer, Leaping, dancing, shooting, wrestling.
the Youths of this City have in the Field exercised themselves, in leaping,
dancing, shooting, wrestling, casting of the stone or ball, etc.

And for defense and use of the Weapon, there is a special profession of men
that teach it. Mat. Paris.
I read that in the year 1222. and the 6. of King Henry the 3. on Saint James
day, the Citizens of London kept games of defense and wrestling, near to the
Hospital of Matilda, at S. Giles in the field, where they got the mastery of
the men of the Suburbs.

The Bailiffe of Westminster devising to be revenged, A game at Westminster on
Lammas day.
proclaimed a game to be at Westminster upon Lammas day: whereunto the Citizens
willingly repaired.

When they had played a while, the Bailiffe, with the men of the Suburbs,
harnessed themselves treacherously, and fell to such fighting, that the
Citizens (being sore wounded) were forced to run into the City, where they
rung the common Bell, and assembled the Citizens in great number. When the
matter was declared, every man wished to revenge the fact: The advice of (...)
L. Mayor.
but the Lord Mayor of the City, being a wise and quiet man, willed them first
to move the Abbot of Westminster in the matter, and if he would promise to see
amends made, it was sufficient. The bad counsel of Constantine Fitz Arnulit as
bad followed.
But a certain Citizen, named Constantine Fitz Arnulit, willed, that all the
houses of the Abbot and Bailiffe should be pulled down. Which desperate words
were no sooner spoken, but the common people (as unadvisedly) issued forth of
the City without any order, and fought a cruel battle, Constantine pulling
down diverse houses; and the people (as praising Constantine) cried; The joy of
the Mountain, the joy of the Mountain; God help, and the Lord Lodowike.

A few days after this tumult, the Abbot of Westminster came to London, Cl^on.
Don. The Abbot of VVestminst. put to his shifts.
to Philip Dawbeney, one of the kings Council, to complain of the injuries
done to him: the Londoners perceiving it, beset the house about, and took by
violence twelve of the Abbots horses away, cruelly beating his men, etc.

But whilst the said Dawbeney labored to pacific the uproar, the Abbot got
out at the back door of the house, and so, by a Boat on the Thames, hardly
escaped, the Citizens throwing stones after him in great abundance.

These things being thus done, The Lord chief Justice entered the City of
London with an Army.
Hubert de Burge, chief Justice of England, with a great Army of men, came to
the Tower of London, and sent for the Mayor and Aldermen, of whom he enquired
for the principal Authors of this Faction. Constantine, being constant in the
sedition, was more constant in the answer; affirming, that he had done it, and
that he had done much less than he meant to have done.

The Justice took him, and two other with him, and that morning sent him to
Faulcatius by water, with a great number of armed men, who brought Constantine
to the Gallows.

But when he saw the Rope about his neck, Constantine and other hanged.
he offered for his life fifteen thousand Marks, yet it would not seem to
save him: so he was hanged, with Constantine his Nephew, and Galfrid that
proclaimed his proclamation, on the 16. of August.

Also in the year 1453. of a tumult made against the Mayor, Gamos of defense.
at the wrestling besides Clerks well, etc. Which is sufficient to prove, that
(of old time) the exercising of wrestling, and such like, has been much more
used than of latter years.

The youths of this City also have used, on holidayes, after Evening Prayer,
Playing at the Bucklers.
at their Masters doors, to exercise their Wasters and Bucklers: and the
Maidens, one of them playing on a Timbrell, Dancing for Garlands in the streets
in sight of their Masters and Dames, to dance for Garlands, hanged thwart the
streets, which open pastimes in my youth, being now suppressed, worser
practices within doors are to be feared.

As for the baiting of Bulls and Bears, they are till this day much frequented,
namely in Beare-gardens on the Bankeside, Bear and Bull baiting.
wherein be prepared scaffolds for beholders to stand upon.

Sliding on the Ice is now but childrens play: but in Hawking and Hunting many
grave Citizens at this present have great delight, and do rather want leisure
than goodwill to follow it.

Of triumphant shows made by the Citizens of Land. Mal. Paris.
ye may read in the year 1236. the twentieth of Henry the third, Shows for
triumphs.
Andrew Bockrell then being Mayor, how Elianor, daughter to Reymond, Earl of
Provence, riding through the City toward Westminster, there to be crowned
Queen of England, the City was adorned with silks, and in the night with
Lamps, Cressets, and other lights, without number, besides many Pageants, and
strange devices there presented; the Citizens also rode to meet the King and
Queen, The Citizens rode.
clothed in long garments embroydered about with gold, Imbroidered garments.
and silks of diverse colors, their horses gallantly, trapped, to the number
of 306. every manbearing a Cup of gold or silver in his hand, and the Kings
Trumpetters before them: These Citizens did minister Wine, as Buttlers, which
is their service at the Coronation.

More, in the year 1298. for victory obtained by Edward the first against the
Scots, every Company, according to their several Trade, made their several
show: Fishmongers Procession for triumph of victory, more than 1000. horsemen.
but specially the Fishmongers, which in a solemn Procession passed through the
City, having amongst other Pageants and shows, four Sturgeons gi^t, carried
on four horses; then, four Salmons of silver, on four horses, and after them
six and forty armed Knights, riding on horses, made like Luces of the Sea, and
then one presenting Saint Magnes, because it was upon Saint Magnes day, with a
thousand horsemen, etc.

One other show in the year 1377. made by the Citizens for disport of the young
Prince Richard, son to the black Prince, in the Feast of Christmas, and in
this manner:

On the Sunday before Candlemas, A show by Torchlight, being a Mummery of more
than 100: men on horseback
in the night, one hundred and thirty Citizens, disgnised and well horsed, in a
Mummery, with sound of Trumpets, Sackbuts, Cornets, Shalmes, and other
Minstrels, and innumerable Torchlights of Wax, rode from Newgate through Cheap,
over the Bridge, through Southwarke, and so to Kennington besides Lambeth,
where the young Prince remained with his Mother, and the Duke of Lancaster, his
Uncle, the Earls of Cambridge, Hertford, Warwick, and Suffolk, with diverse
other Lords.

In the first rank did ride 48. in the likeness and habit of Esquires, two
and two together, clothed in red coats, and gowns of Say or Sendall, with
comely vizors one their faces.

After them came riding 48. Knights, in the same Livery of color and stuff.

Then followed one richly arrayed, like an Emperor; and after him some
distance, one stately tired like a Pope, who was followed by 24. Cardinals: and
after them eight or ten with black vizors, not amiable, as if they had been
Legates from some foreign Princes.

These Maskers, after they had entered the Manor of Kennington, alighted from
their horses: and entered the Hall on foot; which done, the Prince, his Mother,
and the Lords came out of the chamber into the hall, whom the Mummers did
salute: showing by a pair of Dice on the Table, their desire to play with the
young Prince: which they so handled, that the Prince did always win when he
cast at them.

Then the Mummers set to the Prince three Jewels, The Prince did win three
Jewels of the Maskers.
one after another; which were, a Boule of gold, a Cup of gold, and a Ring of
gold, which the Prince wanne at three casts.

Then they set to the Princes Mother, the Duke, the Earls, and other Lords, to
every one ^ Ring of gold, which they did also win. After which they were
feasted, and the Music sounded, the Prince and Lords danced on the one part
with the Mummers, who did also dance: which jollity being ended, they were
again made to drink, and then departed in order as they came.

The like was to Henry the fourth, in the second of his reign, he then keeping
his Christmas at Eltham, twelve Aldermen of London, and their sons, rode in a
mumming, and had great thanks.

Thus much for sportfull shows in Triumphs may suffice.

Now for sports and pastimes yearly used.

First, in the Feast of Christmas, there was in the Kings house, wheresoever he
was lodged, Lord of Misrule at Christmas
a Lord of Misrule, or Master of merry disports, and the like had ye in the
house of every Nobleman of honor, or good worship, were he spiritual or
temporal. Among the which, The Mayor of London, and either of the Sheriffs
had their several Lords of misrule, ever contending, without quarrel or
offense, who should make the rarest pastimes to delight the beholders. These
Lords beginning their rule at Alhallon Eve, continued the same till the mocrow
after the Feast of the Purification, commonly called Candlemas day: In all
which space, there were fine and subtle disguisings, Maskes and Mummeries,
with playing at Cards for counters, nails and points in every house, more for
pastime than for gain.

Against the Feast of Christmas, every man's house, as also their Parish
Churches, were decked with Holme, Ivy, Bays, and whatsoever the season of the
year affoorded to be green: The conduits and standards in the streets were
likewise garnished. Among the which, I read, that in the year 1444. by tempest
of thunder and lightning, on the first of February at night, Tempests of
lightning and thunder fired Paul's steeple, overthrew the standard at Leaden
hall, and threw stones of the payement into men's houses.
Paul's steeple was fired, but with great labor quenched: and toward the
morning of Candlemas day, at the Leaden Hall in Cornhill, a Standard of tree
being set up in the midst of the payement, fast in the ground, nailed full of
Holme and Ivy, for disport of Christmas to the people; was torn up, and cast
down by the malignant Spirit (as was thought) and the stones of the payement
all about, were cast in the streets, and into diverse houses, so that the people
were sore aghast at the great tempests.

In the week before Easter, Twisted trees ^et from the woods.
had ye great shows made, for the fetching in of a twisted Tree, or With, as
they termed it, out of the woods, into the kings house, and the like into every
man's house of Honor or Worship.

In the Month of May, May games
namely on May day in the morning, every man, except impediment, would walk
into the sweet Meddowes and green woods, there to rejoice their spirits with
the beauty and savor of sweet Flowers, and with the harmony of Birds,
praising God in their kind. And for example hereof, Edward Hall.
Edward Hall has noted, that King Henry the eighth, as in the third of his
reign, and diverse other years, so namely in the seventh of his reign, on May
day in the morning, with Queen Katharine his wife, accompanied with many Lords
and Ladies, rode a Maying from Greenwich to the high ground of Shooters-hill:
where as they passed by the way, they espied a company of tall Yeomen, clothed
all in green, with green hoods, and with bows and arrows, to the number of
200. One, being their Chieftaine, Robin Hood and his men shot before the King.
was called Robin Hood, who required the King and all his company to stay and
see his men shoot: whereunto the King granting, Robin Hood whistled, and all
the 200. Archers shot off, loosing all at once; and when he whistled again,
they likewise shot again: their Arrows whistled by craft of the head, so that
the noise was strange and loud, which greatly delighted the King, Queen, and
their company.

Moreover, this Robin Hood desired the King and Queen, with their retinue, to
enter the green Wood, where, in Arbours made with boughs, and decked with
flowers, they were set and served plentifully with venison and wine, by Robin
Hood and his meyny, to their great contentment, and had other Pageants and
Pastimes, as ye may read in my said Author.

I find also, that in the month of May, the Citizens of London (of all estates)
lightly in every Parish, or sometime two or three Parishes joining together,
had their several Maynings, and did fetch in May-poles, with diverse warlike
shows, with good Archers, Morice-dancers, and other devices for pastime all
the day long; and toward the evening, they had stage-plaies, and Bonefires in
the streets.

Of these Mayings, we read in the reign of Henry the sixth, that the Aldermen
and Sheriffs of London, being on May day at the Bishop of Londons Wood in the
Parish of Stebunheath, Bishops Wood.
and having there a worshipful dinner for themselves and other comers,
Bishops Hall by Ble^henhall green.
Lydgate the the Poet, that was a Monk of Bury, sent to them by a Pursivant a
joyful commendation of that seasen, containing sixteen staves in meeter
Royal, beginning thus:

Mighty Flora, Goddess of fresh flowers,
which clothed has the soil in lusty green, The pleasant month of May
commended.

Made buds to spring, with her sweet showers,
by influence of the Sun shine,
To do pleasance of intent full clean,
unto the States which now sit here,
Has Ver down sent her own daughter dear,
Making the virtue, that dared in the root,
Called the virtue, the virtue vegetable,
for to transcend, most wholesome and most soote,
Into the top, this season so agreeable:
the baw my liquor is so commendable,
That it rejoices with his fresh moisture,
man, beast, and foul, and every creature, etc.
About the ninth year of the reign of King Henry the eight, a great he
artburning and malicious grudge grew amongst the Englishmen of the City of
London, against strangers: and namely, the Artificers found themselves much
agrieved; The number of strangers in London misliked.
because such number of strangers were permitted, to resort hither with their
Wares, and to exercise Handicrafts, to the great hinderance and impoverishing
of the Kings Liege people. Which malice grew to such a point that one John
Lincoln a Broker, John Lincoln a Broker beginner of the insurrection
busied himself so far in the matter, that about Palm Sunday, or the fifth
of April, he came to one Doctor Henry Standish, with these words; Sir, I
understand, that you shall preach at the Spittle on Monday in Easter-weeke, and
so it is, that English men, both Merchants and other, are undone by stangers,
who have more liberty in this Land than they, which is against reason, and also
against the Commonweal of this Realm: I beseech you therefore, A bill
offered by Lincoln to Doctor Standish.
to declare this in your sermon, and in so doing, you shall deserve great
thanks of my Lord Mayor, and of all his Brethren. And herewith he offered unto
the said Doctor a bill, containing the matter more at large. But Doctor
Standish wisely considering, that there might more inconvenience arise thereof,
than he would wish, if he should deal in such a sort: both refused the bill,
and told Lincoln plainly, that he meant not to meddle with any such matter in
his Sermon.

Whereupon, the said Lincoln went unto one Doctor Bell, a Canon of the
foresaid Spittle, Doctor Be^^^dertooke to read Lincolns bill in the Pulpit.
that was appointed likewise to preach upon Tuesday in Easter-weake at the same
Spittle, whom he persuaded to read his said bill in the Pulpit: which bill
contained (in effect) the griefs that many found with strangers, for taking
the livings away from Artificers, and the intercourse from Merchants, the
redress whereof must come from the commons knit in one; for as the hurt
touched all men, so must al set to their helping hands. Which letter he read,
The bill contained much seditious matter.
or the chiefest part thereof, comprehending much seditious matter. And then he
began with this sentence: Coelum coeli Domino, terram autem dedit filiis
hominum. And upon this Text he entreated, how this Land was given to
Englishmen, and as Birds defend their nests, so ought Englishmen to cherish and
maintain themselves, and to hurt and grieve Aliens, for respect of their
Commonwealth. And on this Text, Pugna pro Patria, he brought in, how (by Gods
Law) it was was lawful to fight for their Country: Pugna pro Patria.
and thus he subtly moved the people to rebel against strangers. By this
Sermon, many a lightheaded person took courage, and openly spoke against
strangers: and by mishap, there had been diverse evil parts (of late) played by
strangers, in and about the City of London, which kindled the peoples rancor
the more furiously against them.

The twenty eighth day of April, Quarela urged to strangers as they were in the
streets
diverse yong-men of the City picked quarrels with certain strangers, as they
passed along the streets: some they smote and buffetted, and some they threw in
the channel: for which, the Lord Mayor sent some of the Englishmen to prison,
as Stephen Studley, Skinner, Stevenson, Bets, and other.

Then suddenly rose a secret rumor, and no man could tell how it began, that
on May Day next following, Evil May Day.
the City would slay all the Aliens: insomuch that diverse strangers fled out
of the City.

This rumor came to the knowledge of the Kings Council: whereupon the Lord
Cardinal sent for the Mayor, and other of the Council of the City, giving
them to understand what he had heard.

The Lord Mayor (as one ignorant of the matter) told the Cardinal, that he
doubted not so to govern the City, but as peace should be observed.

The Cardinal willed him so to do, and to take good heed, that if any riotous
attempt were intended, he should by good policy prevent it.

The Mayor coming from the Cardinals house, A meeting of the L. Mayor and his
brethren at Guildhall.
about four of the clock in the afternoon on May Eve, sent for his Brethren
to the Guild Hall, yet was it almost seven of the clock before the Assembly
was set. Upon conference had of the matter, some thought it necessary, that a
substantial watch should be set of honest Citizens, which might withstand the
evil doers, if they went about any misrule. Other were of contrary opinion, as
rather thinking it best, that every man should be commanded to shut in his
doors, and to keep his servants within. Before 8. of the clock, Master
Recorder was sent to the Cardinal, with these opinions: who hearing the same,
The Recorder and Sir Thomas More sent to the Cardinal.
allowed the latter. And then the Recorder, and Sir Thomas More, late
under-sheriffe of London, and now of the Kings Council, came back again to
the Guild Hall, half an hour before nine of the clock, and there showed the
pleasure of the Kings Council: whereupon every Alderman sent to his Ward, that
no man (after nine of the clock) should stir out of his house, but keep his
doors shut, and his servants within, until nine of the clock in the morning.

After this commandment was given, An Alderman resisted, and put to flight.
in the Evening, as Sir John Mundy Alderman, came from his Ward, he found two
young men in Cheap, playing at the Bucklers, and a great many of young men
looking on them, for the command seemed to be scarcely published; he commanded
them to leave off; and because one of them asked him why, he would have him
sent to the Counter. But the Prentices resisted the Alderman, taking the
young man from him, and cried Prentices, Prentices, Clubs, Clubs: then out at
every door came Clubs and other weapons, so that the Alderman was forced to
flight. Then more people arose out of every quarter, and forth came Servingmen,
Watermen, Courtiers, and other, so that by eleven of the clock, there were in
Cheap, 6. or 7. hundred, and out of Paul's Churchyard came about 300. From all
places they gathered together, and break up the Counter, took out the
Prisoners, which had been committed thither by the Lord Mayor, for hurting the
strangers: also they went to Newgate, and took out Studley and Bets, committed
thither for the like cause. The Mayor and Sheriffs were present, and made
Proclamation in the Kings name, but nothing was obeyed.

Being thus gathered into several heaps, Sir Thomas More labored to pacify
the rude multitude.
they ran through Saint Nicholas shambles, and at Saint Martins Gate, there met
with them Sir Thomas More, and other, desiring them to go to their lodgings.

As they were thus entreating, and had almost persuaded the people to depart,
they within Saint Martins threw out stones and bats, so that they hurt diverse
honest persons, which were with Sir Thomas More, persuading the rebellious Rout
to cease. Insomuch as at length, one Nicholas Dennis, a Sergeant at Arms,
being there sore hurt, cried in a fury, (...) Den^^, a Sergeant (...) ^^mes
sore hurt.
Down with them: and then all the unruly persons ran to the doors and
windows of the houses within St. Martins, and spoiled all that they found.
After that they ran into Cornehill, and so on to a house East of Leadenhal,
called the Green-gate, where dwelt one Mewtas a Piccard or Frenchman, within
whose house dwelled diverse French men, Mewtas a Piccard.
whom they likewise spoiled: and if they had found Mewtas, they would have
stricken off his head.

Some ran to Blanchapleton, and there brake up the strangers houses, The
strangers houses broken up at Blanchapleton.
and spoiled them. Thus they continued till 3. a clock in the morning, at
which time, they began to withdraw: but by the way they were taken by the Mayor
and other, and sent to the Tower, Newgate and Counters, to the number of 300.
The Cardinal was advertised by Sir Thomas Parre, whom in all haste he sent to
Richmond, The King sends to know the state of the City.
to inform the King: who immediately sent to understand the state of the City,
and was truly informed. Sir Roger Cholmeley Lieutenant of the Tower, during
the time of this business, shot off certain pieces of Ordnance against the
City, but did no great hurt. About five of the clock in the morning, the
Earls of Shrewsbury and Surrey, Thomas Dockery, Lord Prior of Saint John's, The
Lords came with power to London.
George Nevill, Lord Aburgaveny, and other, came to London with such powers as
they could make, so did the Innes of Court; but before they came, the business
was done, as ye have heard.

Then were the prisoners examined, Doctor Bell sent to the Tower for his Sermon.
and the Sermon of Doctor Bell called to remembrance, and he sent to the
Tower. A Commission of Oyer and Determiner was directed to the Duke of
Norfolk, and other Lords, for punishment of this insurrection. The second of
May, the Commissioners, with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Justices, went to the
Guildhall, where many of the offenders were indicted, whereupon they were
arraigned, and pleaded not guilty, having day given them till the 4. of May.

On which day, The Duke of Norfolk entered London with 1300 men.
the Lord Mayor, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Surrey and other, came to
sit in the Guildhall. The Duke of Norfolk entered the City with one thousand
three hundred men, and the prisoners were brought through the streets tied in
ropes, some men, some lads but of thirteen or fourteen years old, to the
number of 278. persons. That day John Lincoln and diverse other were indicted,
and the next day thirteen were adjudged to be drawn, hanged, and quartered:
for execution whereof, Ten pair of Gallows set up in diverse streets of London.
ten pair of Gallows were set up in diverse places of the City, as at Aldgate,
Blanchapleton, Grasse-street, Leaden Hall, before either of the Counters; at
Newgate, Saint Martins, at Aldersgate and Bishopsgate. And these Gallows were
set upon wheels, to be removed irom street to street, and from door to door
whereas the prisoners were to be executed.

On the seventh of May, John Lincoln, one Shirwin, and two brethren, named
Betts, John Lincoln the Broker executed, but the rest respited by the King.
with diverse other were adjudged to dye. They were on the Hurdles drawn to the
Standard in Cheap, and first was Lincoln executed: and as the other had the
ropes about their necks, there came a commandment from the King, to respit
the execution, and then were the prisoners sent again to prison, and the armed
men sent away out of the City.

On the thirteenth of May, the King came to Westminster Hall, and with him the
Lord Cardinal, the Dukes of Norfolk, and ^uffolke, the Earls of Shrewsbury,
Essex, Wiltshire, and Surrey, with many Lords and other of the Kings Council;
the Lord Mayor of London, Aldermen and other chief Citizens, were there in
their best liveries, by nine of the clock in the morning. The prisoners were
brought before the King at Westminster Hall.
Then came in the prisoners, bound in ropes in a rank one after another, in
their shirts, and every one had a Halter about his neck, being in number 400.
men, and 11. women.

When they were thus come before the Kings presence, the Cardinal laid sore to
the Mayor and Aldermen their negligence, and to the prisoners he declared how
justly they had deserved to dye. Then all the prisoners together cried to the
King for mercy, The King graciously pardoned all the prisoners.
and therewith the Lords besought his grace of pardon: at whose request, the
King pardoned them all. The general pardon being pronounced, all the Prisoners
shouted at once, and cast their Halters toward the roof of the Hall. The
prisoners being dismissed, the Gallows were taken down, and the Citizens
took more heed to their servants: keeping (for ever after) as on that night, a
strong watch in Armor, in remembrance of Evil May Day. Evil May Day.


These great Mayings and Maygames made by the Governors and Masters of this
City, with the Triumphant setting up of the great shaft (a principal May Pole
in Cornehill, before the Parish of Saint Andrew) therefore called Undershaft,
by mean of that insurrection of youths, against Aliens on May Day, 1517. the
6. of Henry the eight, have not been so freely used as before. And therefore I
leave them, and will somewhat touch of Watches, as also of shows in the night.

Of Watches in this City, and other matters commanded, and the cause why.
WIlliam Conqueror commanded, Curfe^ Bell at 8. of the clock commanded fire
and candle to be quenched.
that in every Town and Village, a Bell should be nightly rung at eight of the
clock, and that all people should then put out their fire, and candle, and
take their rest. Which order was observed through this Realm during his reign,
and the reign of William Rufus: but Henry the first, restoring to his Subjects
the use of fire and lights, as before, it follows (by reason of Wars within
the Realm) that many men also gave themselves to robbery and murders in the
night: for example whereof in this City, Roger Hoveden writes thus:

In the year 1175. a council was kept at Nottingham, Roger Hoveden manuscript.
in time of which Council, a brother of the Earl Ferrers, being in the night
privily slain at London, and thrown out of his Inn into the durty street when
the King understood thereof he swear that he would be revenged on the Citizens.
For it was then (says mine Author) a common practice in this City; that a
hundred or more in a company, young and old, would make nightly invasions upon
houses of the wealthy, to the intent to rob them, and if they found any man
stirring in the City within the night, that were not of their crew,
Nightwalkers murdered all they met.
they would presently murder him: insomuch, that when night was come, no man
durst adventure to walk in the streets. When this had continued long, it
fortuned, that as a crew of young and wealthy Citizens assembling together in
the night, assaulted a stone house of a certain rich man, and breaking through
the wall, the good man of that house, having prepared himself with other in a
corner, when he perceived one of the thieves, named Andrew Bucquint, to lead
the way, with a burning brand in the one hand, and a pot of coals in the other,
which he assaied to kindle with the brand, he flew upon him, and smote off his
right hand, and then with a loud voice cried thieves. At the hearing whereof,
the thieves took their flight, all saving he that had lost his hand, whom the
good man (in the next morning) delivered to Richard de Lucie the Kings Justice.
Rich thieves most worthy to be hanged.
This thief, upon warrant of his life, appeached his confederates, of whom
many were taken, and many were fled. Among the rest that were apprehended, The
judgment of fire and water called Ordalii, was condemned by Pope Innocent the
third 1205. Decretal. lib. 5.
a certain Citizen of great countenance, credit, and wealth, named John Senex,
who for as much he could not acquit himself by the Water-doome (as that law
was then termed) he offered to the King five hundred pounds of silver for his
life. But forasmuch as he was condemned by judgment of the Water, the King
would not take the offer, but commanded him to be hanged on the Gallows, Cause
why watches in the night were commanded and when.
which was done, and then the City became more quiet for a long time after.

But for a full remedy of enormities in the night, I read, that in the year of
Christ 1253. Henry the third commanded Watches in Cities, and Borough Towns to
be kept, for the better observing of peace and quietness amongst his people.

And further, by the advice of them of Savoy, he ordained, that if any man
chanced to be robbed, or by any means damnified, by any these or robber; he to
whom the charge of keeping that Country, City or Borough chiefly appertained,
where the robbery was done, should competently restore the loss. And this was
after the use of Savoy; but yet thought more hard to be observed here, than in
those parts: and therefore leaving those laborious Watches, I will speak of
our Pleasures and Pastimes in watching by night.

In the Months of June and July, Bonefires and banqueting in the streets
on the Vigils of Festival days, and on the same Festival days in the
Evenings, after the Sunsetting, there were usually made Bone-fires in the
streets, every man bestowing wood or labor toward them. The wealthier sort
also before their doors, near to the said Bonefires would set out Tables on
the Vigils, furnished with sweet bread, and good drink, and on the Festival
days with meats and drinks plentifully, whereunto they would invite their
neighbors and passengers also to sit, and be merry with them in great
familiarity, praising God for his benefits bestowed on them. These were called
Bonefires, as well of amity amongst neighbors, that being before at
controversy, were there by the labor of others reconciled, and made of bitter
enemies, loving friends; as also for the virtue that a great fire has, to
purge the infection of the air. On the Vigill of Saint John Baptist, Marching
watch at Midsummer.
and on Saint Peter and Paul the Apostles, every man's door being shaddowed
with green Birch, long Fennel, Saint John's wort, Orpin, white Lilies, and such
like, garnished upon with Garlands of beautiful flowers, Garnishing of men's
doors, and furnishing them out.
had also Lamps of glass, with Oil burning in them all the night; some hung
out branches of Iron curiously wrought, containing hundreds of Lamps lighted at
once, which made a goodly show, namely in new Fish street, Thames Street, etc.
Then had ye besides the standing watches, all in bright harness, in every Ward
and street of this City and Suburbs, a marching watch, that passed through the
principal streets thereof, to wit, from the little Conduit by Paul's gate,
through West Cheap, by the Stocks, through Cornehill, by Leaden hall to
Aldgate, then back down Fen-Church street, by Grasse-Church, about
Grasse-Church Conduit, and up Grasse-Church street into Cornhil, and through it
into West Cheap again, and so broke up. Almost 1000. cressets light, for the
watch at Midsummer.
The whole way ordered for this marching watch, extended to 3^00. Tailors yards
of assize, for the furniture whereof with lights, there were appointed 700.
Cressers, 500. of them being found by the Companies, the other 200. by the
Chamber of London. Besides the which lights, More than 240. Constables in
London, the one half of them each night went in the marching watch, the
otherhalfe kept their standing watch in every street and lane.
every Constable in London, in number more than 240. had his Cresset: the
charge of every Cresset was in light two shillings four pence, and every
Cresset had 2. men, one to bear or hold it, another to bear a bag with light,
and to serve it: so that the poor men pertaining to the Cressets, taking
wages, besides that every one had a strawen hat, with a badge painted, and his
break fast in the morning, amounted in number to almost 2000. The marching
watch contained in number 2000. men, part of them being old Soldiers, of skill
to be Captains, Licutenants, Sergeants, Corporals, etc. Wiffers, Drummers,
and Fifes, Standard and Ensigne-bearers, Sword-players, Trumpeters on
horseback, Demilaunces on great horses, Gunners with hand-guns, or half
hakes, Archers in cotes of white fustian, signed on the breast and back with
the Arms of the City, their bows bent in their hands, with sheafes of arrows
by their sides, Pike-men in bright Corslets, Burganets etc. Holbards, the like
Billmen in Almaine Rivets, and Aperns of Mayle in great number.

There were also diverse Pageants, Morris dancers, Constables, the one half
which was 120. on St. John's Eve, the other half on Saint Peter's Eve in bright
harness, some over-gilt, and every one a Jornet of Scarlet thereupon and a
chain of Gold, his Hench-man following him, his Ministrels before him, and his
Cresset light passing by him: the Waytes of the City, the Majors Officers, for
his guard before him, all in a Livery of Wosted or Say Iackets, party colored,
the Mayor himself well mounted on horseback, the Sword Bearer before him in
fair Armor, well mounted also, the Majors footmen, and the like
Torch-bearers about him; Hench-men twain, upon great stirring horses following
him. The Sheriffs Watches came one after the other in like order, but not so
large in number as the Majors: for where the Mayor had besides his Giant three
Pageants, each of the Sheriffs had besides their Giants, but two Pageants;
each their morri^s-dance, and one Hench-man, their Officers in Jackets of
Wosted, or Say, party-colored, differing from the Majors, and each from other,
but having harnessed men a great many, etc.

This Midsummer Watch was thus accustomed yearly, time out of mind, until
the year 1539. the 31. of Henry the eighth, in which year, on the S. of May,
A great Muster at London.
a great Muster was made by the Citizens at the Miles end, all in bright
harness, with coats of white silk or cloth, and chains of gold, in three
great battles, to the number of 15000. which passed through London to
Westminister, and so through the Sanctuary, and round about the Park of S.
James, and returned home through Oldborne.

King Henry then considering the great charges of the Citizens, for the
furniture of this unusual Muster, forbad the marching Watch provided for at
Midsummer for that year; which being once laid down, was not raised again
till the year 1548. the second of Edward the sixth, Sir John Gresham then
being Mayor, who caused the marching Watch, both on the Eve of Saint John
Baptist, and of S. Peter the Apostle, to be revived and set forth, in as comely
order as it had been accustomed; which Watch was also beautified by the number
of more than 300. Demilances and light-horsemen, prepared by the Citizens to be
sent into Scotland, for the rescue of the Town of Haddington, and others, kept
by the Englishmen since this Majors time.

The like marching Watch in this City has not been used, though some
attempts have been made thereunto, as in the year 1585. a Book was drawn by
a grave Citizen, John Mou^tgomery.
and by him dedicated to Sir Tho. Pullison, then L. Mayor, and his brethren the
Aldermen, containing the manner and order of a marching Watch in the City upon
the Evens accustomed, in commendation whereof, namely, in times of peace to be
used, he has words to this effect:

The Artificers of sundry sorts were thereby well set aworke, Commodities of
the watch at Midsu^mer, in the time of peace.
none but rich men charged, poor men helped, old Soldiers, Trumpeters,
Drummers, Fifes, and Ensigne-bearers, with such like men, meet for the Princes
service, kept in ure, wherein the safety and defense of every Commonweal
consists. Armor and Weapons being yearly occupied in this wise, the
Citizens had of their own readily prepared for any need, whereas by
intermission hereof, armorers are out of work, Soldiers out of ure, weapons
overgrowne with foulness, few or none good being provided, etc.

In the Month of August, Wrestling at ^kinners we^^, ne^re unto Clerks well
before the Mayor.
about the Feast of Saint Bartholomew the Apostle, before the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London, placed in a large Tentneere unto
Clarkenwell, of old time were diverse days spent in the pastime of wrestling;
where the Officers of the City, namely the Sheriffs, Sergeants, and Yeomen,
the Porters of the Kings Beam, or weigh-house, (now no such men) and other of
the City, were challengers of all men in the Suburbs, to wrestle for games
appointed. And on other days, before the said Mayor, Shooting the standard,
broad arrow and flight before the Mayor.
Aldermen and Sheriffs, in Fensbury field, to shoot the standard, broad-arrow
and flight, for games. But now of late years, the wrestling is only practiced
on Bartholomew day in the afternoon, and the shooting some three or four
days after, in one afternoon and no more. What should I speak of the ancient
daily exercises in the long Bow by Citizens of this City, Shooting in the long
bow suppressed Bowlingalleys erected and freque^ted.
now almost clean left off and forsaken? Lover-passe it: for by the means of
closing in of Common grounds, our Archers, for want of room to shoot abroad,
creep into Bowling-Alleys, and ordinary Dicing-houses, nearer home, where
they have room enough to hazard their money at unlawful Games, and there I
leave them to take their pleasures.

Honor of Citizens, and worthiness both of men and women in the same.
THis City (says Fitzstephen) is glorious in Manhood: furnished with
munitions, populous with inhabitants; insomuch that in the troublesome time of
King Stephen, it has showed at a Muster 20000. armed Horsemen, and threescore
thousand Footmen, serviceable for the Wars. Moreover (says he) the Citizens
of London, wheresoever they become, are notable before all other Citizens, in
civility of manners, attire, table, and talk. The modest Matrons that have
bin, and ought to be.
The Matrons of this City, are the very modest Sabine Ladies of Italy. The
Londoners, sometime called Trinobants, repelled Caesar, who always made his
passage by shedding blood: whereupon Lucan sung: Territa quaesitis oste^dit
terga Britannis.

The City of London has bred some, Worthiness of men, Citizens of London.
which have subdued many Kingdoms, and also the Roman Empire. It has also
brought forth manyothers, whom Virtue and Valor has highly advanced,
according to Apollo in his Oracle to Brute, Sub occasu Solis, etc. In the time
of Christianity, it brought forth that Noble Emperor Constantine, Constatine
the Emperor borne in London.
which gave the City of Rome, and all the Imperial signs, to God, Saint
Peter, and Pope Silvester, choosing rather to be called a Defender of the
Church, than an Emperor. And lest peace might be violated, and their eyes
troubled by his presence, he retired from Rome, and built the City of
Constantinople. London also in late time has brought forth famous Kings: Maude
the Empress, King Henry, son to Henry the second, and Thomas the
Archbishop, etc.

This Thomas, surnamed Becket, borne in London, A Sheriffs Clerk of London
became chancellor of England, and Archbishop of Canturbury.
brought up in the Priory of Marton, and a Student at Paris, became the
Sheriffs Clerk of London for a time, then Parson of S. Mary-hill, he had a
Prebend at London, another at Lincoln, studied the Law at Bononie, etc. was
made Chancellor of England, and Archbishop of Canturbury, etc. Unto these
might be added innumerable persons of honor, Honorable actions done by the
worthy citizens of London.
wisdom and virtue, borne in London: but of actions done by worthy Citizens,
I will only note a few, and so to other matters.

The Citizens of London, Hospital of S. James in the fields.
time out of mind, founded an Hospital at Saint James in the fields, for
leprous women of their City.

In the year 1197. Walter Brune, Walter Brune.
a Citizen of London, and Rosia his wife, founded the Hospital of our Lady,
called Domus Dei, or S. Mary Spittle, without Bishopsgate in London, an house
of such relief to the needy, that there was found standing at the surrender
thereof, ninescore beds, well furnished for receipt of poor people.

In the year 1216. the Londoners sending out a Navy, took 95. ships of
Pirates and Sea-robbers, besides innumerable others that they drowned, which
had robbed on the River of Thames.

In the year 1247. Simon Fitzmary.
Simon Fitzmary, one of the Sheriffs of London, founded the Hospital of S.
Mary, called Bethlem, without Bishopsgate.

In the year 1283. Henry Wallis, Henry Wallis,
then Mayor, builded the Tun upon Cornehill, to be a Prison for
night-walkers, and a Market-house called the Stocks, both for fish and flesh,
standing in the midst of the City. He also builded diverse Houses on the
West and North side of Paul's Churchyard, the profits of all which buildings
are to the maintenance of London Bridge.

In the year 1332. William Elsing, William Elsing,
Mercer of London, founded Elsing Spittle, within Creplegate, for fustentation
of an hundred poor blind men, and became himself the first Prior of that
Hospital.

Sir John Poultney, Draper, Sir John Poultney.
4. times Mayor, 1337. builded a fair Chapel in Paul's Church, wherein he was
buried. He founded a College in the Parish Church of S. Laurence, called
Poultney. He builded the Church called little Alhallowes, in Thames street:
and the Carmelite Friars Church in Coventry: he gave relief to prisoners in
Newgate and the Fleet, and ten shillings the year to Saint Giles Hospital by
Oldborne for ever, and other legacies long to rehearse.

John Stody Vintner, (...).
Mayor, 1358. gave to the Vintners all the Quadrant, wherein the Vintners Hall
now stands, with all the tenuments round about, from Stodies Lane, where is
founded thirteen Almes-houses, for so many poor people, etc.

Henry Picard, Henry Picard.
Vin^ner, Mayor, 1357. In the year 1363. did in one day ^umptuously feast
Edward the third, King of England; John, King of France; David, King of Scots;
the King of Cipres, then all in England; Edward, Paince of Wales, with many
other Noblemen, and after kept his Hall for all comers, that were willing to
play at dice and hazard; the Lady Margaret his wife kept her chamber to the
same effect, etc.

John Lofken Fishmonger, Job. Lofken.
four times Mayor, 1367. builded an Hospital called Magdalens, at Kingstone
upon Thames, gave thereunto 9. tenements, 10. shops, one Mill, 125 acres of
Land, 10 acres of meddow, 120. acres of pasture, etc. More, in Land. he builded
the fair parish Church of Saint Michael in crooked Lane, and was there buried.

John Barnes, Joh. Barnes.
Mayor, 1371. gave a Chest with three locks, and 1000. marks therein, to be
lent to young men upon sufficient pawn, and for the use thereof, to say De
profundis, or Pater noster, and no more: he also was a great builder of S.
Thomas Apostles Parish Church, as appears by his Arms there both in stone
and glass.

In the year 1378. John Filpot, Ioh. Filpot.
sometime Mayor, hired with his money 1000. Soldiers, and defended the Realm
from incursions of the enemy; so that in small time his hired men took John
Mercer, a Sea-rover, with all his ships, which he before had taken from
Scarborrow, and fifteen Spanish ships, laden with great riches.

In the year 1380. Thomas of Woodstocke, Thomas Percy, Hugh Calverley, Robert
Knowles, and others, being sent with a great power to aid the Duke of
Britain, the said John Filpot hired Ships for them of his own charges, and
released the Armor, which the Soldiers had pawned for their victuals, more
than a thousand in number.

This most Noble Citizen, (says Thomas Walsingham) that had traveled for the
commodity of the whole Realm, more than all other of his time, had often
relieved the King, by lending him great sums of money, and otherwise. He
deceased in the year 1384. after that he had assured lands to the City, for
the relief of thirteen poor people for ever.

In the year 1381. William Walworth, William Walworth^ valianey.
then Mayor, a most provident, valiant, and learned Citizen, did by his arrest
of Wat Tylar, (a presumptuous Rebel, upon whom no man durst lay hands) deliver
the King and Kingdom from the danger of most wicked Traitors, and was for his
service knighted in the field, as before has been related.

Nicholas Brembar, John Filpot, Robert Laund, Nicholas Twiford, and Adam
Francis, Aldermen, were then for their service likewise Knighted, and Sir
Robert Knowles, for assisting of the Mayor was made free of the City.

Sir Robert Knowles, To. Knowles.
thus worthily enfranchised a Citizen, founded a College with an Hospital at
Pountfract: he also builded the great stone bridge at Rochester, over the River
of Medway.

John Churchman Grocer, John Churchman.
one of the Sheriffs, 1386. for the quiet of Merchants, builded a certain
house upon Wool wharse, in Tower ward to serve for Ternage, or weighing of
wools, and for the Customer, Comptrollers, Clerks, and other Officers to sit,
etc.

Adam Bamme, Adam Bamme.
Goldsmith, Mayor, 1091, in a great dearth, procured corn from diverse parts
beyond the Seas, to be brought hither in such abundance, as sufficed to serve
the City, and the Countries near adjoining: to the furtherance of which good
work, he took out of the Orphants Chest in the Guildhall, 2000. Marks to buy
the said corn, and each Alderman laid out 20. pound to the like purpose.

Tho. Knowles, Thomas K^^^les.
Grocer, Mayor, 1400. with his brethren the Aldermen, began to new build the
Guild Hall in London, and in stead of an old little Cottage in Alderman-bury
street, made a fair and goodly house, more near unto S. Laurence Church in
the Jurie. He reedified S. Anthonies Church, and gave to the Grocers his house
near unto the same, for relief of the poor for ever. More, he caused water
to be conveied to the gates of Newgate and Ludgate, for relief of the
prisoners there.

John Hind, John Hind.
Draper, Mayor 1405. newly builded his parish Church of Saint Swithen by London
stone, his monument is defaced, save only his Arms in the glass windows.

Thomas Falconer Mercer, Thomas Falconer.
Mayor, 1414 lent to King Henry the 5. toward maintenance of his wars in
France, 10000. marks upon Jewels: more, he made the posterne called
Mooregate, caused the ditches of the City to be cleansed, and did many other
things for good of the same City.

William Sevenock Grocer, William Sevenock.
Mayor 1419. founded in the Town of Sevenock in Kent, a free school for poor
men's children, and 13. Almes-houses: his Testament says 20. poor men and
women.

Richard Whittington Mercer, Richard VVhittington.
3. times Mayor, in the year 1421. began the Library of Gray Friars in London,
to the charge of four hundred l. his executors (with his goods) founded and
builded Whittington College, with Almeshouses for 13. poor men, and Divinity
Lectures to be read there for ever. They repaired Saint Bartholomews Hospital
in Smithfield, they bare some charges to the glazing and paving of the
Guildhall, they bare half the charges of building the Library there, and they
builded the west gate of London, of old time called Newgate, etc.

John Carpenter, John Carpenter.
Towne-Clerke of London, in the reign of Henry the fifth, caused (with great
expenses) to be curiously painted upon board, about the North Cloister of
Paul's, a monument of death, leading all estates, with the speeches of death,
Dance of death, called the dance of Paul's.
and answer of every state. This Cloister was pulled down 1549. He also gave
Tenements to the City, for the finding and bringing up of four poor men's
children, with meat, drink, apparel, learning at the Schools in the
University, etc. until they might be preferred, and then other in their places
for ever.

Robert Chichley, To. Chichley.
Grocer, Mayor, 1422. appointed by his Testament, that on his birthday, a
competent dinner should be ordained for two thousand four hundred poor men,
householders of this City, and every one to have two pence in money. More, he
gave one large plot of ground, thereupon to build the new parish Church of S.
Stephen near unto Walbrooke, etc.

John Rainwell Fishmonger, Ioh. Rainwell.
Mayor, 1427. gave Tenements to discharge certain Wards of London of
Fifteenes, and other payments.

John Wells Grocer, Ioh. Wels.
Mayor, 1433. a great builder of the Chapel or College of the Guild Hall,
and was there buried: he caused fresh water to be conveyed from Teyborne, to
the Standard in West Cheap, for the service of the City.

William Eastfield Mercer, William Eastfield.
1438. appointed his executors, of his goods, to convey sweet water from
Teyborne, and to build a fair Conduit by Aldermanbery Church, which they
performed, as also made a Standard in Fleetstreet, by Shew-lane end: they also
conveyed water to Creplegate, etc.

Stephen Brown Grocer, Stephen Brown.
Mayor 1439. sent into Prusia, causing corn to be brought from thence,
whereby he brought down the price of Wheat, from three shillings the bushel,
to less than half that money: for corn was then so scarce in England, that
poor people were enforced to make them bread of Fearne roots.

Philip Malpas, Philip Malpas.
one of the Sheriffs, 1440. gave by his Testament 125. l. to relief of poor
prisoners, and every year for five years, 400. shirts and smocks, 40. pair
of sheets, and 150. gowns of Freeze to the poor. To 500 poor people in
London, every one six shillings eight pence: to poor maids marriages, 100.
marks: to highways, an hundred marks: twenty marks the year to a Graduate
to preach, twenty pounds unto Preachers at the Spittle on the three Easter
holy days, etc.

Robert Large Mercer, Robert Large.
Mayor 1440. gave to his parish Church of S. Olive in Surrey 200. l. to S.
Margarets in Lothbery 25. l. to the poor twenty pounds: to London bridge one
hundred marks. Toward the vaulting over the watercourse of Walbroke two
hundred marks. To poor Maids marriages, one hundred marks: to poor
House-holders, one hundred pounds, etc.

Richard Rich Mercer, Richard Rich.
one of the Sheriffs, 1442. founded Alms houses at Hodsdon in Hertfordshire.

Simon Air Draper, Simon Air.
Mayor, 1346. builded the Leaden Hall, for a common Garner of corn, to the use
of this City, and left five thousand marks to charitable uses.

Godfrey Bullein, Godfrey Bullein.
Mayor of London, 1458. by his Testament gave liberally to the prisons,
hospitals, and Lazer-houses; besides a thousand pound to poor house-holders in
London, and 200. l. to poor householders in Norfolk.

Richard Rawson, Richard Rawson.
one of the Sheriffs, 1477. gave by Testament large Legacies to the Prisoners,
Hospitals and Lazer-houses. To other poor, to high ways, to the
water-conduits, besides to poor Maids marriages, 340. pounds, and his
executors to build a large house in the Churchyard of S. Mary Spittle, wherein
the Mayor and his brethren do use to sit, and hear the Sermons in the Easter
holy days.

Thomas Ilam, Tho. Ilam.
one of the Sheriffs, 1480. newly builded the great Conduit in Cheap, of his
own charges.

Edward Shaw Goldsmith, Edw. Shaw.
Mayor 1483 caused Creplegate of London to be builded of his own goods, etc.

Thomas Hill Grocer, Tho. Hill.
Mayor, 1485. caused of his goods, the Conduit of Grasse-street to be builded.

Hugh Clopton Mercer, Hugh Clopton.
during his life a batchelour, Mayor 1492. builded the great stone arched
Bridge at Stratford upon Avon in Warwickshire, and did many other things of
great charity, as in my Summary.

Robert Fabian, Robert Fabian.
one of the Sheriffs, 1494. gathered out of diverse good Authors, as well Latin
as French, a large Chronicle of England and of France, which he published in
English, to his great charges, for the honor of this City, and common utility
of the whole Realm.

Sir John Percivall Merchant-Taylor, John Percivall.
Mayor, 1498. founded a Grammarschoole at Macklefield in Cheshire, where he was
borne, he endowed the same school with sufficient Lands, for the finding of a
Priest, master there, to teach freely all children thither sent, without
exception.

The Lady Thomasine his wife, Rich. Carew.
founded the like Freeschoole, together with fair lodgings for the
Schoolemasters, Scholars, and other, and added twenty pound of yearly revennue
for supporting the charges, at Saint Mary Wike in Devonshire, where she was
borne.

Stephen Gennings, Stephen Gennings.
Merchant-Taylor, Mayor 1509. founded a fair Grammarschoole at Vlfrimhampton
in Staffordshire, left good lands, and also builded a great part of his Parish
Church, called Saint Andrews Undershaft in London.

Henry Keble Grocer, Hen. Keble.
Mayor 1511. in his life a great benefactor to the new building of old Mary
Church, and by his Testament gave a thousand pounds toward the finishing
thereof. He gave to highwaies two hundred pound; to poor Maids marriages, one
hundred marks. To poor husbandmen in Oxford and Warwickshires, one hundred
and forty Ploughshares, and one hundred and forty Cultars of iron, and in
London to seven Almes-men, six pence the week for ever.

John Collet, Ioh. Collet.
a Citizen of London by birth, and by dignity Deane of Paul's, Doctor of
Divinity, etected and builded one Free-schoole in Paul's Churchyard, 1512. for
3. hundred fifty three poor men's children, to be taught free in the same
school, appointing a Master, a submaster and a Chaplain, with sufficient
stipends to endure for ever, and committed the oversight thereof to the Mercers
in London, because himself was son to Henry Collet, Mercer, Mayor of London,
and endowed the Mercers with Lands, to the yearly value of 120. pound, or
better.

Sir William Fitzwilliam the elder, William Fitzwilliam
being a Merchant-taylor, and servant sometime to Cardinal Wolsey, was chosen
Alderman of Breadstreet Ward in London, in Anno 1506. Going afterward to dwell
at Milton in Northamptonshire, in the fall of the Cardinal his former master,
he gave him kind entertainment there at his house in the Country. For which
deed being called before the King, and demanded how he durst entertain so
great an enemy to the State? His answer was, that he had not contemptuously or
wilfully done it; but only because he had been his Master, and (partly) the
means of his greatest fortunes. A just and royal disposition in the King.
The King was so well pleased with his answer, that saying, himself had too
few such servants, immediately he knighted him, and afterward made him a Privy
Counselor.

This worthy Knight dying, The liberal and bountiful mind of this
Fitz-William. His death.
gave an hundred pounds to poor maids marriages. His debts and debtors (over
whose names he had written, Amore Dei remitto) he freely forgave. He gave to
the Universities forty pounds; to the poor, thirty pounds; to mend the high
ways betwixt Chigwell and Copersall in Essex, fifty pounds. To mend other high
ways, about Thorney and Sawtry Chapel, and the Bridge, fifty pounds more.
And to the Merchant-Taylors his Brethren, he gave his best standing Cup, as a
friendly remembrance of him for ever.

John Tate, Brewer, John Tate.
then a Mercer, Mayor, 1514. caused his Brewhouse, called the Swanne, near
adjoining to the Hospital of Saint Anthony in London, to be taken down, for
the enlarging of the said Church, then new builded, being a great part of his
charge: This was a goodly foundation, with Alms houses, a Free School, etc.

George Monnox Draper, George Monnox.
Mayor 1515. re-edified the decayed Parish Church of Waltamstow or Walthamstow
in Essex, he founded there a Free School, and Almes-houses for thirteen
Almes-people: He made also a cawsey of Timber over the Marshes, from
Walthamstow to Locke-Bridge, etc.

Sir John Milborne, John Milborne.
Draper, Mayor, 1522. builded Almes-houses, foureteen in number, by the crossed
Friars Church in London, there to be placed foureteen poor people, and left to
the Drapers, certain Messuages, Tenements, and Garden-plots, in the Parish of
Saint Olaves in Hartstreet, for performance of stipends to the said Alms
people, and other uses. Look more in Aldgate Ward, where you shall be further
satisfied.

Robert Thorn, Robert Thorn.
Merchant-Taylor, deceasing a Batchelour, in the year 1532. gave by his
Testament to charitable actions, more than four thousand, four hundred and
forty pounds, and legacies to his poor kindred more, five thousand, one
hundred forty two pounds, besides his debts forgiven, etc.

Sir John Allen, Sir John Allen.
Mercer, Mayor of London, and of counsel to King Henry the 8. deceased 1544.
buried at Saint Thomas of Acres, in a fair Chapel by him builded. He gave to
the City of London a rich collar of gold, to be worn by the Mayor, which was
first worn by Sir William Laxton. He gave five hundred Marks to be a stock
for Sea-cole, his Lands purchased of the King, the rent thereof to be
distributed to the poor in the Wards of London for ever.

He gave besides to the Prisons, Hospitals, Lazer houses, and all other poor
in the City, or two miles without, very liberally, and overlong to be recited.

Sir William Laxton, Sir William Laxton.
Grocer, Mayor, 1545. founded a fair free School at Owndale in
Northamptonshire, with six Almes-houses for the poor.

Sir John Gresham, Sir John Gresham.
Mercer, Mayor 1548 founded a Free school at Holt, a Market Town in Norfolk:
He gave to every Ward in London ten pounds, to be distributed to the poor;
and to 120. poor men and women, every one of them three yards of broad cloth,
of 8. or 9. shillings the yard, to be made in Gowns ready to their backs. He
gave also to Maids marriages, and to the Hospitals in London, above 200. pounds
in ready money.

Sir Rowland Hill, Sir Rowland Hill.
Mercer, Mayor, 1550. caused to be made diverse cawseyes, both for horse and
man: he made four Bridges, two of stone, containing 18. Arches in them both.
He builded one notable Free-schoole at Drayton in Shropshire: he gave to
Christ's hospital in London, 500. pounds, etc.

Sir Andrew Iud Skinner, Sir Andrew Iud.
Mayor 1551. erected one notable Free-scoole at Tunbridge in Kent, and
Almes-houses nigh Saint Helens Church in London, and left to the Skinners,
Lands to the value of threescore pounds, 3. shillings eight pence the year,
for the which they be bound to pay 20. l. to the Schoolmaster, 8. l. to the
Usher yearly for ever, and four shillings the week to the six alms people,
and twenty five shillings four pence the year in coals, for ever.

Sir Thomas White, The famous memory of Sir Thomas White.
Lord Mayor of this honorable City in Anno 1554. and a worthy Brother likewise
of the Merchant-Taylors Society, being a lover of learning, and an earnest
furtherer thereof, first purchased the Hall in Oxenford, called Gloucester Hall,
Gloucester Hall in Oxenford.
for Scholars and Students, to receive there the benefit of learning. But his
private thoughts very often soliciting him, that he should (in time) meet with
a place, where two Elmes grew, and that there his further purpose should take
effect. At length, he found out the place, where (at his own cost and
expenses) he founded the famous College, called Saint John Baptist College,
The building of S. John Baptist College in Oxenford.
and where these two Elmes (as I have heard) are yet standing endowing it with
such liberal gifts, lands and revenues, as would require too much time, here
to be remembered of set down.

Beside his provision for learning in this worthy place, Other Schools by him
builded and maintained.
he erected other Schools: as at Bristow, Reading, and a College at Higham
Ferries. More, he gave to the City of Bristow, the sum of two thousand pounds
to purchase land, His great bounty to the City of Bristow.
amounting to the yearly value of an hundred and twenty pound: The Mayor and
Citizens paying therefore yearly an hundred pounds. Eight hundred pounds must
be lent to sixteen poor Clothiers, fifty pounds each man, for the space of
ten years, sufficient security being given by them for the same. Afterward
that eight hundred pounds, was to pass to other sixteen poor clothiers,
according to the discretion of them put in trust. Provision of Corn for the
poor.
Two hundred pounds beside was reserved, for provision of corn, and needful
occasions for the poor, in the order and care of the Mayor, Aldermen and
Citizens, etc.

Then according to his will, which remains yet to be seen, out of this
bountiful gift to Bristow, His order out of his gift to Bristow.
these memorable branches, and benevolences, were (by himself) devised, and
thus ordered, beginning in the year 1577. and so thence forward, they went on
according to his own direction. Then on the Feast of Saint Bartholmew was
brought to the Merchant-Taylors Hall, An hundred and 4. pounds brought to
Merchant Tailors Hall always on Bartholomew day.
an hundred and four pounds, the hundred pound to be lent (for ten years
space) to four poor young men in the City of York, Freemen and Inhabitants
being Clothiers: and the four pound overplus, to be employed about the
charges and pains, that no man (used in the business) might receive
coffeehouse. Then in 1578. the like sum was to be delivered thence to
Canturbury: and so thence forward, the same sums (yearly) to the Cities and
Towns following orderly.

To 1579 Reading. The order of the yearly lending.
1580 The Merchant-Taylors themselves. 1581 Gloucester. 1582 Worcester. 1583
Excester. 1584 Salisbury. 1585 West-Chester. 1586 Norwich. 1587 Southampton.
1588 Lincoln. 1589 Winchester. 1590 Oxenford. 1591 Hereford East. 1592
Cambridge. 1593 Shrewsbury. 1594 Linne. 1595 Bathe. 1596 Derbie. 1597 Ipswich.
1598 Colchester. 1599 New Castle.


This sum of one hundred and four pounds, The hundred and four pounds is
yearly delivered at the Merchant Tailors Hall.
passing thus yearly to the forenamed places, is delivered still at the
Merchant-Taylors Hall, and to the good intended uses of the giver; and that
there might be no breathing while for so just a Stewards talent, but to have it
still kept in continual employment for the poor: the same order was
appointed, to take beginning again (as before) at the City of York, and so
successively (while the world endures) to the Towns before named, Passing
still in order from place to place.
in the selfsame course as it had the Original; with great care and
observance in them, to whom it belongs, that the dead may not be abused, nor
poor men's right injured.

But did he thus shut up his purse, and say to himself; I have given
sufficient? No, His liberal bounty to the City of Coventry, it being then in
great distress.
he did cast his pitying eye next on the City of Coventry, distressed (at that
time) in great and grievous manner: What his instant benevolence was, he took
it to be but as an hours Sunshine after a whole day of storm and tempest;
although it might yield some comfort, were the season never so short. But to
establish a certainty, that no dismay or doubt should ever after be able to
remove (even as a worthy Pyramides erected to perpetuity) he gave to the City
of Coventry, 1400. pounds, therewith to purchase lands, rising to the annual
value of seventy pounds. Twelve poor aged Inhabitants of Coventry yearly.
Twelve aged poor inhabitants of that City, were to have (in free Alms) 24.
pounds, each man 40. shillings yearly, on the eleventh day of March, or within
six days after Four poor young men also were to have 40. pounds lent them in
free lone, Four poor young men of the same City.
ten pound each man, and for nine years space, upon sufficent security given.
And their turns being thus served, then four other poor young men were to
have the like sums, and for like limitation, and so from 9. years to nine
years for ever.

Afterward, it was ordered (in free lone) to two poor men of the same City,
and lastly, to one: in which nature (according to the several limitations) it
does yet, and doubtless shall for ever continue. Also the same sum was
appointed to one young man in Northampton for 9. years in free lone,
Northampton.
next, to one in the City of Leicester; Leicester.
thirdly, to one in Nottingham; Nottingham Warwick.
fourthly, to one in Warwick; and for the like time. Then returning again to
Coventry for one year, it repasseth to the said Towns again, each after
other in like nature, for ever. And lest his worthy intent should fail in the
continuance, he enlarged his first gift to Coventry of 1400. l. to 2000. and
60. pound to be employed as has been remembered: 40. l. being yearly paid out
of it, to Saint John Baptist College in Oxenford, and allowances also by
himself given in each place, that bonds should be made, without any charge to
the receiver.

Edward Hall Gentleman, Edward Hall.
of Grayes Inn a Citizen by birth and office, as common Sergeant of Land. and
one of the Judges in the Sheriffs Court, he wrote and published a famous and
eloquent Chronicle, entitled, The uniting of the two noble Families, Lancaster
and York.

Richard Hills Merchant-Taylor, Richard Hills.
1560. gave 500. pound toward the purchase of an house, called, the Manor of
the Rose, wherein the Merchant-Taylors founded their free School in London: he
also gave to the said Merchant-Taylors one plot of ground, withcertainsmal
Cottages on the Tower hill, where he builded fair Almes-houses for fourteen
sole women.

About the same time, W. Lambert.
William Lambert Esquire, free of the worshipful Company of. Drapers, borne in
London, a Justice of the peace in Kent, founded a College for the poor, which
he named of Queen Elizabeth in East Greenwitch.

William Harper. Merchant-Taylor, Sir William Harper.
Mayor, 1562. sounded a a free School in the Town of Bedford where he was
borne and also buried.

Sir Thomas Gresham Mercer, Sir Thomas Gresham.
1566. builded the Royal Exchange in London, and by his Testament left his
dwelling house in Bishopsgate street, to be a place for readings; allowing
large stipends to the Readers, and certain Almes-houses for the poor.

William Patten Gentleman, VV. Patten.
a Citizen by birth, and customer of London outward, Justice of Peace in
Middlesex, the Parish Church of Stokenwenton being ruinous, he repaired or
rather new builded.

Sir Thomas Row Knight, Sir Thomas Row his worthy liberality.
Lord Mayor of the City of London, in 1568. a worthy brother also of the
Merchant-Taylors Company, beside his charitable cost and charges, in building
the new Church yard in Bethlem, containing near one Acre of ground, and
enclosed with a wall of brick, and a Sermon to be preached every Whit-Sunday
in the morning, in presence of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen; as also giving one
hundred pounds, to be lent to eight poor men: gave to the merchant-Taylors,
lands, or tenements, Ten poor men to be maintained for ever.
out of them to be given 40. pounds yearly, to maintain ten poor men for
ever, such as were not brethren of his own society, but chosen out of five
several Companies, Clothworkers.
viz. Clothworkers, Armorers, Carpenters, Tylars, and Plaisterers. Armorers.
As considering, that by over toyling labor, Carpe^ters.
dangers, Tylars.
fall, bruises and such like inconveniences, Plaisterers
they were soonest like to become impotent, and unable to help or maintain
themselves. Therefore, to each of these ten men, he freely gave the sum of
four pounds, quarterly to be paid them at the Merchant-Taylors Hall, during
their lives. And then to succeed to other men in the same Companies, according
to due consideration of just cause, and most necessity.

Ambrose Nicholas Salter, Ambrose Nicholas.
Mayor 1576. founded 12. Almes-houses in Monkswell street, near unto
Creplegate, wherein he placed 12. poor people, having each of them 7. d. the
week, and once every year, 5. sackes of coals, and one quarter of a hundred
Faggots, all of his gift for ever.

William Lamb Esquire, sometime a Gentleman of the Chapel to King Henry the
eighth, William Lamb Citizen and Clothworker of London.
and in great favor with him: was also a free Brother of the worshipful
Company of Clothworkers, and a kind loving Citizen to the City of London. Out
of his love to Learning and Scholars, in the Town of Sutton Valens in Kent,
where he was borne, at his own proper cost and charges he erected a free
Grammar-Schoole, A free Grammar School at Sutton Valens in Kent.
for the education and instruction of youth, in the fear of God, good manners,
knowledge, and understanding, allowing yearly to the Master twenty pounds, and
ten pouuds yearly to the Usher, from time to time, as either place shall be
supplied by succession, and for their yearly stipends or perpetual pensions.

In the same Town of Sutton also, Almes-houses at Sutton for the poor.
for the relief of poor people, he caused to be builded six Almes-houses,
having an Orchard and Gardens, and the sum of ten pounds yearly paid them.

At Maidstone likewise in Kent, Free School at Maidstone.
he has given ten pounds yearly to the free School for ever: with this
special caution, that needy men's children may be preferred only, to the
enjoying of this benefit.

The Gentleman foresecing, His relief to poor Clothiers in diverse places.
in his life time, the decay of sundry Trades and Occupations, to the utter
undoing of very many, especially poor Clothiers, whose impoverishing deserved
greatly to be pitied, freely gave to the poor Clothiers in Suffolk, in
Bridgenorth and in Ludlow in Shropshire, 300. pounds to be paid by even
portions: to each several Town of the said Counties, one hundred pounds
apeece, for their supportation and maintenance, at their work or occupation.

And as his charity extended it self thus liberally abroad in the Country,
His building of the Conduit near to Oldborn, and the Standard at Oldborn
bridge.
so did the City of London likewise taste thereof not sparingly. For near
unto Holborne he founded a fair Conduit, and a standard with a Cock at
Holborne bridge, to convey thence the waste. These were begun the six and
twentieth day of March, 1577. and the water carried along in pipes of Lead,
more than two thousand yards, all at his own cost and charges, amounting to
the sum of fifteen hundred pounds, and the work fully finished the four
and twentieth of August in the same year.

Moreover, Poor women benefited by the Conduit.
he gave to poor women, such as were willing to take pains, 120 Pailes,
therewith to carry and serve water.

Being a member (as I have already said) of the Cloth-workers Company, His gift
to the worshipful Company of Clothworkers.
and to show that he was not unmindfull of them, he gave them his dwelling
house in London, with other Lands and Tenements to the value of thirty pound
yearly, besides, 4. pounds more also yearly, by them to be thus bestowed; to
wit, for the hyring of a Minister to read divine Service, thrice every week,
as Sunday, Wednesday and Friday, throughout the year, in the Chapel or
Church belonging to his house, called by the name of Saint James in the Wall,
Allowance for four yearly Sermons.
by Creplegate; and for four Sermons there to be preached, a competent
allowance for each. And also out of the thirty pounds yearly, Every pooreman
and poor woman, a shirt, a smock and a gown, and a pair of shoes, etc.
it is provided, that a deduction be made by the said Clothworkers, for
apparelling of twelve men, and as many women, in form as follows: To every
of the twelve men a Freeze gown, one Lockeram shirt, and a good strong pair
of Winter shoes. To the twelve women likewise, a Freeze gown, a Lockeram
smock, and a good pair of Winter shoes, all ready made for their wearing.
Always remembered, that they be persons both poor and honest, to whom this
charitable deed is to be extended; and this is yearly done on the first of
October.

To the Parish Church of Saint Giles without Creplegate, S Giles without
Creplegate.
he gave fifteen pound to the Bells and Chime, intending a further liberality
thereto, if they had taken due time.

To the worshipful Company of the Stationers he gave a legacy of six l. 13.
s. 4. d. for perpetual relief of the poor, His gift to the Company of
Stationers.
in the Parish Church of Saint Faiths under Paul's: namely, to twelve poor
people, twelve pence in money, and twelve pence in bread, every Friday
throughout the year.

To Christ's Hospital in London, His gift to Christ's Hospital.
toward the bringing up of poor men's children he has given 6. l. yearly for
ever: and an hundred pounds in ready money together, therewith to purchase
Lands, that their relief (by the revennues of the same) may be perpetual.

To Saint Thomas Spittle or Hospital in Southwarke, His gift to S. Thomas
Hospital.
toward the succor of the sick and diseased, he gave four l. yearly for
ever.

An hundred pounds he intended to the Hospital called the Savoy, His intent to
the Savoy.
but by reason that such agreements could not be made as he thought convenient,
his contribution that way, (much against his mind) went not forward.

For the relief of poor prisoners in the two Compters, His relief for poor
prisoners.
Newgate, Ludgate, the Marshalseas, the King's Bench, and the White Lion, he
dealt very bountifully and discreetly; giving unto the two Compters six pound
apeece, and to be paid unto them by twenty shillings each month. To the other
Prisons forementioned, six mattresses apeece, the whole number being two dozen
and an half.

He was not unmindful of poor maids marriages, Marriage money for poor maids.
but gave twenty pounds to be equally divided among forty, by equal portions
of ten shillings apiece. Yet with this proviso, that those poor maids to be
married, should be of good name and fame.

His love and bounty to his servants, His love and liberality to his servants.
as also the hundred and eight Freeze gowns ready made, which he bequeathed at
his Funeral to poor men and women, with dispersing the remnant of all his
goods after his burial, where need and reason required, I am contented to
pass over, referring what else is further to be said of him, till I come to
speak of the place where he lies buried.

Sir T. Offley, Sir Thomas Offley bequeathed much to the poor.
Merchant-Taylor, Mayor, deceased 1580. appointed by his Testament, the one
half of all his goods, and two hundred pounds deducted out of the other half,
given to his son Henry, to be given and bestowed in deeds of charity, by his
executors, according to his confidence and trust in them.

Barnard Randulph, Bernard Randolph, Common Sergeant of London, his liberal
bounty.
Common Sergeant of London, 1583. This man (in his life time) somewhat before
his death, gave and delivered with his own hand, to the Company of Fishmongers
in London, the sum of nine hundred pounds; of good and lawful money of
England, to be employed toward the conducting of Thames water, cesterning the
same in lead, For conveying of Thames water.
and cas^eling it with stone, in the Parishes of Saint Mary Magdalen, and Saint
Nicholas Cold-Abbey, near unto old Fishstreet, seven hundred pounds. The other
two hundred pounds, to pay for ever yearly, the sum of ten pounds: to wit,
toward the maintenance of a poor Scholar, For a poor Scholar.
in the University of Oxenford, yearly, four pounds. Toward mending the
highways in the Parish of Tisehurst, For mending high ways.
in the County of Sussex where the said Barnard was borne, every year four
pounds. For the poor in diverse parishes.
And to the poor people of the Parishes of Saint Nicholas Oliffe in
Breadstreet, and St. Mary Magdalen near to old Fishstreet, forty shillings; to
wit, twenty shillings to either Parish for ever.

More he willed and bequeathed by his last will and testament, to be bestowed
in land or annuities, for relief of the poor, inhabiting in the Wards of
Queen Hith, and Castle Baynard in the City of London, and in the forenamed
Parish of Tisehurst, in the County of Sussex, the sum of 1000 pounds.

Master Thomas Ridge, Master Tho. Ridge.
Grocer, gave 1163. l. 6. s. 8. d. to godly and charitable uses in form
following.

To the Company of Grocers, Benefit of young beginners.
for the benefit of Young Men, free of the same Society, and to be lent unto
them for a certain time one hundred pound.

To the Hospitals in and about London, 100. l.

For the relief of poor Preachers, Love to Religion. Care of poor tradesmen
400. l.

For the help of poor and decayed Trasedmen, in and about London, 300. l.

To a Lecture in Grasse-Church in London, 100. l.

To his men and maid servants, 63. l.

In gowns for poor men, 100. l.

Master John Haydon Mercer, Master John Haydon his bountiful charity.
Alderman, and one of the Sheriffs of London, deceasing in the time of his
Shrievalty 1583. gave these christian and liberal gifts following.

An hundred gowns, which cost 100. l. given to an hundred poor men, To the
poor in gowns.
and every man 12. d. in money beside.

For the benefit of young beginners in the world he gave, Benefit of young
beginners.
to his own Company of the Mercers, 600. l. to be lent to young men, after
the allowance of 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. in the hundred pound. And the 20. pound
yearly arising by that money, yearly to be given to the poor.

To the same Company also he gave 400. l. more, to be likewise lent out,
according to the former rate: and the benefit ensuing thereby; of 3. l. 6. s.
8. d. yearly, Love to Religion.
allowed toward the maintaining of a Lecture at Saint Michaels Church by Pater
noster row, called St. Michaels in the Querne.

He gave to Christ's Hospital 500. l.

He gave to the eleven chief worshipful Companies, Care for young beginners
and the poor.
beside his own, the sum of 1100. l. to be lent out (for time) to young
beginners, at 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. in the hundred pound, and the benefit of 20.
pound arising thereby yearly, to go to the Hospitals, and sixteen pound
besides to the poor yearly. To several Cities for the benefit of young
beginners and the poor prisoners.


He gave to the City of Excester one hundred pound.

To the City of Bristow one hundred pound.

To the City of Gloucester, one hundred pound.

This money is intended to be lent to poor young beginners in trading, at the
rate of benefit (by the money) of 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. in the 100. l. And that
benefit should go to the relief of poor prisoners, and other poor people.

He gave to the Town of Wardbury, in the County of Gloucester, 6. l. 13. s. 4.
d.

He gave to his Company of the Mercers, Remembrance of his Company and of his
servants.
to make them a Cup, 40. l.

He gave to his servants among them all, (...). l.

What remained out of this moity, as an overplus, he gave to the before
remembered Companies, viz. 50. pound to each of them and to the uses forenamed.

Master Richard Walter Girdler, Richard Walter.
2200. pound to the four Hospitals of London. And 500. pound toward building
and maintaining a Free-Schoole at Thiryden in Northampton shire.

William Norton, Stationer, sometime Treasurer of Christ's Hospital, William
Norton his benevolence.
gave the sum of 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. yearly to his Company to be lent to
young men, free of the same Society: And 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. yearly for ever,
he gave also unto Christ's Hospital.

Thomas Iennings, Thomas Iennings his love to the poor.
Fishmonger, to 7. Parishes in London, gave 4. l. 13, s. 2. d. yearly.

To Christ's Hospital he gave 40. s. yearly.

To the Town of Braughin in Hartford shire, where he was borne, he gave 6. l.
13. s. 4. d.

Master Peter Blundell, Peter Blundell his most liberal charity.
Clothier of London, a man very godly and christianly disposed all his life
time, dying in Anno 1599. gave by his last will and testament, these bountiful
gifts following.

He gave to Christ's Hospital in London, To Hospitals in and about London.
500. l.

To S. Bartholomews Hospital 250. l.

To S. Thomas Hospital 250. l.

To Bridewell Hospital yearly 8. l.

To the Church of Tiverton, in which Town he was borne, 50. l.

Toward mending the Highways there, 100. l.

To the twelve chief Companies in London, For the relief of poor prisoners.
to each of them 150. l. toward the releeving of poor prisoners, and other
charitable uses, the whole sum amounting to 1800. l.

Toward the help of poor Maids marriages in the Town of Tiverton, To poor
maids marriages
400. l.

He gave to the City of Excester, To help poor Artificers.
to be lent there to poor Artificers nine hundred pound.

He gave toward the building of a free Grammar-Schoole in Tiverton, To a free
School and Officers thereto belonging.
2400. pound.

More afterward laid out by his executors 1000. pound.

To the Schoolmasters yearly, fifty pounds.

To the Usher yearly, 13. l. 6. s. 8. d.

To the Clerk yearly, 40. s.

To place four boys Apprentises in husbandry yearly 20. pound. For
Apprentises.


For the maintenance of six Scholars yearly, His love to Learning and
Scholars.
three in Oxenford, and the other three in Cambridge, 2000. l.

Robert Comin, Robert Chilcot a worthy servant to so good a Master.
alias Chilcot, servant sometime to the said Peter Blundell, imitated the
worthy steps of his Master, so far as power permitted him leave, giving as
insueth.

He gave to Christ's Hospital in London, 100. l.

To poor prisoners, Relief of poor prisoners.
whose debts did not amount above five pound, 100. l.

Toward the building of an ordinary Free-Schoole, His love to learning and the
poor.
that children might be made apt and ready for his Masters free
Grammar-Schoole in Tiverton, where he himself also was borne, 400. l.

Toward the maintaining of the said lesser school, To the School and the
attending Officers.
and for relief of certain poor people yearly, 90. l.

To the Schoolmasters yearly 20. pound.

To the Clerk yearly 3. l.

For reparations yearly 4. s.

For 15. poor men's Gowns, For the poor.
and each of them 2. s. in money yearly 16. l. 10. s.

To 15. poor Artificers 15. pound.

To as many poor people weekly, Repairining the Church.
6. d. to each.

Toward repayring the Church 19. l. 10. s.

To mend the Highways there ten pound.

To other uses four pound.

John Holmes Draper, John Holms.
gave to the Parish of Saint Sepulchers, in Anno 1588. his dwelling house in
the same Parish, yielding yearly, 32. pound.

Thomas Atkinson Baker, Thomas Atkinson.
gave also to the same Parish, 10. l. yearly.

Master Thomas Cure, Sadler, and Squire Sadler to Queen Elizabeth, Thomas Cure
his hospital in Southwarke.
as his son also was after him, did build an Hospital in Southwarke, having
some help afforded him by the Parish of St. Savior: but the main and chief
charge was his own proper cost. The house was for 18. poor people each of
them having two Chambers, and allowance of 4. pound ten shillings to each
person yearly. The building of the Hospital cost above three hundred pounds.

Master George Bishop, Stationer, gave 6. pound yearly to his Company: George
Bishop his memorable charity.
and has allowed ten pound yearly for ever toward maintaining Preachers at
Paul's Cross. He gave likewise six pound yearly to Christ's Hospital.

Master Richard Culverwell, Richard Culverwell.
Brewer, gave to the Hospital of Bridewell, two hundred pound.

Master William Whitmore, William VVhitmore
Haberdasher, gave also to the same hospital, 200. pound.

Master John Norton, John Norton mindful of the poor, and of his Company.
Stationer, gave to his own Company the sum of one thousand pound to
purchase lands amounting to the value of fifty pound yearly, and some part to
be lent to poor young men.

He gave also one hundred and fifty pounds to the Parish of S. Faiths under
Paul's, to purchase seven pounds ten shillings yearly for ever, to be given
to the poor.

Master Henry Fisher, Fishmonger, gave to his Company nine pound yearly, Henry
Fisher his love to learning.
to maintain a Scholar in the College of Brazen-nose in Oxenford, with the
allowance of nine pound and two shillings yearly for two Sermons.

Master Thomas Aldersey, Thomas Aldersey his love to religion and the poor.
Haberdasher, out of an Appropriation which he had at Bunbery in Cheshire, gave
the allowance of two hundred Marks yearly, one hundred Marks whereof was for
the maintenance of a Preacher.

He gave to the Minister 20. pound.

He gave to a School, thirty pound.

He gave to the poor, ten pound.

Master Robert Offley, Robert Offley his liberal charity.
Haberdasher, to the Mayor and communalty of Chester gave six hundred pound to
be lent there to young Traders.

For relief of the poor, and men in prisons, besides other charitable uses
two hundred pound.

More, he gave two hundred pounds, to pay ten pounds yearly to the poor of
the Company.

More, Relief for two poor scholars yearly.
he gave two hundred pounds, that ten pounds might be yearly given to either
of the Universities, toward the maintaining of two Scholars there, one in each.

He gave to Bethlem, one hundred pounds.

He gave to the other Hospitals, to prisons, and to the poor, one hundred and
threescore pounds.

Master Thomas Fisher, Tho. Fisher his love to learning, and respect of the
poor.
Skinner, gave forty five pounds yearly, out of which, twenty pounds was to be
yearly allowed, for a Free-schoole at Standon in the County of Hertford.

To buy paper, books, pens and ink, yearly for the Scholars, 5. poends.

To Christ's Hospital yearly, ten pounds.

For the redemption of Prisoners in either of the Compters and Ludgate, lying
there for three pounds debt, twenty pounds.

Master Florence Caldwell, Florence Caldwell his charity
Haberdasher, to diverse poor Parishes in London gave twenty pounds yearly.

Diverse wel-disposed Citizens of London, The love of diverse Citizens to
learning.
desirous (as yet) not to be named, being born in or near to Ashborn in the
Peake, in the Country of Derby, combining their loving benevolence together,
have builded there a fair School-house, with convenient lodgings for a Master
and Usher, and liberal maintenance yearly allowed thereto.

Master Robert Rogers, The Christian and charitable works of Robert Rogers
Leatherseller, and a Batchelour, like a most liberal and bountiful
benefactor, gave these gifts following:

To the Prisons in and about London, twelve pounds.

To the poor of two several Towns in the west Country, thirteen pounds
six shillings eight pence.

To the poor of the Town of Poole, where he was borne, ten pounds.

For the building of Almes-houses there, three hundred thirty three l.

For the relief of poor prisoners, A special note of a godly disposition.
such as were neither Atheists nor Papists, and might be delivered, each man at
the sum of twenty Nobles, an hundred and fifty pounds.

For the benefit of poor Preachers, Care of Religion.
allowing to each man ten pounds, an hundred pounds.

For the comfort of poor decayed Artificers, being charged with wife and
children, and of known honest reputation, one hundred pounds.

He gave to the Company of Merchant Adventurers, His care for poor decayed
brethren.
for the relief of poor decayed people, and toward the support of young
Freemen, four hundred pounds.

He gave to Christ's Hospital, to purchase Lands for the relief of the house,
five hundred pounds.

For the erection of certain Almes-houses in and about London, His provident
care for the poor in diverse places and Parishes.
and also for the maintenance of twelve poor people, six hundred pounds.

To the Parish wherein he dwelt, 10. l.

That two dozen of bread may every Sunday (through the year) for ever be given
to the poor, an hundred pounds.

He gave to Christs-Church Parish, fifteen pounds.

For relief of the poor in sundry Parishes without the walls, as Newgate,
Creplegate, Bishopsgate, and the Parish of S. George in Southwarke; unto every
one of them he gave twenty six pounds, thirteen shillings, fourepence.

Moreover, he gave to S. Georges Parish in Southwarke, Saint Sepulchers, S.
Olaves beyond the Bridge, Saint Giles without Creplegate, and S. Leonard in
Shorditch, to buy coals for the poor in each Paris, thirty pounds apeece.

He gave beside to either Parish of S. Buttolph, without Aldgate and
Bishopsgate, twenty pounds.

For the maintaining of four Scholars, His love and liberality to Learning.
two in Oxenford, and two in Cambridge, Students in Divinity, 400, l. Of which
the Company of Leather-sellers have great respect, and not only see it
diligently performed; but also have added their bounty thereto.

Master John Fuller, John Fuller his Almes-houses and charity.
Esquire, and one of the Judges in the Sheriffs Court in London, by his last
will and testament, bearing date the 10. of June, 1592. appointed his wife, her
heirs and assigns, to erect certain Almes-houses in the Parish of
Stoken-heath, for twelve poor aged single men, being aged fifty years or
upwards.

He appointed also the like Almes-houses to be builded in the Parish of S.
Leonard in Shorditch, For poor aged widows.
for twelve poor Widow women of the like age, and she to endow them with the
yearly maintenance of one hundred pounds; namely, to each fifty pounds by the
year for ever. And that money to be deducted out of his Lands in Lincolnshire,
assuring over the same to certain Feoffees in trust, by a Deed of Feoffement.

Moreover, Feoffees put in trust to see his will performed.
he gave his Messuages, Land, and Tenements, lying and being in the several
Parishes of S. Bennet, and S. Peter by Paul's wharfe, to Feoffees in trust,
yearly for ever, to disburse all the issues and profits of the said Lands and
Tenements, to the relieving and discharging of poor prisoners, in the Hole or
Two-penny wards, Care for the relief and discharge of poor prisoners.
in either of the Compters in London, by equal portions to each Compter.
Provided, that the debt do not exceed the sum of twenty shillings eight
pence, for every prisoner at any time to be set free.

Master Edward Elmer, Edward Elmer.
Grocer, gave to both the Compters in London, an hundred pounds, partly to be
laid out in Faggots for the Prisoners in cold weather; and for two load of
straw yearly to Bethlem.

Master William Nelson, William Nelson his love to learning.
Grocer, toward the maintaining of twelve poor Scholars in Oxenford and
Cambridge, gave four hundred pounds, to be paid yearly to each place twenty
pounds; and thirty three shillings four pence to each man. And to the Prisons,
33. l.

Master Rafe Newbery, Rafe Newbery.
Stationer, gave a stock of Books, and privileges of Printing, to be sold
for the benefit of Christ's Hospital and Bridewell.

Master Robert Row, Haberdasher, for the furtherance of poor Scholars in both
the Universities, Robert Row a savourer of learning.
gave 20. l. yearly, and the remainder of his goods that were not bequeathed.

Master Edmond Style, Edmond Style his charity.
Grocer, and Sheriff of London, gave to be distributed among the said
Hospitals in London, the sum of threescoure pounds.

John Stockley, John Stockley his charity and love to learning.
Merchant-taylor, gave to Christ's Hospital, and the other Hospitals beside,
toward the education of poor children in the fear of God, the sum of forty
pounds.

He gave besides to the Universities, forty pounds more, toward the
maintenance of four poor Scholars, to be disposed by the Master and Wardens
of the Merchant-taylors, with consent of his Executors and Overseers; desiring
that S. John Baptists College in Oxenford should have the prerogative of the
gift, if such be there to be found, as are capable of the same.

Gaius Newman, Gaius Newman his charity.
Goldsmith, gave to Christ's Hospital, five pounds: to Saint Bartholomews
Hospital, six pounds, thirteen shillings, four pence: and to the hospital
of Bridewell, three pounds.

John Newman, John Newman his charity.
Grocer, gave to Christ's Hospital; three pounds: to Saint Bartholomews
hospital, six pounds: and to Saint Thomas in Southwarke, and Bridewell
hospital, forty shillings to each house.

Richard May, Richard May his love-toke^ to London, and charity to the poor.
Merchant-taylor, gave (by his last will and testament) to the Chamber of
London, the sum of three hundred pounds, toward the new building of old,
ruined and decayed Blackwell Hall, in London: It being a Market place for the
selling of woollen clothes, on such usual market-dayes as are thereunto
assigned. Upon the receipt of this gift, the said Hall was taken down, a new
foundation laid; and within the space of ten months following, the work was
finished, with the full charge of 2500. pounds.

He gave besides to Christ's Hospital, the sum of ninety pounds.

Peter Chapman, Peter Chapman his charity, and love to learning.
Ironmonger, gave to the eight Prisons in and about London, the sum of
threescore pounds.

He gave also to two poor Scholars of Oxenford, studying Divinity, 5. l. to
each yearly.

To poor Scholars in Cambridge also, following the same study, he gave the
like sum of money.

To the poor of the Town of Cokeham in Barkeshire, where it appeared he was
borne, he gave the sum of five pounds yearly.

John Carre, John Carre his care for learning, and the poor.
Ironmonger, gave a gift of twenty pounds yearly, for the space of one and
twenty years. Five pounds thereof was to go to a Preacher at Standon in Essex.

Concerning the other 15. pounds, it was ordered to pass in this manner of
course.

The first year, it was for the benefit of certain poor Parishes in London,
thereto appointed.

The second year it was for the help of two poor Scholars, one in Oxenford,
and the other in Cambridge.

The third year it was appointed for relief of the poor in Standon. And so
(according to this course) to continue for time and place, during the space of
one and twenty years.

Henry Cowche, Henry Cowche his charity.
or Croutch, Merchant-Taylor, gave unto Christ's Hospital the benefit of his
house, known by the name of the Crown without Aldgate, having diverse years as
then to come in the Lease, and yielding yearly the sum of fifteen pounds.
Five pound is yearly appointed to be paid to the poor of the Parish, and
ten shillings to a Preacher. The rest remains to the Hospital, and after
the Leases expiration, it is judged to yield above an hundred marks yearly.

David Smith, David Smith his care of the poor.
Embroiderer, at his own charge did build certain Almeshouses, upon the hill
called S. Peter's hill, near unto old Fishstreet, allowing sufficient
maintenance to them.

He gave also five and twenty pounds yearly to the Company of Ironmongers,
appointing it to be distributed among the poor, in the Wards of Queen Hithe,
and Castle Baynard.

John Scot, John Scot his charity to the poor.
Salter, gave to his Company the sum of twenty pounds yearly, because they
should allow to the six poor Almes-men of the Company, each man twelve pence
weekly. The rest is to be divided among other poor, and thirty shillings to
be bestowed in Coals yearly for the poor.

William Stoder, William Stoder his charity.
Grocer, gave to Christ's hospital, for relief of the poor children there,
fifty pounds yearly.

William Mascall, William Mascall his charity.
Brewer, gave to the same hospital, and to the same intent, nine pounds
yearly.

Stephen Skidmore, Stephen Skidmore his love and charity to the poor.
Vintner, gave a gift of forty four pounds yearly, and ordered in this manner:

To seventeene poor Parishes in London, appointed by nomination, seventeene
pounds.

To the poor of the Parish of S. Stephen in Colemanstreet, twelve pence weekly
in bread.

To the poor of Cork in Ireland, (where it seems he was borne) being twelve
in number, to each poor body forty shillings.

Richard Jacob, Richard Jacob his charity to hospitals and prisons.
Vintner, gave a gift of sixteen pounds for ever, that it should be
distributed to Christ's Hospital, Saint Bartholomews, Bridewell, and Saint
Thomas in Southwark, forty shillings to each house yearly: and the other eight
pounds to be given to certain appointed poor Parishes in London.

He gave moreover (for so long time as two hundred years should last) the
sum of twenty eight pounds yearly. A time of honest and large continuance.
Of which portion of money, sixteen pounds was appointed for poor Prisoners,
that lay imprisoned in any of the eight Prisons in and about London yearly; to
each Prison forty shillings: as the Gatehouse, the Fleet, both the Compters of
the Poultry and Woodstreet, Ludgate, the Marshallsea, the Kings Bench, and the
White Lion.

What remained of the over plus of the money, was to be distributed to the
poor of diverse appointed Parishes.

John Russell, John Russell his charitable deeds.
Draper, gave the sum of fourscore pounds yearly for ever: out of which
these sums following should be deducted, and the rest remain to be employed
by the Company of Drapers.

He gave thirteen pounds nine shillings yearly to thirteen poor people.

For relief of the poor, His especial respect of the poor.
to be bestowed in bread yearly, two and fifty shillings.

To be bestowed in Coals yearly for the poor, three pounds.

For the maintaining of Preachers yearly at Paul's Cross, His love to religion
and learning.
ten pounds.

Toward the maintaining of two Scholars, one in Oxenford and the other in
Cambridge, the sum of thirteen pounds six shillings eight pence.

For maintaining a Scholemaster at Burton in Staffordshire, thirteen pounds,
six shillings, eight pence.

Item, Rob. Gale his love to learning, and respect of the poor.
To the Visher, five pounds.

And to the Visitors, thirty shillings.

Robert Gale, Vintner, out of his Lands lying in diverse places, gave the sum
of one hundred and forty pounds yearly, to be employed in manner following,
after the decease of Dorothy his wife.

To six of the poorer sort of Scholars in Corpus Christi College, in the
University of Oxenford, usually commorant and residing in the said College,
and yearly to be chosen on the Feast day of Saint Thomas the Apostle, by
George Lacocke, his heirs or assigns, under his or their hand and seal: To
each Scholar he gave three pounds, six shillings eight pence yearly for ever,
to be paid by the said Lacocke, his heirs or assigns for ever, out of his
Lands in Claipoole, in the County of Lincoln, and Brassington, in the County
of Derby.

To the poor Town of Chippenham, in Wiltshire, he gave twenty pounds.

To the Preacher there, 20. shillings.

To the Bailiffe and Burgesses, as a friendly remembrance, yearly twenty
shillings.

To Christ's Hospital in London, twenty pounds.

To the Company of Vintners, twenty pounds.

To the poor in Lincoln, 20. pounds.

To a Preacher there yearly, ten shillings.

To the Mayor and Chamberlain, twenty shillings.

To the Minister of S. Marks Church there, ten shillings.

John Quarles, John Quarles his charity.
Draper, gave yearly to be bestowed in bread, for relief of the poor, six
pounds.

William Dummer, William Dummer his charity.
Draper, gave to the poor the sum of 13. pounds, 18. shillings, 4. pence
yearly for ever.

William Parker, W. Parker his charity
a Brother also of the same Society, gave toward the maintaining of a Lecture
yearly at Saint Antlins, six pounds.

Owen Clun, another Brother also of the same Society, Owen Clun his charity
gave to the poor of the said Company yearly for ever, the sum of twenty
five pounds.

James Stoddard, James Stoddard his love to Learning.
Grocer, for the maintaining of two poor Scholars, the one in the College of
Brazen-nose in Oxenford, and the other to be of Queens College in Cambridge,
gave 10. l. yearly to be paid for ever, out of his Tenement called the Swan
with two necks, in the Parish of S. Laurence old Jury.

John Skeete, John Skeete his respect of the poor, and his love to learning.
Draper, for relief and maintenance of the poor, in the Hospitals in and
about London, gave the sum of three hundred pounds.

Moreover, he gave to four poor Scholars studying Divinity in the University
of Oxford, and which are not able to proceed in their degrees, five pounds to
each Scholar, to be paid at the next Act or Commencement.

The like liberality he gave to the other University of Cambridge, for so many
Scholars, five pound to each, and at the same time.

Roger Owfield, Roger Owfield, his love to learning.
Fishmonger, gave the sum of one hundred pounds toward the maintenance of
poor Scholars, that studied. Divinity in the Universities of Oxenford and
Cambridge, or else where. And his desire was, that some of them might be of the
Town of Ashborne, if any such could there be found fit for it. Otherwise he
appointed the money to be employed in Scholarships, in Sidney or Emanuel
College in Cambridge. Beside, he gave to Christ's Hospital one hundred pounds.

John Berriman, John Berryman his respect of the poor.
of Bishops Tawton, in the County of Devonshire, Clothier, and said to be a
free Draper of London, gave to Christ's Hospital, an hundred pounds: to Saint
Bartholomews, five pounds: to Saint Thomas, six pounds: to Bridewell, forty
shillings: and to Bethlem fifty pounds.

John Ireland, John Ireland his charity
Salter, gave to Christ's Hospital, four pounds: to Saint Bartholomews, four
pounds: to Saint Thomas and Bridewell, twenty shillings to each house.

Thomas Thorney, Thomas Thorney his charity.
Barber Surgeon, gave to Christ's Hospital, five pounds, and to Bridewell,
five pounds.

Francis Evington, Francis Evington his charity and love to learning.
Merchant-Taylor, gave to Christ's Hospital, ten pounds, and to Saint
Bartholomews Hospital, ten pounds.

He gave also to poor Scholars in both the Universities, six pounds to each
Scholar.

Henry Butler, Draper, gave to Saint Thomas Hospital, Henry Butler his charity.
ten pounds: to Christ's Hospital, five pounds: and to S. Bartholomews and
Bridewell, five pounds to each house.

Peter Hall, Peter Hall his charity
Draper, gave to Christ's Hospital, ten pounds: to Saint Bartholomews, three
pounds: and the like to Saint Thomas.

Roger Ienkins, Roger Ienkins his love to Learning.
Barber Surgeon, to the poor Scholars in Christ's Hospital, gave five
pounds, to buy them Books at the discretion of the Treasurer.

George Chamberlain, George Cha^berlaine his charity
Ironmonger, gave to Christ's Hospital, ten pounds; to Saint Thomas, five
pounds: to Saint Bartholomews, five pounds: and to Bridewell, ten pounds.

Thomas Church, Tho. Church his charity
Draper, gave to Christ's Hospital, ten pounds: to Bridewell, ten pounds:
to Saint Bartholomews five pounds; and to Saint Thomas, five pounds.

Andrew Banning Grocer, gave for ever, Andrew Banning his love to learning.
120. pounds to the Company of Grocers, therewith to purchase lands of five
pounds value yearly, for the relief of some poor Scholar in the University
of Cambridge.

Randall Manning, Randall Manning His love to Learning.
Skinner, gave toward the relief of four poor Scholars yearly, forty
shillings to each Scholar, being of Christ's and Emanuel Colleges in Cambridge,
and this gift to continue the space of thirty years. Katharine, wife to the
said Randall Manning, gave also the sum of one hundred pounds, that her
husbands will might the more effectually be kept and performed.

Hugh Cappe, Hugh Cappe his liberal charity.
Plaisterer, gave for relief of the poor children in Christ's Hospital, the
sum of 100. pounds. He gave also to the two Hospitals of Saint Bartholomews
and S. Thomas in Southwarke, ten pounds to each house.

Jews Randall, Jews Randall his charity.
Pewterer, gave unto Christ's Hospital, fifty pounds: and to S. Thomas
Hospital, twenty shillings.

Henry van Hilton, A strangers charity.
Merchant Stranger, and a free Denison of London, gave unto Christ's Hospital,
thirty pounds.

Humfrey Fox, Hufrey Fox his charity.
Draper, gave to the poor childrens succor in Christ's Hospital, the sum of
fifty pounds.

William Parker, William Parker his bountiful charity.
Merchant-taylor, gave to Christ's Hospital, to purchase lands for maintenance
of the poor children, five hundred pounds.

He gave also to the Treasurer of Bridewell, to set forty Boys on work, which
should be taken up begging in the streets, and there bound Apprentices for 7.
years, to learn several Trades; for each boy should five pound be paid to
the Treasurer, until the sum of two hundred pound should fully be run out.

Of this man expect more when I come to speak of the new building of
Aldersgate.

George Palin, George Palin his bou^tifull charity.
Merchant, and free of the Girdlers Society, by his last Will and Testament,
Those Almeshouses are builded near to Creplaegate.
to good and charitable uses gave these gifts following:

First, he gave nine hundred pounds toward the erection or building of
certain Almes-houses, in or about the City of London, wherein six poor
people should have the yearly allowance of six pounds, thirteen shillings and
four pence to each person.

More, he gave toward the having a sweet Chime in Bow Church in London, one
hundred pounds.

He gave to Saint John Baptist, His care and love to Learning.
and Brazen-nose Colleges in Oxenford, toward the maintaining of four
Scholars there yearly, three hundred pounds, to each College, and to each
Scholar, four pounds yearly.

To the six several Prisons in and about London, His care for prisoners, and
the poor.
he gave threescore pounds.

He gave unto Christ's Hospital to purchase Lands after the rate of twenty
pounds yearly, for benefit of the poor children there, the sum of three
hundred pounds.

Moreover, His zeal to learning.
in further expression of his zeal and love to learning, and for the like uses
as we have before declared, he gave to Trinity and Saint John's College in
Cambridge, the sum of six hundred pounds.

To the Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, he gave fifty pounds.

Toward the bearing of such Scholars charges, The fruits of a Christian faith
as should come (from time to time) to preach at Paul's Cross, he gave the
sum of 200. pounds.

He gave 132. pounds to be distributed to certain Parishes in London, to some
ten pounds, to others twenty pounds.

He gave to the Town of Wrenbury in Cheshire, His care of poor people in the
country
200. l. to purchase Lands, after the rate of twenty marks by the year, for
relief of the poor there.

He gave also for behoof of the Church there, the sum of thirty pounds.

He gave for forty poor Gowns, forty pounds.

Laurence Camp, Laurence Camp his love to learning.
Draper, gave forty pounds toward the maintenance of poor Scholars in
Cambridge, at the discretion of Robert Meakin, Preacher of S. John's Church in
Walbrooke.

Robert Dove, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, The worthy charitable
gifts of Master Robert Dove
gave (in his life time, and long before he dyed) to the Master, Wardens, and
Assistants of that worshipful Company, the sum of two thousand, nine
hundred, fifty eight l.. ten shillings, to be yearly employed in these good
uses following:

First, This charity exte^deth only to poor brethren of the same company.
for the mantaining of thirteen poor Almes-men, in gowns of good cloth, well
lined, with a silver Dove upon each man's left sleeve. And six other poor men,
termed Reversioners, to succeed in the rooms of the deceased Gowne-men, they
wearing Cloakes of good cloth in the mean time, with a silver Dove also upon
each man's left arm: the yearly allowance to perform this is one hundred and
seven pounds.

He gave to the Schoolmaster eight pounds.

He gave also to the poor of Saint Buttolphs without Aldgate, in which Parish
he dwelt and dyed, twenty pounds, nine shillings.

To Saint John Baptists College in Oxenford he gave 100. pounds. His love to
learning.


To the prisoners in the two Counters of London, and to the Prisons of Ludgate
and Newgate, he gave twenty pounds.

He gave to Christ's Hospital in London, to purchase Lands, after the rate of
ten pounds yearly, and for one to instruct the boys in singing, two hundred
and forty pounds.

He gave to the Parish of S. Sepulchers the sum of fifty pounds, A notable
and most Christian care for poor condemned persons, and their going to their
death.
that after the several Sessions in London, when the Prisoners remain in the
Jail, as condemned men to death, expecting execution on the morrow following,
the Clerk of the Church should come in the night time, and likewise early in
the morning, to the window of the prison where they lie, and there ringing
certain toules with a hand-bell, appointed for the purpose, he does afterward
(in most Christian manner) put them in mind of their present condition, and
ensuing execution, desiring them to be prepared therefore as they ought to be.
When they are in the Carts, and brought before the wall of the Church, there
he stands ready with the same Bell, and after certain toules, rehearses an
appointed Prayer, desiring all the people there present to pray for them. The
Beadle also of Merchant-taylors Hall has an honest allowed stipend, to see
that this be duly done.

What else remains concerning this man, expect when I come to speak of the
Hall.

Randulph Woolley, Randulph Wolley his love to learning, and care for the poor.
Merchant-Taylor, gave to the Governors of Christ's Hospital, therewith to pay
yearly for ever, five pounds, to the Reader of Oar Chapel, in the Parish of
Mucklestone, in the County of Stafford, by fifty shillings at each half year.
For which he is to teach freely the children of the inhabitants of Aston, in
the forenamed Parish of Mucklestone.

He gave more to the said Hospital one hundred pounds, for the allowing of
fifty shillings yearly every Easter day, that the poor children may then eat
roast meat.

He gave moreover to the said Governors one hundred pounds, therewith to pay
yearly unto the poor of the Parish of Muckle stone five pounds.

He gave also to Saint Bartholomews Hospital, three pounds.

Henry Walcot, Henry Walcot, his charity.
Grocer, gave to Saint Bartholomews Hospital twenty pounds: to Christ's
Hospital, five pounds: to S. Thomas in Southwarke, five pounds: to Bridewell,
three pounds six shillings, eight pence: and to Bethlem, three pounds, six
shilling eight pence.

Henry Woolaston, Henry VVoolaston his charity.
Draper, gave to S. Thomas Hospital, forty pounds: and to the four Beadles,
Coats of good new cloth.

Also he gave to every Governor, going to his burial, and staying there the
Sermon time, half a crown to each man, to dine together afterward.

John Vernon, John Verno^ his charity.
Merchant-Taylor, gave to Christ's Hospital, forty pounds: to S. Bartholomews
Hospital, fifty pounds: to Bridewell and S. Thomas, five pounds to each house.

Edward Harvist, Edward Harvist his charity.
Brewer, gave unto Christ's Hospital, the sum of one hundred pounds: and
fifty pounds, to be equally divided between the two Hospitals of S.
Bartholomews and S. Thomas in Southwarke.

John Brown, John Brown his charity.
Wool-winder, and Magdalen his wife, gave certain lands lying in Barking in
Essex, amounting then to 5. l. 6. s. 8. d. yearly. And this gift they gave
unto Christ's Hospital for ever.

John Porter, John Porter his charity.
of Porters Key, Fishmonger, gave unto Christ's Hospital, twenty pound.

Lewis Randall, Lewis Randall his charity.
Pewterer, but a Brewer by his profession, of his own free cost and charge,
paved (with fair free Stone) the East I Will of Christ's Hospital Cloister, and
renewed all the Armories of former liberal Benefactors to that house, whereof
himself was one of the Governors.

He gave beside 50. pound to the Treasurer, His love to the children.
that the poor children there maintained, might eat roste-meat, at dinner, on
every Saint Mathias day, if it fall out of Lent. But if it fall in Lent, then
they are to eat good and well made Furmenty, both at dinner and supper.

John Whithall, John VVhithall his charity.
Skinner, gave to the Childrens relief in Christ's Hospital, 40. pound.

William Jones, William Jones his bountiful charity.
Merchant, and free of the worshipful Company of Haberdashers, in his life
time did many charitable deeds, and by his Will and Testament ordained many
more, putting his own Society in trust to see them performed, as shall briefly
be declared.

First, His Christian care for Religion in his country.
many years before he dyed, he allowed 50. pound yearly to a Preacher at
Monmouth, there to instruct the people in Gods true Religion. Afterward he
grew to settle a certain stipend there, amounting to the sum of 100. Marks
yearly, to maintain a good Preacher there. Providing also, that a convenient
house should be built for him, with all necessary matters belonging to it, that
he might (with the more comfort) dwell there among them. His care for the
maintenance of Learning.


Also, for the instruction of youth in Learning and Religion, he ordained to
have a fair Free-Schoole there built at his own charge, and a fair house
also to be erected for the chief Master. Allowing him yearly (for ever) 60.
pound, and 30. pound also yearly to the Visher.

Beside, His providence for the poor and needy people in Monmouth.
being Christianly mindful of the poor and needy people in those parts, he
took order for the building of an Hospital in the same Town, ordaining it
for twenty poor people: giving to every one of them a good Gown yearly, and
2. shillings 6. pence apeece weekly. And because himself (being far absent)
could be no Surveyor of these works, he committed the care thereof to the
loving Brethren of his Company, paying to them (in his life time) the sum of
8000. pound. And left them by his will, 1000. pound more, for the full
finishing of so good a work.

More, Still his Piety and Christian Charity walk hand in hand together.
he appointed to the said Company of Haberdashers, the sum of 5000. pound by
them to be disbursed, for the maintenance of a good Preacher at Newland in
Gloucester shire, and of certain poor people in the same Parish.

More, His care for poor decayed brethren of the Company.
He gave to the same Society, one thousand four hundred and forty pounds, to
allow unto nine poor men, being free Brethren of the same Company, eight
pounds apeece yearly for ever.

Moreover, His maintaining of a Preacher in the City of London for ever.
he left (by his will) 600. pound in money, and a fair house in the City of
London, to the disposition of the Company, to bestow the yearly profits, for
the yearly maintenance of a godly Preacher in this City for ever, which
Preacher from time to time is to benominated by the Company. As already they
have thereto appointed Master John Downham, Bachelor in Divinity, and a very
learned Preacher.

More, His love to poor Preachers.
he gave the sum of 1000. pound to be faithfully distributed among poor
Preachers here in England.

To be distributed among the several Hospitals in London, His charity to
Hospitals and poor people beyond the Seas.
he gave the sum of 500. pound.

To the poor in Stoad he gave 200. pound.

To the poor of Hamborough, he gave 50. pound.

Beside, to such poor English men as lived in Hamborough, he gave 50 pound.

He gave likewise a good sum of money (by way of gratitude and thankfulness)
to his own Company, His love to his own Company
as a token of his love, for their care and paines-taking, in the managing of
so serious a business.

The Hospital at Monmouth was built (by the Company) in his life time, What
care and diligence the worthy Company have taken in the execution of his will,
according to the times and several appointed places.
and the poor people placed in it.

Since his death, the house for the Preacher there, the Free-schoole, and the
house for the Schoolmaster, all these are (by this time) near hand finished.

An house also for the Preacher at Newland, and the Hospital for ten poor
people there, is already (by them) begun, and in very good forwardness.

His intended care for a Preacher in London, is already performed, and the same
continued in a Lecture, at S. Bartholomews Church, near to the Exchange, every
Thursday in the afternoon.

Whatsoever else remains, concerning the trust reposed in them, they will
(with all speed) both truly and faithfully effect.

Here I could enter into a further relation, Diverse men yet living, have been
and still are most bountiful benefactors to the poor, and many other
religious uses
concerning some men yet living, whose liberal bounty and most Christian
charity, does deserve no mean commendation, and is very little inferior to
many of them already named.

But because they account it honor enough to them, that diverse poor people
(in private) should rather sufficiently find it, than the world (in public)
know it, I am content to spare their nomination, as knowing very well, that
they who have been so liberal in their life time, have (no doubt) set down
extraordinary determinations, which neither death, nor any deceiving Executors,
can or shall frustrate and disappoint.

Let me commend that truly-religious man, The testimony of a good and godly
conscience indeed.
who perceiving the heavy want of diverse honest house-holders, laboriously
end^vouring (night and day) to maintain their charge; but that the worlds
extremity frowned too fiercely upon them. I know the man, and oftentimes in
tears has he said to me; Here is true poverty indeed, too modestly silent in
speaking their mighty need and misery, and therefore justly deserving pity.
To two, three, four, and many times more of these, has he been, and is, a
liberal Benefactor (weekly) with his own hands: yet not in his own name, or
as coming from himself, (he being so meanly disguised at such times of his
coming to them, and so sudden also in departing from them, that they were not
able to distinguish him;) but alleging, that the relief was sent them from
some, who understood their need (almost) as well as themselves, and willed
them to be thankful only to God for it.

Oh that London had a Park near adjoining to it, stored with many such choice
Dear; as doubtless it has, though not easily known. For some build
Almes-houses, Free-Schooles, Cawseyes and Bridges in very needful places: yea,
and repair old ruined Churches, releeving Hospitals also in very bountiful
manner, and are weekly Benefactors to Prisons: yet performed by such agents
faithfully, that the true bestowers are not noted, though vehemently suspected;
and the glory they shun here, will (for ever) shine on them elsewhere. But
God stir up the minds of many more, to imitate them in this tonguelesse
liberality.

Master William Masham, William Masham his love to Learning.
Grocer, and Alderman of London, gave (beside his liberal charity to the
Hospital) toward the maintenance of poor Scholars, at both the Universities,
twenty pounds.

Master Henry Prannel, Henry Prannel his charity.
Vintner, and Alderman of London, gave among the said Hospitals the sum of
50. pounds yearly.

Master William Elkin, William Elkin his bountiful charity.
Mercer, and Alderman of London, in the year 1593. gave to Christ's Hospital
in London, and for certain charitable uses, the sum of 800. pounds.

He gave also to the Prisons in and about London, threescore pounds.

Beside, he gave to Emanuel College in Cambridge, five pounds, and to both the
Universities together, threescore pounds.

Master Richard Gurney, Richard Gurney his charity.
Slater and Alderman of London, gave to be distributed among the several
Hospitals in and about London, threescore pound. And to the Universities
yearly five pound.

Master Hugh Offley, Hugh Offley his love to learning and care for the poor.
Leather seller and Alderman of London, gave for the maintaining of Scholars in
both the Universities, 77. pound.

He gave to Christ's Hospital in London, the like sum of 77. pound.

Beside, he gave to the prisoners in and about London, 20. pound, and 35.
shillings yearly to continue for certain years.

Master Robert Brook, Robert Brook his charity.
Grocer and Alderman of London, gave to be distributed among the Hospitals in
London, the sum of six and thirty pound.

Master Benedict Barnham, Benedict Barnham, his charity.
Draper and Alderman of London, gave to be distributed among the several
Prisons in London, fifty pounds.

Master Robert Tailor, Robert Tailor his charity.
Haberdasher and Alderman of London, gave in distribution to the Hospitals in
London, the sum of one hundred pound.

Master Paul Banning, Paul Banning his charity.
Grocer, and sometime an Alderman of London, gave unto Christ's Hospital the
sum of one hundred pounds.

Sir Richard Goddard, Sir Richard Goddard.
Draper and Alderman of London, gave to the Hospital of Bridewell, two hundred
pound.

Master William Walthall, William VValthall his charitable benevolence
Mercer and Alderman of London, gave to the Hospitals of London, two hundred
pounds.

More, he gave to poor Scholars in Cambridge, nine pound yearly.

To the Prisons beside, in and about London, he gave one hundred thirty five
pounds.

Beside his former gifts, he gave ten pound yearly to Christ's Hospital.

To his Company of the Mercers he gave five hundred pounds to be lent to young
men that begin the world. Care for young beginners.


Sir Robert Hampson, Sir Robert Hampson, his charity.
Merchant-Taylor, and Alderman of London, gave to the charitable relief of
poor prisoners, one hundred and fifty pounds in ready money, and the reversion
of two Tenements beside.

Sir Henry Anderson, Henry Anderson, his love to learning.
Grocer and Alderman of London, and Richard Anderson his son, gave to the
College of Brazen-nose in Oxenford, for the relief of poor Scholars there,
one hundred and thirteen pounds.

Sir William Glover William Glover his charity.
Dyer and Alderman of London, gave also to the Hospitals, in and about London,
the sum of two hundred pounds,

Sir William Rumney, William, Rumney his charity.
Haberdasher, and Alderman of London, gave also to be distributed among the
same Hospitals, the sum of threescore and five pounds.

Sir Roger Jones, Roger Jones his charity.
Dyer and Alderman of London, gave likewise to the said Hospitals, two and
twenty pounds.

Master Richard Faringdon, Richard Faringdon his charity.
Clothworker, and Alderman of London, gave also to be distributed among the
same Hospitals, the sum of threescore and six pound thirteen shillings four
pence.

Nicholas Style, Nicholas Style, his charity, and care for poor Seamen.
Grocer, and Alderman of London, gave unto Christ's Hospital five pound, to St.
Bartholomews, 10. pound, and to St, Thomas Hospital three pound.

Moreover, he gave to poor maimed Seafaring soldiers, in S. Bartholomews
Hospital ten pound, if no house were erected in or about London, for the
harbor and relief of such maimed Souldidiers and Saylors.

Master Ieffrey Elwes, Ieffrey Edwes his charity.
Merchant-Taylor, and Alderman of London, gave unto Christ's Hospital the sum
of one hundred pounds. And to the Hospital of St. Bartholomew, and St. Thomas
in Southwarke ten pounds to each house.

Master Cuthbert Martin, Cuthbert Martin his charity.
Skinner, and Alderman of London, gave unto Christ's Hospital, the sum of
twenty pounds.

Sir James Deane, James Dean his charity.
Draper, gave to be distributed among the several Hospitals in and about
London, the sum of one hundred and thirty pounds. And to the Prisoners
threescore and ten pounds.

Master George Smithes, George Smithes his charity.
Goldsmith, and Alderman of London, gave to Christ's Hospital, ten pounds. And
to Bridewell ten pounds.

Sir William Bowyer, William Bowyer, his charity.
Grocer, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1543. gave to the
several Prisons in and about London, the sum of two hundred pounds.

Sir John Lion, Grocer, Alderman, and Lord Mayor of Land, Sir John Lion his
charity.
in the year 1554. gave to Christ's Hospital. St. Bartholomews, S. Thomas in
Southwark, and Bridewell, one hundred pounds.

Sir Richard Champion, Sir Richard Champion his charity for relief of the
poor.
Drapet, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, in the year, 1565. gave the sum
of nineteen pound and fourteen shillings yearly, to a Christian and
charitable work, formerly begun by Sir John Milbourne, Draper, Alderman and
Lord Mayor of London likewise, and with the like yearly allowance of nineteen
pounds and fourteen shillings toward the maintenance of 13. poor
Almes-houses at Tower Hill, and near to the dwelling of the Lord Lumley.

Sir Christopher Draper, Sir Christopher Draper his charity.
Ironmonger, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1566. gave to the
Prisons in and about London, and Bethlem withal, threescore and eight pounds.

Sir Lionel Ducket, Sir Lionel Ducket his charity.
Mercer, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1572. gave to be
distributed among the Hospitals in London, the sum of one hundred pounds.

Sir Thomas Ramsey, Sir Thomas Ramsey his charity.
Grocer, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1577. gave also in
distribution among the said Hospitals threescore pounds.

Sir Wolstane Dixie, Sir VVolstane Dixie his charitable benevolence
Skinner, Mayor, 1586. gave as follows.

He founded a Free-schoole at Bosworth and endowed it with twenty pound yearly.

To Christ's Hospital in London he gave yearly for ever two and forty pounds.

For a Lecture in St. Michaels Bassings Hall, yearly, ten pounds.

To the poor of Newgate, twenty pounds. His bounty to Prisons in diverse places.


To the two Compters, and to Ludgate and Bethlem, to each of them ten pounds.

To the four Prisons in Southwarke, twenty pounds, thirteen shillings, and
four pence.

To the poor of Bassings Hall, ten pounds.

To Emanuel College in Cambridge, Out of his love to learning.
to buy lands for the maintenance or two Fellows, and two Scholars, six
hundred pounds.

To the building of the College, fifty pounds.

To be lent unto poor Merchants, To poor Merchants.
five hundred pounds.

To the Hospitals of Saint Bartholomew, To Hospitals and poor maids marriages,
etc.
and Saint Thomas, fifty pounds to each.

To the the poor of Bridewell, twenty pounds.

To poor Maids marriages, one hundred pounds.

To poor Strangers of the Dutch and French Church, fifty pounds.

Toward the building of the Pesthouse, To the Pesthouse.
two hundred pounds.

Sir John Heart, Sir John Heart his care of Learning, and respect of the poor.
Grocer, Alderman and Lord Mayor London, in the year 1589. erected and founded
a Free-schoole in Yorkshire, with the allowance of thirty pound yearly to a
Master and an Usher.

Sir John Allot, Sir John Allot his charity.
Fishmonger, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, gave likewise in distribution
among the said Hospitals, threescore and six pound thirteen shillings.

Sir William Web, Sir William VVebbe his charity.
Salter, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1591. gave likewise to
be distributed among the said Hospitals, fourscore pound.

Sir Stephen Slanie, Sir Stephen Slanie, his charity.
Skinner, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1595. beside his
bountiful charity to the several Hospitals, gave to be bestowed among the
several Prisons, the sum of one hundred pounds.

Master Thomas Skinner, Thomas Skinner his charity.
Clothworker, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1596. gave to the
several Hospitals in and about London one hundred and twenty pound to be
equally divided among them.

Sir Robert Lee, Sir Robert Lee his charity.
Merchant-Taylor, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, 1602. gave also in
distribution among the said Hospitals, two and forty pound.

Sir John Wattes, Sir John Watts, his charity.
Clothworker, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1606. gave unto
Christ's Hospital the sum of ten pound, and to Saint Thomas hospital in
Southwarke, twenty pounds.

Sir Henry Row, Sir Henry Row his charity.
Mercer, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, 1607. gave likewise to be
distributed among the same hospitals, the sum of one hundred pounds.

Sir Humfrey Weld, Sir Humfrey VVeld his charity.
Grocer, and Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1608. gave to be distributed
among the several hospitals, the sum of one hundred pounds.

Sir Thomas Cambell, Sir Thomas Cambell his charity.
Ironmonger, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1609. gave to
Christ's Hospital the sum of twenty pounds. And to the two Hospitals of S.
Bartholomews, and Saint Thomas, five pound to each house.

Sir James Pemberton, Sir James Pemberton his love to learning and to the poor.
Goldsmith, and lately Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1611. in his life
time founded a Free-schoole at Heskin in the Parish of Ekklesden, in
Lamcashire, endowing it with fifty pounds yearly.

He gave also to Christ's Hospital, five hundred pounds.

He gave to his Company of Goldsmiths, two hundred pounds.

To diverse Prisons he gave one hundred pounds.

And to sundry poor Parishes he gave charitably, leaving it to his Executors
discretion.

Sir John Swinnerton, Sir John Swinnerton his charity.
Merchant-Taylor, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1612. gave
unto Christ's Hospital the sum of one hundred pound. And to the other three
hospitals, of Saint Bartholomews, Saint Thomas, and Bridewell, ten pound to
each house.

Sir Henry Row, Sir Henry Row his love to learning.
Mercer, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, beside his former bounty to the
hospitals, gave to the two Universities, Oxenford and Cambridge, forty pound to
poor scholars that study Divinity: and when they shall proceed Masters of
Arts, to each scholar forty shillings.

Sir Thomas Hunt, Sir Thomas Hunt his charity.
Skinner, gave to be divided among the poor of Christ Church, Saint
Bartholomews, Saint Thomas in Southwarke, and Bridewell, one hundred pounds.

Sir William Rumney, William Rumney his love to learning.
Haberdasher, and Alderman of London, beside his former liberality to the
hospitals, gave to 40. poor scholars in Cambridge, the sum of twenty pounds.

Sir William Stone, William Stone his charity.
Clothworker, gave to the several Prisons in London, the sum of fifty pounds.

Master Ieffrey Elwes, Ieffrey Elwes his love to learning.
Merchant-Taylor, and Alderman of London, over and beside his bountiful
charity to the Hospitals in London, gave to the Chancellor, Master and scholars
of the University of Oxenford, to the use of the body and corporation of the
said University, and to Saint John Baptist College, the sum of three hundred
pounds.

Thus much for famous Citizens have I noted, concerning their charitable
actions, for the most part done by them in their life time. The residue left in
trust to their Executors, I have known some of them hardly (or never)
performed. Wherefore I wish men to make their own hands their Executors, and
their eyes their Overseers, not forgetting the old Proverb, Women be
forgetful,
Children be unkind,
Executors be covetous,
and take what they find.
If any body ask where
the deads goods became,
They answer;
So God me help and holydome,
he dyed a poor man.


And now of some women, Citizens wives, deserving memory, for example to
posterity, shall be noted.

Dame Agnes Foster widow, Agnes Foster.
sometime wife to Sir Stephen Foster, Fishmonger, Mayor, 1455. having enlarged
the Prison of Ludgate, in 1463. she procured in a common Council of this
City, certain Articles to be established for the ease, comfort and relief of
poor Prisoners there, as in the Chapter of Gates I have set down.

Avice Gibson, Avice Gibson founded a Chapel, a Free-schoole, and Alms
houses at Radcliffe.
wife unto Nicholas Gibson, Grocer, one of the Sheriffs, 1539. by license of
her husband, founded a Free-schoole at Radcliffe near unto London, appointing
to the same for the instruction of threescore poor men's children, a
Schoolmasters and Usher with fifty pound. She also builded Almes-houses for
fourteen poor and aged persons, each of them to receive quarterly six
shillings eight pence the piece for ever. The government of which Free-schoole
and Almes-houses, she left in confidence to the Coopers in London.

This virtuous Gentlewoman, was afterward joined in marriage with Sir Anthony
Knevet, Cursed is he that removes his neighbors mark, have I read.
Knight, and so called the Lady Knevet. A fair painted Table of her picture
was placed in the Chapel, which she had built there, but of late removed
thence, by the like reason, as the Grocers Arms (fixed on the outer wall of
the Schoole-house, are pulled down, and the Coopers set in place.

Margaret Danne, Margaret Danne.
Widow to William Danne, Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffs of London, 1570.
gave by her testament to the Ironmongers two thousand pounds, to be lent to
young men of that Company, paying after the rate of 5. pounds the year for
every hundred, which hundred pounds so arising yearly was to be employed on
charitable actions, as she then appointed; but not performed in more than
thirty years after.

The Lady Baineham, sometime an Aldermans Widow of this City, The Lady
Baineham her charity.
gave to the poor of the Drapers Company, ten pounds yearly for ever.

The Lady Forman gave to be distributed among the several hospitals forty
pounds. The Lady Forman her charity.


The Lady Barn, The Lady Barn her charity.
Wife to Sir George Barn, Haberdasher, and Lord Mayor of London, gave also to
the said hospitals, fourscore pounds.

The Lady Anne Saunders, The Lady Saunders her charity.
sometime also an Aldermans wife of London, gave unto the relief of the said
Hospitals, the sum of one hundred and twenty pound.

The Lady Anne Hunt, The Lady Hunt her charity.
Wife to Sir Thomas Hunt, Skinner, gave in like manner for relief of the
several Hospitals in London, the sum of one hundred and fourscore pounds.

The Lady Frances Ierningham, The Lady Ierningham her charity.
Widow, out of her Christian and charitable disposition to the said Hospitals,
gave liberally the sum of three hundred and forty pounds.

The Lady Frances, The Countess of Sussex her charity.
sometime Countess of Sussex, but a great friend and well-willer to the City
of London, and known to be a very godly and religious Lady, gave to the said
Hospitals the sum of one hundred pounds.

The Lady Katharine Constable, The Lady Constable her charity.
being said to be bred and brought up in this Honorable City, declared her
love thereto at her death, and gave unto the Hospitals the sum of two hundred
pounds.

The Lady Web, sometime Wife to Sir William Web, The Lady Web her charity.
Ironmonger, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, gave to be distributed among
the several Hospitals, the sum of three hundred pounds.

The Lady Gresham, wife sometime to Sir Thomas Gresham, The Lady Gresham her
charity,
Mercer, and Agent beyond the Seas to Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, gave
also to the Hospitals, fourscore and ten pounds.

The Lady Mary Ramsey, The Christian and bountiful charity of the Lady Ramsey.
wife to Sir Thomas Ramsey, Grocer, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, about
the year one thousand, five hundred, seventy seven, being seized of Lands in
Fee-simple of her own inheritance, amounting to the yearly value of two
hundred forty three pounds; by consent of her said husband, gave the same to
Christ's Hospital in London, toward the relief of the poor children there,
and other charitable uses, as shall be declared.

To the Master and Usher of the School belonging to Christs-Church, she gave
yearly twenty pounds.

To the Schoolmaster of Hawsted, Her love to learning.
by the year for ever, she gave twenty pounds.

To ten poor Widows, beside apparel and houses, yearly twenty pounds.

To two poor people, Her care of the poor.
a man and a woman by her appointed, during their lives she gave unto each of
them yearly, two pounds thirteen shillings and four pence.

To two Fellows of Peter-house, in the University of Cambridge, and toward
the relief of four Scholars yearly forty pounds.

To St. Bartholemews Hospital, ten pounds.

To Newgate, Ludgate, and both the Compters, Her charity to the poor prisoners.
each of them, ten pounds.

After the expiration of certain Leases, there is to come unto Christ's
Hospital yearly the sum of one hundred and twenty pounds.

To three several Parishes in London, To parishes in London.
namely, Saint Andrews Undershaft, Saint Peter's the poor, and Saint Mary
Wolnoth in Lumbardstreet, ten pounds to each.

Toward the maintenance of six poor Scholars in Cambridge, twenty pounds.

Toward the relief of ten poor maimed Soldiers, Care for poor maimed
Soldiers.
beside cassoks, caps, hose and shoes yearly, the sum of twenty pounds.

For two Sermons yearly, forty shillings.

She gave to the poor of Christschurch Parish yearly for ever, the sum of
fifty shillings.

To the poor of the Company of Drapers in London, she gave ten pounds yearly.

All these gifts already rehearsed, are to continue for every yearly.

Moreover, to each of these five Companies, Her care for poor beginners in the
world.
of Grocers, Drapers, Goldsmiths, Haberdashers, and Merchant-Tailors, she gave
the sum of one thousand two hundred pounds, to be lent to young Tradesmen
for four years.

She gave to the Mayor and Communalty of Bristow, a thousand pounds, to be
employed toward the new hospital there, and other charitable uses, by the
consent of her Executors.

To certain Parishes in the Country, Her charity to diverse Parishes in the
country.
as Berden, Newport, Clavering, Langley, Rickling, Quenden, Stocking, Pelham,
and Walden, she gave the sum of one hundred pounds, to buy forty Gowns of
Freeze for women, and sixty Coats for men, the remainder and overplus to go to
the poor.

She gave to poor maids marriages, forty pounds.

Moreover, she gave the sum of five hundred pounds, toward the releasing of
such prisoners, as lie for the debt of forty shillings, in any of the prisons
in London and Southwarke.

She gave beside, the sum of three thousand pounds, to other good and godly
uses.

The Lady Elizabeth Billingsley, The Lady Billingsley her love to learning.
wife to Sir Henry Billingsley, Haberdasher, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London,
gave to her said husband, the sum of 4000. pounds, therewith to purchase
lands in convenient time, and willed, that the residue of the profits of the
said lands, should be bestowed upon a Scholarship and a Fellowship, in the
University of Cambridge, in Saint John's College, or any other College there
at his discretion.

The Lady Anne Jones, sometime wife to Sir Roger Jones, The Lady Jones her love
to learning.
Dier, and Alderman of London, gave toward the encouragement of poor Scholars
in the Universities, 29. pounds, at the discretion of her Executors.

The Lady Spencer, The Lady Spencer her charity.
sometime wife to Sir John Spencer, Clothworker, Alderman and Lord Mayor of
London, gave to be distributed among the Hospitals, the sum of threescore and
ten pounds.

The Lady Anne Glover, The Lady Glover her charity.
sometime wife to Sir William Glover, Dier, Alderman of London, gave to relief
of the Hospitals, the sum of fourscore pounds.

The Lady Barbara Stone, The Lady Stone her charity.
sometime wife to Sir William Stone, Clothworker, gave to the relief of
Christ's Hospital, one hundred pounds.

Mistress Elizabeth Walter, Mistress Walter her love to learning.
sometime wife to Richard Walter, Girdler, gave 2. Fellowships to Emanuel
College in Cambridge.

More, for the relief of poor Preachers, such as want livings, she gave the
sum of three hundred pounds.

Mistress Alice Barnham, Mistress Barnham her love to learning.
mother to M. Benedict Barnham, Draper and Alderman of London, gave to both
Universities, 20. pound.

Mistress Elizabeth Scot, Mistress Scot, her love to learning.
sometime wife to John Scot, Salter, gave to the relief of poor Scholars in
the Universities, forty pounds.

Mistress Katharine Garway gave also to the same benefit of poor Scholars,
Mistress Garway her love to learning.
twenty pounds.

Mistress Cicely Hawes, Mistress Hawes her love to learning.
gave to poor Scholars in the Universities, twenty pounds.

Mistress Alice Hill, Mistress Hill her charity.
Widow, gave for the relief of poor prisoners, in the several Prisons in
and about London, one hundred pounds.

Mistress Elizabeth Packingten, Mistress Packingten her charity.
Widow, gave to Christ's Hospital, Mistress Packington her charity.
threescore pounds.

Mistress Elizabeth Smith, Mistress Smith her charity.
Widow, gave to be distributed among the Hospitals, fourscore pounds.

Mistress Elizabeth Flicton, Mistress Electon her charity.
sometime wife to Robert Electon, Grocer, gave unto Christ's Hospital, the
sum of 66. pounds.

Mistress margery Simcotes, Mistress Simcotes her charity.
sometime wife to George Simcotes, Grocer, gave unto Christ's Hospital, for
relief of the poor Children, one hundred pounds.

Mistress Margaret Search, Mistress Search her charity.
Widow, gave unto Christ's Hospital, twenty pounds.

Mistress Jane Allington, Mistress Allington her charity.
Widow, gave unto Christ's Hospital, twenty pounds.

Mistress Jane Baker, Mistress Baker her charity.
widow gave to the relief of poor maids marriages, an hundred pounds.

Mistress Sambach, Mistress Sambach her charity.
widow, gave to the poor of the parish of Saint Brides in Fleetstreet, the
sum of twenty five pounds yearly.

Mistress Venables, Mistress Venables her charity.
widow, in her love to Christian Religion, gave for the help of poor
Preachers, the sum of five thousand pounds.

Mistress Clarke, Mistress Clarke her love to Learning.
widow, late wife of Roger Clarke, Salter, and Alderman of London, in the
Parish of Saint Margaret Moses, gave for the maintenance of poor Scholars, and
other charitable uses beside, the sum of one thousand four hundred pounds.

Mistress Ioane Doxie, Mistress Doxie her charity.
Widow, of Saint Bennet Grasse-Church in London, gave unto Christ's Hospital
5. pounds.

She gave to poor Maids marriages, twenty pounds.

She gave to the Company of Armorers, for relief of four poor widows, for
ever yearly, five pounds to each widow, desiring to have it called The poor
Widows Mite.

She gave also toward the maintenance of the Lecture in Grasse-Church, fifty
shillings yearly.

Mistress Bakhouse, Mistress Bakhouse her love to learning.
widow, gave to the worshipful Company of Haberdashers, the sum of forty
pounds yearly, toward the maintaining of 8. poor Scholars in the
Universities; allowing to each Scholar yearly five pounds.

Mistress Katharine Woodward, Mistress Woodward her charity.
widow, gave two hundred pounds to the Company of Ironmongers, to be lent out
to young men for their help.

She gave two hundred pounds more, to be distributed unto poor Scholars, the
Hospitals, poor Prisoners, poor Parishes, poor Householders, poor Maids
marriages: and three pounds thereof for three Sermons yearly.

Mistress Jane Baker, Mistress Baker her love to learning.
widow, over and besides her former gift, for the help of poor Maids
marriages, gave to three poor Scholars in Cambridge, and as many in Oxenford,
the sum of twenty four pounds, that when they shall severally take degree of
Batchelours of Arts, they are to receive four pounds each man.

Mistress Sibilla Jacob, Mistress Jacob her charity.
widow unto Richard Jacob, Vintener, gave unto Christ's Hospital, three
pounds, and to Saint Thomas, three pounds.

Mistress Margery Philips, Mistress Philips her charity.
widow, gave unto Christ's Hospital five pounds, and to Saint Thomas, five
pounds.

Mistress Anna Whitmore, Mistress Whitmore her liberal charity.
sometime wife to Master William Whitmore, Haberdasher, out of her most
bountiful charity, gave unto Christ's Hospital the sum of four hundred
pounds.

More, she gave to Saint Thomas Hospital, twenty pounds.

To Saint Bartholomews Hospital, threescore pounds.

She gave also to the Hospital of Bridewell, to set the poor on work, an
hundred pounds.

Mistress Margaret Awdley of Hackney, Mistress Awdley her charity.
Widow, gave unto Christ's Hospital, one hundred pounds.

She gave to Saint Bartholomews, fifty pounds.

And to Saint Thomas Hospital, fifty pounds.

Mistress Alice Elkin, The worthy charity of Mistress Alice Owen.
widow to Master William Elkin, Mercer and Alderman of London, was afterward
married to the learned Lawyer, Master Thomas Owen, one of the learned Judges of
the Land. This Mistress Alice Owen, caused (in her life time) an Hospital to
be builded at Istington, for ten poor women, with very convenient rooms,
and Gardens to them adjoining. Many other good works were by her performed,
and in her life time: and according as she franckly and freely gave them, so
will I set them down in order, as follows.

First, The manifest testimony of her affection to learning.
she gave to the Library in the University of Oxenford, the sum of two
hundred pounds.

She gave also to the Library in the University of Cambridge the sum of
twenty pounds.

For the foundation of one Fellowship, as also one Scholarship, in Emanuel
College in the University of Cambridge, she gave a sum of money, the
certain value thereof is not as yet come to my hands.

She gave unto Christ's Hospital in London, Her care of the poor.
to the end that twelve pence a piece weekly might be given to certain poor
people of Islington, threescore pounds.

Toward the beautifying of the Cloisters of Christ's Hospital, she gave the
sum of sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings, four pence.

She gave, toward the maintaining of a Schoole-house at Edmunton, twenty
pounds.

For a great Bell, A token of her love to the Country.
to be rung and used in the Parish of Condover in Shropshire, she gave the
sum of fifty pounds.

Item, The building of the Almeshouses at Islington, and purchasing of the Land
laid to them, did cost her the sum of one thousand, four hundred and fifteen
pounds.

Close to the said Almes-houses, Her providence for the poor in her
almes-houses.
she builded a Schoolehouse and a Chapel of ease, that the poor might not go
over-far to Church, the charges whereof did cost her the sum of three
hundred, sixty one pounds.

Yearly also she gave good sums of money, All these things were done in her
life time.
to poor Preachers unbeneficed, as also to the Prisons in and about London,
all these being done in her life time.

By her last Will and Testament, Gifts appointed by her will.
she has provided, that 22. pounds yearly shall be purchased, for the
maintenance of the School at Islington.

She has bequeathed to poor Preachers the sum of 35. pounds.

She has given to the Parish of Bashingshaw, (wherein sometime she dwelt) to
increase the stock of the poor there, twenty pounds.

She has given to the Prisons, eight pounds.

To the Company of Brewers in London, to whose trust and care she has
committed the government and oversight of the forenamed Almes-houses and
Schoole-house at Islington; as a grateful remembrance of her love, and that
their pains should not go altogether unregarded, she has given in plate and
money, one hundred pounds.

And here let me tell you, that the charity of this virtuous and religious
woman, A worthy example, and well deserving imitation.
deserves the more to be remembered, and commended also to posterity; because
she made her own eyes the witnesses, to all or the greater part of the
several sums, first mentioned and given in her life time.

And yet at the time of her death, of children and childrens children, she had
no less than two and twenty: A motive very able to hinder charity, especially
in a worldly and covetous mind.

Nevertheless, looking on all the parts disposed to her children, and the
other dividents beside, she selected out so bountiful a portion for those
poor members of Christ, that (even to the worlds end) may successively
remember her good done to them, and justly term her their liberal and
merciful mother.

One thing (above the rest) I may not forget; because in deliverances from any
dangers, we owe a more special duty and gratitude to God.

This worthy woman being borne at Islington, A great danger she escaped in her
childhood.
in the time of her childhood, she happened there to escape a great danger, by
means of an Arrow shot at random in the field, where she was then sporting
among other children, the Arrow missing all the other, pierced quite through the
hat on her head, and (God be praised for it) did not touch her with any other
harm: The reason of erecting her Almes-houses.
whereupon, in the Town of her birth, and where she escaped such an expected
peril, she made choice to express her thankfulness to GOD, upon the Altar
of her charitable Almes-houses and School.

Thus much for the worthiness of Citizens (both men and women) in this City,
John Lidgate, in praise of Londoners of his time.
touching whom, John Lidgate, a Monk of Bury, in the reign of King Henry the
sixth, made (amongst other) these Verses following: Of seven things I praise
this City:
Of true meaning and faithful observance,
Of righteousness, truth and equity;
Of stablenesse aye kept in Legiance,
And for of virtue thou have suffisance:
In this land here, and other londs all,
The Kings Chamber of Custom men thee call.


Having thus in a generality handled the Original, the Walls, Gates, Ditches,
and fresh Waters; the Bridges, Towers and Castles; the Schools of Learning,
and Houses of Law; the Orders and Customs, Sports and Pastimes, Watchings and
Martial Exercises; and lastly, the honor and worthiness of the Citizens: I
am now to set down the distribution of this City into Parts; and more
especially, to declare the Antiquities (note worthy) in every of the same: and
how both the whole and parts have bin (from time to time) ruled and governed.
THe ancient division of this City, The City of London divided from East to
west, into a South half and a North half.
was into Wards or Aldermanries: and therefore I will begin at the East, and
so proceed through the high and most principal street of the City to the West,
after this manner:

First, through Aldgate street, to the West corner of Saint Andrews Church,
called Undershaft, on the right hand, and Limestreet corner on the left; all
which is of Aldgate Ward. From thence through Cornehill street, to the West
corner of Leaden Hall; all which is of Limestreet Ward. From thence, leaving
the street that leads to Bishopsgate on the right hand, and the way that
leads into Grasse-street on the left, still through Cornehill street, by the
Conduit, to the West corner against the Stocks; all which is in Cornehill
Ward. The Stocks market the midst of the City.
Then by the said Stocks (a Marketplace both of Fish and Flesh, standing in
the midst of the City) through the Poultry, (a street so called, to the great
Conduit in West Cheap, and so through Cheap to the Standard, which is of
Cheap Ward, except on the South side from Bow-lane to the said Standard, which
is of Cordwayner-street Ward. Then by the Standard to the great Cross, which
is in Creplegate Ward on the North side, and in Breadstreet Ward on the South
side: and to the little Conduit by Paul's gate, from whence (of old time) the
said high street stretched straight on to Ludgate, all in the Ward of
Farringdon within, then divided truly from East to West: but since, S. Paul's
Church burned in the Conqueror time.
by means of the burning of Paul's Church, which was in the reign of William
the first, Mauricius, then Bishop of London, laid the foundation of a new
Church, so far in largeness exceeding the old, that the way toward Ludgate
was thereby greatly straightned, as before I have discoursed.

Now, from the North to the South, The City divided from north to south, into
an east half and a west half.
this City was (of old time) divided, not by a large highway or street, as
from East to West, but by a fair Brook of sweet water, which came from out
the North Fields, through the Wall and midst of the City, into the River of
Thames, and which division is (till this day) constantly and without change
maintained. This water was called (as I have said) Walbrooke; The course of
Walbrooke, and reason of the name.
not Gallus brook, of a Roman Captain, slain by Asclepiodatus, and thrown
therein, as some have fabuled; but of running through and from the Wall of this
City. The course whereof, (to prosecute it particularly) was and is from the
said Wall, to Saint Margarets Church in Lothbury; from thence, beneath the
lower part of the Grocers Hall, about the East part of their Kitchen, under
Saint Mildreds Church, somewhat West from the said Stocks Market: from thence,
through Buckles berry, by one great house builded of stone and Timber, called
the old Barge; because Barges out of the River of Thames were then rowed up so
far into this Brook, on the backe-side of the houses in Walbrooke street,
(which street takes name of the said Brook) By the West end of S. John's
Church upon Walbrooke, under Horshooe Bridge, by the West side of
Tallow-Chandlers Hall, and of the Skinners Hall, and so behind the other houses
to Elbow lane, and by a part thereof, down Greenewitch lane, into the River of
Thames.

This is the course of Walbrooke, The course of VValbrooke arched over.
which was (of old time) bridged over in diverse places, for passage of horses
and men, as need required: but since, by means of encrochment on the banks
thereof, the channel being greatly straightned, and other annoyances done
thereunto, at length the same (by common consent) was arched over with brick,
and paved with stone, equal with the ground, where-through it passed, and is
now in most places builded upon, that no man may by the eye discern it; and
therefore the trace thereof is hardly known to the common people.

This City being thus divided from East to West, This City divided intowards
and from North to South; I am now further to show, how the same was (of old
time) broken into diverse parts, called Wards, whereof Fitzstephen, Fitzstephen.
more than four hundred years since, writes thus: This City (says he) even
as Rome, is divided into Wards: it has yearly Sheriffs, in stead of Consuls:
It has the dignity of Senators in Aldermen, etc.

The number of these Wards in London, Wards in London 24. Patent Record.
were both before and in the reign of Henry the third, 24. in all: whereof 13.
lay on the East side of the said Walbrooke, and 11. on the West.
Notwithstanding, these 11. grew much more large than those on the East: and
therefore in the year of Christ, 1393. the seventeenth of Richard the second,
Faringdon Ward, which was then one entire Ward, but mightily increased of
buildings without the gates; was by Parliament appointed to be divided into
twain, and to have two Aldermen, to wit, Faringdon within, and Faringdon
without, which made up the number of twelve Wards on the West side of
Walbrooke, and so came the whole number of 25. on both sides. Wards in London
25.


Moreover, in the year 1550. the Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens of London,
purchasing the liberties of the Borough of Southwarke, appointed the same to
be a Ward of London; and so became the number of thirteen wards on the East,
twelve on the West, and one South the River Thames, in the said Borough of
Southwarke, in the County of Surrey; Wards in London and the Borough of
Southwarke, 26.
which in all arise to the number of 26. Wards, and 26. Aldermen of London to
govern them.

Wards on the East part of Walbrook are these:
1. Portsoken ward, Names of wards in London.
without the walls. 2. Towerstreet ward. 3. Ealdgate ward. 4. Limestreet ward.
5. Bishopsgate ward, within the walls, and without. 6. Broadstreet ward. 7.
Cornehill ward. 8. Langbourne ward. 9. Billingsgate ward. 10. Bridge ward
within. 11. Candlewike-street ward. 12. Walbrooke ward. 13. Downgate ward.

Wards on the West side of Walbrook are these:
14. Vintry ward. 15. Cordwainer-street ward. 16. Cheap ward. 17.
Colman-street ward. 18. Bassings-Hall ward. 19. Creplegate ward, within and
without. 20. Aldersgate ward, within and without. 21. Faringdon ward within.
22. Breadstreet ward. 23. Queen Hith ward. 24. Castle Baynard ward. 25.
Faringdon ward without the walls.
One ward is south the River of Thames in the Borough of Southwarke, by the
name of, 26. Bridge ward without.


OF PORTSOKEN WARD: The first Ward in the East part.
SEeing that of every of these Wards I have to say somewhat, Portsoken ward.
I will begin with Portsoken ward without Ealdgate.

This Portsoken, which sounds the Franchise at the gate, was sometime a
Guild, Lib. Trinit. Knighten Guild.
and had beginning in the days of King Edgar, more than six hundred years
since. Therewere then 13. Knights or Soldiers, well beloved to the King and
Realm, for services by them done, who requested to have a certain portion of
Land on the East part of the City, being left desolate and forsaken by the
Inhabitants, by reason of too much servitude. They besought the King to have
this Land, with the liberty of a Guild forever. The King granted to their
request, with conditions following; to wit, That each of them should
victoriously accomplish three Combats; one above the ground, one under ground,
and the third in the water.

And after this, at a certain day in East Smithfield, they should run with
Spears against all comers; all which was gloriously performed; and the same
day the King named it Knighten Guild, Bounds of Knighten Guild, or Portsoken
ward.
and so bounded it, from Ealdgate, to the place where the bars now are toward
the East, on both the sides of the street, and extended it toward Bishopsgate
in the North, unto the house then of William Presbyter, afterward of Geffrey
Tanner, and then of the heirs of Clover; after that, of John Easeby: but since
of the Lord Bourchier, etc. And again, toward the South, unto the River of
Thames, and so far into the water, as a Horseman entering the same, might ride
at a low water, and throw his Spear. So that all East Smithfield, with the
right part of the street that goes to Dodding Pond, into the Thames, and also
the Hospital of Saint Katharine, with the Mils, that were founded in King
Stephens days, and the outward stone wall, and the new ditch of the Tower,
were of the said Fee and Liberty: for the said wall and ditch of the Tower,
were made in the time of King Richard the first, when he was in the holy Land,
by William Longshampe, Bishop of Ely, as before I have noted unto you.

These Knights had as then none other Charter, by all the days of Edgar,
Ethelred, and Cnutus, until the time of Edward the Confessor, whom the heirs
of those Knights humbly besought to confirm their liberties: whereunto he
graciously granting, gave them a Deed thereof, Lib. Trinit.
as appears in the Book of the late house of the holy Trinity. The said
Charter was fair written, in the Saxon letter and Tongue.

After this, King William, the son of William the Conqueror, made a
confirmation of the same Liberties, unto the heirs of those Knights, in these
words:

William, King of England, to Maurice, Bishop, and Godfrey de Magum, and
Richard de Parre, and to his faithful people of London, greeting: Know ye me
to have granted to the men of Knighten Guild, the Guild that belonged to them,
and the Land that belonged thereunto, with all Customs, as they had the same
in the time of King Edward, and my Father. Witness Hugh de Buche; at Rething.

After him, King Henry the first confirmed the same by his Charter, to the like
effect, Priory of the Trinity within Ealdgate.
the recital whereof I pretermit for brevity. After which time, the Church of
the holy Trinity within Ealdgate of London, being founded by Queen Matilde,
wife to the said Henry, the multitude of brethren praising God therein, in
short time so increased, that all the City was delighted in beholding of them:
insomuch that in the year 1115. certain Burgesses of London, of the progeny
of those Noble English Knights; to wit, Radulphus Fitzalgod, Wilmarde le
Devereshe, Orgare le Prude, Edward Hupcornehill, Blackstanus, and Alwine his
kinsman, and Robert his brother, the sons of Leofstanus the Goldsmith, Wiso
his son, Hugh Fitzvulgar, Algare Secusme, coming together into the Chapter
house of the said Church of the holy Trinity, Knighten Guild give^ the Canons
of the holy Trinity.
gave to the same Church and Canons serving God therein, all the Lands and Soke
called in English, Knighten Guild, which lies to the wall of the City without
the same gate, and stretches to the River of Thames: they gave it, I say,
(taking upon them the brotherhood and participation of the benefits of that
house) by the hands of Prior Norman.

And the better to confirm this their Grant, they offered upon the Altar
there, the Charter of Edward, together with the other Charters which they had
thereof; and afterward they did put the foresaid Prior in seisin thereof, by
the Church of Saint Buttolphs, which is builded thereon, and is the head of
that Land. These things were thus done, before Bernard Prior of Dunstable, John
Prior of Derland, Geffrey Clinton Chamberlain, and many other Clerks and
Laymen, French and English: Orgare le Prude (one of their company) was sent to
King Henry, beseeching him to confirm their gift, which the King gladly
granted by his deed.

Henry, King of England, to R. Bishop of London, to the Sheriffs and Provost,
and to all his Barons, and faithful people, French and English, of London and
Middlesex, greeting: Know ye me to have granted and confirmed to the Church and
Canons of the holy Trinity of London, the Soke of the English Knighten Guild,
and the Land which pertains thereunto, and the Church of S. Buttolph, as the
men of the same Guild have given and granted unto them: And I will and
straightly command, that they may hold the same well, and honorably and
freely, with Sack and Soke, Toll and Thea, infangthefe, and all customs
belonging to it, as the men of the same Guild in best sort had the same in the
time of King Edward, and as King William my Father, and brother, did grant it
to them by their Writs. Witness, A. the Queen, Geffrey Clinton the
Chancellor, and William of Clinton: at Woodstocke.

All these prescribed witings (says my Book) which sometime belonged to the
Priory of the holy Trinity, are registered in the end of the Book of
Remembrances, in the Guildhall of London, marked with the letter C. folio 134.
The King sent also his Sheriffs, to wit, A^bery de Vere, and Roger, Nephew to
Hubert, which (upon his behalf) should invest this Church with the possessions
hereof, which the said Sheriffs accomplished by coming upon the ground,
Andrew Buchevite, and the forenamed witnesses, and other standing by;
notwithstanding, Othowerus, Acolivillus, Otto, Co^stables of the Tower.
and Ieffrey, Earl of Essex, Constables of the Tower by succession, withheld
by force a Portion of the said land, as I have before delivered. Part of
Knighten Guild withheld by the Co^stables of the Tower.
The Prior and Canons of the holy Trinity, being thus seized of the said land
and soke of Knighten Guild, a part of the Suburb without the wall, (but within
the liberties of the City) the same Prior was for him, and his successors,
admitted as one of the Aldermen of London, Prior of the Trinity an Alderman of
London.
to govern the same land and soke. According to the Customs of the City, he
did sit in Court, and rode with the Mayor and his Brethren the Aldermen, as one
of them in Scarlet, or other livery as they then used; until the year 1531.
at the which time, the said Priory (by the last Prior there) was surrendered to
King Henry the eight in the 23. of his reign, who gave this Priory to Sir
Thomas Audley, Knight, Lord Chancellor of England, and he pulled down the
Church. Sithence the which dissolution of that house, the said Ward of
Portsoken, has been governed by a temporal man, one of the Aldermen of
London, and elected by the Citizens, as by the Aldermen of other Wards. Thus
much for the outbounds of Knighten Guild, or Portsoken Ward, and for the
antiquity and government thereof.

Now for the parts therein, this is specially to be noted. First, the East part
of the Tower stands there, then an Hospital of Saint Katharine, founded by
Matilde the Queen, wife to King Stephen, by license of the Prior and Covent of
the holy Trinity in London, on whose ground she founded it. Hospital of Saint
Katharines. A second Foundres.
Elianor the Queen, wife to King Edward the first, a second Foundresse,
appointed to be there, one Master, three Brethren Chaplains, and three
Sisters, ten poor women, and six poor Clerks; she gave to them the Manor
of Clarton in Wiltshire, and Vpchurch in Kent, etc. Queen Philip, wife to King
Edward the third, 1351. founded a Chauntry there, and gave to that Hospital
ten pound land by year; it was of late time called a free Chapel, a
College, and an Hospital for poor sisters. The Quire, which (of late years)
was not much inferior to that of Paul's, was dissolved by Doctor Wilson, a late
Master there, the brethren and sisters remaining. This house was valued at 315.
l. 14. s. 2. d. being now of late years enclosed about or pestered with small
Tenements, and homely cottages, having inhabitants English and Strangers, more
in number than in some City in England. There lie buried in this Church, the
Countess of Huntington, Countess of the March, in her time 1429. John Holland
Duke of Excester, and Earl of Huntington, 1447. and his two wives, in a fair
Tomb on the North side the Quire: Thomas Walsingham Esquire, and Thomas
Ballard Esquire by him 1465. Thomas Flemming Knight, 1466. etc.

On the East and by North of the Tower, New Abbey on Eastsmithfield.
lies Eastsmithfield and Tower hill, two plots of ground so called, without
the wall of the City, and East from them both was sometime a Monastery, called,
New Abbey, founded by King Edward the third, in the year 1359. upon occasion as
follows.

In the year 1348. the 23. of Edward the third, Burial for the dead prepared
in time of pestilence.
the first great pestilence in his time began, and increased so sore, that for
want of room in Churchyards to bury the dead of the City, and of the
Suburbs, one John Corey Clerk, procured of Nicholas, Prior of the holy
Trinity within Ealdgate, one toft of ground near unto Eastsmithfield, for the
burial of them that dyed, with condition that it might be called the
Churchyard of the holy Trinity, which ground he caused by the aid of diverse
devout Citizens to be enclosed with a wall of stone. Robert Elsing, son of
William Elsing, gave five pounds thereunto: and the same was dedicated by Ralfe
Stratford, Bishop of London, where innumerable bodies of the dead were
afterward buried, and a Chapel built in the same place, to the honor of God:
to the which King Edward setting his eye (having before in a Tempest on the
Sea, and peril of drowning, made a vow to build a Monastery to the honor of
God, and our Lady of grace, if God would grant him grace to come safe to land)
builded there a Causing it to be named Eastminster.
Monastery, placing an Abbot, and Monks of the Cistercian, or white order. The
bounds of this plot of ground, together with a decree for tithes thereof, are
expressed in the Charter, the effect whereof I have set down in another place,
and have to show.

This house at the late general suppression was valued at 546. l. 10. d.
yearly, it was surrendered in the year 1539. the 30. of Henry the 8. Since the
which time, the said Monastery being clean pulled down, by Sir Arthur Darcy,
Knight, and other; of late time (in place thereof) is builded a large
Storehouse for Victual, The Kings Storehouse.
and convenient Ovens are builded there, for baking of Biscuit to serve his
Majesty's Ships. The grounds adjoining and belonging to the said Abbey, are
employed in building of small Tenements.

For Tower Hill, Towerhill.
as the same is greatly diminished, by building of tenements and Garden plots,
etc. So it is of late, to wit, in the year of Christ, 1593. on the North side
thereof, and at the West end of Hogstreet, Merchant-Taylors Almeshouses at the
Tower hill.
beautified by certain fair Almes-houses, strongly builded of Brick and
Timber, and covered with Slate for the poor, by the Merchant-Taylors of
London, in place of some small Cottages, given to them by Richard Hills,
sometime a Master of that Company, one hundred loads of Timber for that use,
being also given by Anthony Radcliffe, of the same Society, Alderman.

In these Almes-houses 14. charitable brethren of the said Merchant-Taylors
then living, caused to be placed fourteen poor sole women, which receive
each of them of their Founders sixteen pence, or better, weekly, beside 8. l.
15. s. yearly, paid out of the common Treasury of the same Corporation for
fuel.

From the West part of this Towerhill, toward Ealdgate, being a long
continual street, amongst other smaller buildings in that row, there was
sometimes an Abbey of Nuns of the order of S. Clare, Abbey of S. Clare Nuns
called the Minories.
called the Minories, founded by Edmund, Earl of Lancaster, Leicester and
Darby, brother to King Edward the first, in the year 1293. the length of which
Abbey contained 15. perches and seven foot, near unto the Kings street, or
highway, etc. as appears by a deed dated 1303. A plague of pestilence, being
in this City, in the year 1515. there dyed in this house of Nuns professed, to
the number of 27. besides other lay people, servants in the house. This house
was valued to dispend 418. l. 8. s. 5. d. yearly, and was surrendered by Dame
Elizabeth Salvage, the last Abbess there, unto King Henry the 8. in the thirty
of his reign, the year of Christ, 1539.

In place of this house of Nuns, Storehouse for Armor.
is now builded with diverse fair and large Storehouses for Armor, and
habiliments of war, with diverse workhouses serving to the same purpose:
Parish Church of S. Trinity.
There is also a small Parish Church for inhabitants of the Close, called,
Saint Trinity.

Near adjoining to this Abbey, A farm by the Minories, wherein has been sold
three pints of milk for one halfe-penny, in memory of men living.
on the South side thereof, was sometime a Farm belonging to the said Nunrie,
at the which Farm, I my self (in my youth) have fetched many a halfe-penny
worth of milk, and never had less than three ale pintes for a half penny in
the Summer, nor less than one ale quart for a halfe-penny in the Winter,
always hot from the Kine, as the same was milked and strained. One Trolop, and
afterward Goodman, were the Farmers there, and had thirty or forty Kine to the
paile. Goodmans son, being heir to his fathers purchase, let out the ground,
first for grazing of horses, and then for Garden plots, and lived like a
Gentleman thereby. He lies buried in S. Buttolphs Church.

On the other side of that street, Ditch of the City lay open and was cleansed,
but now filled up.
lies the Ditch without the walls of the City which of old time was used to
lie open, always (from time to time) cleansed from filth and mud, as need
required, of great breadth, and so deep, that diverse watring horses, where
they thought it shallowest, were drowned both horse and man. But now of later
time, the same Ditch is enclosed, and the banks thereof let out for Garden
plots, Carpenters yards, Bowling Allies, and diverse houses thereon builded,
whereby the City wall is hidden, the Ditch filled up, a small Channel left,
and that very shallow.

From Ealdgate East, lies a large street, and highway, sometime replenished
with few, but fair and comely buildings; on the North side whereof, first was
and is, the Parish Church of Saint Buttolph, in a large Cemitery, or
Churchyard.

This Church has been lately new builded, Parish Church of S. Buttolph.
at the special charges of the Priors of the holy Trinity, Patrones thereof,
as it appears by the Arms of that house engraven on the stone work. The
Parishioners of the Parish, being of late years mightily increased, the Church
is pestered with lofts and seats for them. Monuments of this Church are few,
Henry Jorden founded a Chauntery there, John Romany, Olarie and Agnes his wives
were buried there, about Anno 1408. Richard Chester Alderman, one of the
Sheriffs 1484. Thomas Lord Darcy of the North, Knight of the Garter, beheaded,
1537. Sir Nicholas Carew of Bedington in Surrey, Knight of the Garter,
beheaded, 1538. Sir Arthur Darcy, youngest son to Thomas Lord Darcy, deceased
at the new Abbey on the Tower Hill, and was buried there.

There is a fair Vault under ground, purposely made (as appears) for the
whole Family. Over which Vault (being in the East end of the Chancell, but
leaning somewhat to the North) is a fair ancient Tomb of Alabaster,
ingeniously wrought: having these lines following engraven thereon: Here lies
Thomas Lord Darcy of the North, and sometime of the Order of the Garter. Sir
Nicholas Carew, Knight, sometime of the Garter. Lady Elizabeth Carew, Daughter
to Sir Francis Brian, Knight: and Sir Arthur Darcy Knight, younger son to the
abovenamed Lord Darcy. And Lady Mary his dear wife, Daughter to Sir Nicholas
Carew Knight; who had ten Sons, and five Daughters. Here lie Charles,
William and Philip, Mary and Vrsula, Sons and Daughters to the said Sir Arthur,
and Mary his Wife: whose souls God take to his infinite mercy. Amen.

On the North side of this Tomb, there is a small Monument, fixed in the wall,
bearing this inscription: Here lies Sir Edw. Darcy, Knight, third Son of Sir
Arthur Darcy, Knight, of the Privy Chamber to the late Queen Elizabeth. He
married the Daughter of Thomas Asteley, Esquire, by whom he had fifteen
Children. Sir Robert Darcy, Knight, his eldest Son, caused him to be buried
in this Vault amongst his Ancestors, according to his desire. He dyed at his
house called Dartford-Place in Kent, the 28. day of October. Anno Dom. 1612. He
being 69. years old.

Another smaller Monument is also fixed in the same wall, but somewhat more
toward the South, having this inscription: Here lies buried the corpse of
Robert Tailor, of Silverdale, in the Parish of Warton in the County of
Lancaster, Gentleman, the Father of John Tailor, Citizen and Draper of London,
and of this Parish Beere-brewer. He departed this life, about the age of 80.
years, the 15. day of February, An. Dom. 1577.

Upon the ground, under the head of the Communion Table, lies an ancient fair
stone, and these lines engraven thereon in brass: Hic jacet Ioannes, Episc.
Bathon. and Wellensis, qui cum obiissit plures insig. Legation. tandem obiit
summum in Legatione Clevensis, in Ianuarii. M. C. XL. Cujus anima propitietur
Deus.

Near unto the place where the Minister reads Divine Service, there is a
small brass plate fixed in the wall, a very unworthy Monument (in my mind) for
a man of so great charity and bounty, not having so much as a graven stone
bestowed on him upon the ground. The Plate contains these lines following.

Here before this Pew lies buried the body of Robert Dow, Citizen and
Merchant-Taylor of London, with Lettice his Wife, and Thomas his Son. Which
Robert deceased the second day of May, in the year, 1612. His age was 89.
years. Who amongst other his charities done in this City, and elsewhere
sundry ways, as to several Hospitals abroad and at home, Prisons, and to
nineteen poor householders, of the Merchant-Taylors Company in perpetuum, gave
to this Parish of S. Buttolphs without Aldgate (whereof he was a member) the
nomination of two Almes-women freely relieved. And twenty pound yearly to be
distributed to threescore poor aged and impotent men and women, by Nobles a
piece upon every S. Thomas Eve for ever. Ad gloriam Dei. Per Nepotem ac
Haeredem Zachari Dow, Posthumum. In the North I Will of the Chancell, lies a
fair stone on the ground, with this inscription upon it, engraven in brass:
Here lies the body of William Cowch, one of the ordinary Yeomen of her
Majesty's Chamber, Citizen and In-holder of London. He deceased the 13. day of
July, An. Dom. 1583. Who has given (after the decease of Ioane his Wife) the
house, called the Crown, being at the East end of this Church, called S.
Buttolphs without Aldgate, unto Christ's Hospital for ever. Out of the which
house after the decease of the said Ioane his Wife, is to be paid by the
Governors of the said Hospital, five pound yearly for ever, to the poor of
Portsoken Ward, within the said Parish.

In the middle I Will of the Church, before the entrance into the Chancell, lies
a fair Gravestone on the ground, having this inscription engraven upon Brasle
upon it: Dies mei sicut umbra declinaverunt, and ego sicut foenum aresco.

Here under this Stone lies buried the body of Robert Cocks, late Citizen and
Tallow-Chandler of London: Who by his last will and Testament, gave to this
Ward of Portsoken (wherein he dwelt) the sum of one hundred pounds, to be
employed for the use and benefit of the poor of the said Ward. He departed
this mortal life the 20. day of September, An. Dom. 1609. and was here
enterred the 3. day of October next following: Aetatis suae. LXVII.

Vixi dum volui, volui dum Christ volebas, Christ mihi spes es, vita, corona,
salus.



In the same I Will, but a little lower, lies another fair gravestone, having
(in a whiter kind of stone) a coat of Arms on it, and a description in well
formed letters, speaking thus: Here underneath this stone, lies the body of
Daniel Balgay, sometime an Inhabitant of this Parish; of good account and
credit: being a Citizen of this honorable City of London, and free of the
worshipful Company of the Mercers: Who parted this mortal life the 20. day of
DDDecember, in the year of our Lord, 1608 being the day of the Nativity of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Christus mihi vita.



In the Churchyard Southward, and toward the street, stands a handsome
Ttombe, well defenced over from weather, and a fair Gravestone upon it.
Beneath, on the outside of the Tomb, are engraven the Arms belonging to the
Vintners, and the Barber Chirurgions: upon the Gravestone is a fair plate of
Brass, with all these following lines engraven on it: Here under this Stone
lies the body of George Clarke, Citizen and Vintner of London, who by his last
Will and Testament, gave for diverse good and charitable uses, these Legacies
hereafter following.

First, for a public School in the University of Oxenford, the sum of two
hundred pounds.

To the use of the poor of the four Precincts of the Ward of Portsoken, being
in the Parish of St. Buttolps without Aldgate, the sum of 293. pounds 6.
shillings, 8. pence.

To the Parish of White Chapel, for the relief of the poor there, the sum
of 230. pound.

To the Parish of S. Leonards in Shorditch, to the use of the poor there, the
sum of 106. pound, 15. shillings, 4. pence.

To the Company of the Vintners, he gave the sum of ten pounds.

And to the poor of Christ's Hospital he gave the sum of 5. pounds.

He deceased the 19. day of April, Anno Dom. 1606. And was here buried the 24.
day of the same next following: Aetatis suae 63. East from this Parish Church,
there are certain fair Innes, for receipt of Travelers repairing to the
City, up toward Hog-lane end, somewhat within the Bars, and a mark there
showing, how far the liberties of the City do extend.

This Hog-lane stretches North toward S. Mary Spittle, Hog-lane.
without Bishopsgate, and within these 40. years, had (on both sides) fair
hedge-rowes of Elm Trees, with Bridges and easy Styles to pass over into the
pleasant fields, very commodious for Citizens therein to walk, shoot, and
otherwise to recreate and refresh their dulled spirits, in the sweet and
wholesome air, which is now (within few years) made a continual building
throughout, of Garden houses, and small Cottages: and the fields on either side
be turned into Garden plots, Tenter-yards, Bowling Allies, and such like; from
Houndsditch in the West, so far as White Chapel, and further toward the
East.

On the South side of the Highway from Aldgate, were some few tenements thinly
scattered here and there, with many void spaces between them up to the Bars.
But now that street is not only replenished with buildings outward, and also
pestred with diverse Alleys, on either side to the Bars; but to White Chapel
and beyond.

Amongst the which late buildings, Water-Conduit at Aldgate.
one, memorable for the commodity of that East part of this City, is a fair
water-Conduit, hard without the gate, the building whereof, in the year 1535.
Sir Bohn Allen being Mayor, two fifteenes were granted by the Citizens, for the
making, and laying of pipes to convery water from Hackney to that place, and so
that work was then finished.

Here I may not omit to tell you, that although this Water-Conduit was very
beneficial to the people inhabiting there round about: yet in regard of the
situation, being then upon the streets South side, and immediately descending
down many steps or stayres of stone, it was troublesome to the poor people
fetching water there, in coming up laden with their Tubs, Pailes, anand
Tankards. Beside, until the turn of each party came by order and due course,
their Tankards, Tubs, and Pailes did greatly pester the passage about and
through the Gate, endangering diverse personal harms, and other great
inconveniences. Which since then, at the taking down of the old Gate, that a
new might be builded in the same place, is exceeding commendably amended, to
the Cities honor, their credit that had care for the disposing of the work,
and great case of the poor. Water-bearers, and all passengers. For now there
is a fair spacious Court, wherein all the Tankards and other vessels orderly
stand, (without any annoyance to the Street:) and the descent to the Conduit is
made very convenient, free from offending one another in their labor, the
passage to and fro is so aptly ordered, and the room so large for their
attendance.

The old ruinous Gate being taken down, and order provided for a new
foundation: diverse very ancient pieces of Roman coin, The two pieces of Coin
were of Traionus and Dioclesianus Emperors*
were found among the stones and rubbish; which as Mr. Martin Bond (a
Worshipful Citizen, and one of the Surveyors of the work) told me, two of
them (according to their true form and figure) he caused to be carved in
stone, and fixed on either side of the Gates Arch without, Eastward.

The rest of these stamped Roman pieces, were sent for by the Lord Mayor an
his brethren to the Guild Hall, where as yet they remain to be seen.
Moreover, under his own handwriting, he delivered me this brief note, which
(for mine own discharge) I have here set down.

The 10. day of March, Anno 1607. I Martin Bond, laid the first foundation
stone of Ealdgate, Northward. The bottom of which foundation was sixteen foot
deep, and eight foot broad. Now concerning the building of the Gate, Begun to
be taken down in An. 1606. and finished in An. 1609.
what time it was in hand, and the care and pains taken about it: it would
require a larger explanation, than here I am limited unto. But the Gate being
very worthily and famously finished, it may be thus described to posterity.

Eastward, upon the height of the Gate, stands a fair golden Sphere, with a
goodly Vane on it. On the upper Battlements (as vigilant Sentinels, and kept
waking by Fames golden Trumpet) are placed the shapes of two armed ancient
Soldiers, each holding a great stone in his hand, as denying the entrance of
any bold enemy, or such as are not friends to the City.

Beneath, in a fair large square, stands the imaginary figure of our Royal
Sovereign King James, in bright gilt Armor, at whose feet (on either side)
lie the Lion and golden-chained Unicorn mildly couching, as expressing awe and
humility in so great a presence.

So much for the outside of the Gate, with the two Roman Coins before
remembered.

Westward, or within, highest of all, stands Fortune, ingenuously carved and
gilded, standing upon her Globe or Mound, with her Sail spreading over her
head, and looking with a graceful and auspicious countenance upon the City.

Beneath her, in a large square, are placed the Kings Arms, richly wrought and
engraven, bearing the Motto, DIEV EST MON DROIT.

And a little lower,

VIVATE REX.



Somewhat lower, and to grace each side of the Gate, are set two feminine
personages, the one Southward, appearing to be Peace, with a silver Dove upon
her one hand, and a gilded wreath or garland in the other. On the North side
stands Charity, with a child at her breast, and another led in her hand:
Implying (as I conceive) that where Peace, and love or Charity do prosper, and
are truly embraced, that City shall be for everblessed.

Over the Arch of the Gate is thus fairly engraven: Senatus Populusque
Londinens. fecit, 1609.

And underneath:

HVMFREY WELD, Mayor.



From Ealdgate Northwest to Bishopsgate, Hounds-ditch.
lies the Ditch of the City, called Hounds-ditch, because that in old time,
when the same lay open, much filth (conveyed forth of the City) especially
dead dogs, were there laid or cast: wherefore (of later time) a mud wall was
made, enclosing the Ditch, to keep out the laying of such filth as had been
accustomed.

Over against this mudde wall, on the other side of the street, was a fair
field, sometime belonging to the Priory of the Trinity, and since, by Sir Tho.
Awdley, given to Magdalen College in Cambridge. This field (as all other about
the City) was enclosed, reserving open passage thereinto, for such as were
disposed. Toward the street were some small Cottages, of two stories high, and
little Garden-plots backward, for poor bedred people, (for in that street
dwelt none other) builded by some Prior of the holy Trinity, to whom that
ground belonged.

In my youth, I remember, devout people, Bedred people in Hounds-ditch.
as well men as women of this City, were accustomed oftentimes (especially on
Fridayes weekly to walk that way purposely) there to bestow their charitable
Alms, every poor man or woman lying in their bed within their window, which
was toward the street, and open so low, that every man might see them; a
clean linen cloth lying in their window, and a pair of Beads, to show that
there lay a bedred body, unable but to pray only. This Street was first paved
in the year 1503.

About the latter end of the reign of King Hen. 8. three brethren that were
Gun-founders, Brass ordnance (...) in Hounds-ditch.
surnamed Owens, gate ground there to build upon, and to incloze for casting of
Brass Ordnance. These occupied a good part of the street on the field side,
and in short time diverse others also builded there, so that the poor bedred
people were worn out, and in place of their homely Cottages, such houses
builded, as do rather want room than rent; which houses be for the most part
possessed by Brokers, sellers of old apparel, and such like. The residue of
the field was for the most part made into a Garden, by a Gardener named
Cawsway, one that then served the Markets with herbs and roots: and in the last
year of King Edw. the 6. the same was parcelled into Gardens, wherein are now
many fair houses of pleasure builded.

But as it is fatal to the Suburbs of every great City, A matter greatly
deserving reformation in Hounds-ditch.
to be infected with some foul and unclean Birds, that there build their
nests, although not with professed and ignominious stain of lewd life; because
(within the limits of Hounds-ditch) dwell many a good and honest Citizen, that
will never endure such scandalous neighborhood: yet there are crept in among
them a base kind of vermin, wel-deserving to be ranked and numbered with
them, whom our old Prophet and Countryman Gyldas, The unconscionable broking
Usurers their living.
called Aetatis atramentum, the black discredit of the Age, and of place where
they are suffered to live. Or rather (as S. Bernard thinks it more convenient
to term them) Baptisatos Iudaeos; who take themselves to be Christians, when
they are worse (indeed) than the Jews ever were for usurie. The Jews were
never any such gripple Extortioners.


These men, or rather monsters in the shape of men, profess to live by
lending, and yet will lend nothing but upon pawnes; neither to any, but unto
poor people only, and for no less gain, than after fifty or threescore l.
in the hundred. The pawn of the poor borrower, must needs be more than double
worth the money lent upon it, and the time of limitation is no longer than a
month; albeit they well know, that the money needs not be repayed back,
until a twelvemoneths end. By which time, the interest grows to be so great,
that the pawn, which (at the first) was better than twice worth the money
borrowed on it, does not (in the end) prove to be valuable to the debt, which
must be prayed, before the poor party can redeem it. By which extorting
means of proceeding, Such gains are the greedy Usurers glory.
the poor borrower is quite cheated of his pawn, for less than the third
part, which it was truly worth indeed.

It is a great error (in my poor opinion) that in so ancient and famous a
City, abounding (otherwise) in most Christian Alms and works of mercy, that
among so many worthy liberalities bestowed on the poor in diverse and distinct
Parishes, A public stock would do well for the poor in every Parish.
no order is taken for such a public stock, for the truely-poore, that when
in their urgent necessity, either by want of means, sickness and other
hindrances, their pawnes may not go to the cutthroat Usurer; but remain to
their own good (living or dying) or to theirs; without any other benefit, than
that it may still serve for the like relief.

And let me not here be mistaken, that I condemn such as live by honest
buying and selling, and make a good conscience of their dealing: no truly, I
mean only the Judas Broker, that lives by the Bag, and (except God be more
merciful to him) will follow him that did bear the Bag.

On the ditch side of this street, the mudde wall which was, is also (by little
and little) taken all down, the Bank of the ditch being raised, made level
ground, and turned into Garden-plots, and Carpenters yards, and many large
houses are there builded, for the uses before remembered; the filth of which
houses, as also the earth cast out of their vaults, is turned into the ditch;
by which means the ditch is filled up, and both the ditch and wall so hidden,
that they cannot be seen of the passers by.

Here, according to my purpose in all other Wards and Parishes, I mean not to
forget Gods blessings bestowed, by the hands and merciful minds of charitable
Benefactors. In this Parish of Saint Buttolphs without Aldgate, these persons
following do justly deserve memory.

Benefactors to the Poor. Master William Newton, For relief of the poor in
the Parish of S. Buttolphs without Aldgate.
Citizen and Sadler of London, gave diverse Tenements in the high street.

Mistress Mary Bristow, gave a Tenement to the poor, the yearly rent being, 3.
l. 6. s. 8. d.

Mistress Joyce Ripton, gave the sum of 40. l. that fuel may be given thrice
yearly for ever to the poor.

Master William Cowch (of whom we have already spoken) gave 5. l. yearly to
the poor, and for a Sermon also ten shillings.

Mr. Anthony Duffield gave the sum of 20. l. to have 400. of good Faggots
yearly given to the poor.

Mistress Ioane Duffield gave 10. l', to have 200. of good Faggots given yearly
to the poor.

Mr. John Frank gave an annuity of 20. s. yearly for ever to the poor.

Mistress Margaret Holigrave gave the like sum of 20. s. and for the like
intent yearly to the poor.

Mr. Bernard Williamson gave yearly a sum of money, (which since is made up
twenty pounds) that a load of Charcoales, and a certain sum of money, may
yearly for ever be given to the poor.

Mr. Toby Wood, Esquire, gave a tenement of 6. l. rent yearly; the rent whereof
is quarterly given to the poor, and for 4. Sermons.

Mistress Anne Clarke, widow, of Houndsditch, gave 40. l. to have four Sermons
yearly, and a certain allowance of bread given to the poor.

Mr. Henry Jorden, sometime Citizen and Fishmonger of London, gave an annuity
of twenty shillings yearly for ever, to be given in fuel to the poor.

Mr. George Palin, Girdler, gave 10. l. for ever, to be employed for the
benefit of the poor.

Mr. Robert Rogers, late Citizen and Leatherseller, gave 20. l. to be laid out
yearly in Coals, that the poor may have them at a reasonable price in winter.

Mr. Stephen Seudamour, late Citizen and Vintner, gave 20. s. yearly for ever,
to be given in fuel to the poor.

Mr. Francis Tirrell, late Citizen and Grocer, gave 10. l. in money to the
poor, and 5. Chauldrons of Coals yearly for ever.

Mr. Robert Dow, a great Benefactor, both in his life time, and for ever after
death: as also Mr. George Clarke, and Mr. Robert Coxe, we have spoken of
before.

Now, The limits of Fortsoken Ward, and of the whole Parish, which extends a
great way further than the Ward does.
concerning the bounds and limits, both of the Parish and Ward, and how far
they extend themselves every way; there can be no better direction therein,
than following the order of their own yearly perambulation, which for avoiding
of prolixity, thus I observe.

Walking down Hounds ditch Northward, so far as the dwelling house of one
Edward Ansell, Carpenter, they there cross the way Eastward into Still and
Hand Alley, passing on along by a Garden brick wall, belonging to a fair
goodly Place, termed sometime, Fishers Folly. Thence they proceed into
Hoggelane, in the middle of which lane, is the partition between the two
Parishes of White Chapel and S. Buttolphs. There they go on to the Bars in
the common street, and crossing the way Southward, go through a now Tavern
house, known by the name of the Castle, where turning back again, the breadth
of two small Gardens, they then pass on right forward (west) to the Minories
wall, until they come to the Minories bars.

There (at the further end) they turn down into an Alley, called Brownes
Alley, to a Wall being by Goodmans Fields, and so along by that wall, so far as
to Goodmans gate. Where, by reason of a controversy happening between the
Parish of White Chapel and Saint Buttolphs, and a Barn and other buildings
erected in the way, they are constrained to turn up into the street again.
Then they go down Red-Lion Alley, to the house of one Darby Morgan, passing
on thence directly into Rosemary lane. Then down on the South side, till they
come to the East side of a new Churchyard, there builded at the Parishes cost,
and for their help in times of sickness. There they go through an house, then
through the Churchyard, and afterward through the house of one John Batcheler.
Thence they go down Nightingale lane, on the West side, until they come to
the middle of a Foord, which sometime turned Wapping Mill; and there the
foresaid two Parishes are divided again by that Foord. Then go they on so far
as M. Duppa, or Duppers house, and so round about Saint Katharines, till they
come to the sign of the Maidenhead, and there they fix their mark.

And then pass over Tower Hill, to the house of one John Atkinson, near to
the Posterne gate; and then go directly Northward up the Minories street, till
they come to the Portcullis under Aldgate, where the testimony of their mark
concludes all.

In these, or the most part of these latter directions, I have been greatly
favored by Master John Brigges, the painful and industrious Minister of S.
Buttolphs, who by the help of the Clerk and Sexton, most lovingly and gently
befriended me.

This Portsoken Ward has an Alderman and his Deputy; common Counselors, 6.
Constables, 4. Scavengers, 4. for the Wardmore inquest, 18. and a Beadle. To
the Fifteen it is seized at 4. l. 10. s.

TOWER-STREET WARD.
THe first Ward in the East part of this City, Towerstreet Ward.
within the wall, is called Tower-street Ward and extends along the River of
Thames, from the said Tower in the East, almost to Belingsgate in the West:
one half of the Tower, the ditch on the West side, and Bulwarks adjoining,
do stand within that part, where the wall of the City (of old time) went
straight from the Posterne gate South to the River of Thames, before that the
Tower was builded. From and without the Tower ditch west and by north, is the
said Tower Hill, Tower hill.
sometime a large plot of ground, now greatly straightened by encroachments
(unlawfully made and suffered) for Gardens and houses, some on the bank of the
Tower-ditch, whereby the ditch is marred, and more near unto the wall of the
City from the Posterne north, till over against the principal fore-gate of
the Lord Lumleyes house, etc. but the Tower ward goes no further that way.

Upon this Hill is always readily prepared (at the charges of the City) a
large Scaffold and Gallows of timber, for the execution of such Traitors or
Transgressors, as are delivered out of the Tower, or otherwise to the Sheriffs
of London by writ, there to be executed. I read, that in the fifth of King
Edward the fourth, a Scaffold and Gallows were there set up by other the Kings
Officers, and not of the Cities charges; whereupon the Mayor and his Brethren
complained, but were answered by the King, that the Tower hill was of the
liberty of the City; and whatsoever was done in that point, was not in
derogation of the Cities liberties, and therefore commanded Proclamation to be
made, as well within the City as in the Suburbs, as follows:

Forasmuch as the seventh day of this present month of November, Gallows were
erect and set up besides our Tower of London, within the liberties and
franchises of our City of London, in derogation and prejudice of the liberties
and franchises of this City: The King our Sovereign Lord would have it be
certainly understood, that the erection and setting up of the said Gallows
was not done by his commandment: wherefore, the King our Sovereign Lord
wills, that the erection and setting up of the said Gallows, be not any
president, or example thereby hereafter to be taken, in hurt, prejudice or
derogation of the franchises, liberties and privileges of the City, which he
at all times has had, and has in his benevolence, tender favor, and good
grace, etc.

Apud Westminst. nono die Novembris, Anno regni nostri quinto. Many
Controversies have been in times past, betwixt the Lord Mayor and Citizens of
London, on the one party, and the Lieutenant of the Tower of London on the other
party, touching their liberties: The Lieutenant usurping diverse privileges
which were against the Laws of the Realm: as for example:

If A. B. were indebted to C. D. dwelling in the precinct of the Tower, and
would suffer himself to be arrested and prosecuted by the said C. D. in the
Court held within the Tower, and there to have judgment upon the said debt
obtained against him: after which judgment obtained, a Precept was awarded
under the seal of office of the Lieutenant, redirected unto the Porter of the
Tower or to his deputy, to take A. B. in execution for the same debt. And after
that A. B. is so taken in execution, there is return made of the execution of
the said Precept; and thereupon the Lieutenant not only appoints about a
dozen or more Keepers to the said A. B. and such as the said A. B. will
nominate; This pretended Privilege is directly against the Laws of the Realm,
as hereunder is resolved by the Judges.
but also suffers the said A. B. to go at liberty, giving unto him a
Protection under the seal of his Office: And thereby commands all Officers
in any wise to forbear to arrest or trouble the said A. B. for the space of
one whole year, being his prisoner. Then if it shall happen that the said A.
B. shall be arrested, being in the custody of any of his Keepers, and having
the said Protection to show; if immediately upon the showing of the same, he
be not set at liberty again, In such case, the Lieutenant pretends that he
has power to arrest the body of any person, dwelling in such City or County,
wherein the said A. B. was so arrested and troubled, if any such person can be
found within the liberties of the Tower, and the body of the same person to
detain in safe custody, until such time as the said A. B. shall be enlarged.

By which means the execution of the Laws of the Realm is hindered, and the
Subjects wronged.

The form of a Precept of the Lieutenant of the Tower, for the taking of one
in execution, with the return of the same Precept.
PRaeceptum est Ianitori Turr. Tur. Land.
praedict. quod capiat Willm. Aston de Land. Civem and Haberdasher: Ita quod
habeatur corpus ejus cora^ Edwardo Warner, milite, Locumtenen. Dominae Reginae
Turr. praed. and ejus Senescall. ibi ad prox. Cur. infra Turr. praed. tenend.
ad satisfaciend. Johanni Thomson viginti lib. legalis monetae Angliae, quas
idem Johannis in eadem Curia recuperavit adversus praefat. VVillm. and xxj. s.
pro miss. and custag. Curiae, quae eidem Iohanni in eadem Curia adjudicat.
fuerunt. Et qualiter hoc Praeceptum per te fuerit executum constare fac,
adpraefat. Cur. Et hoc non omit. periculo incumbent.

Dat. apud Turr. praed. sub sigillo quo utor in hoc officio, decimo tertio die
Novembris, Anno Regni Elizabethae, Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hyberniae
Reginae, primo. Ianitori Turris Land. aut suo Deputato.

RESPONS.
CEpi Corpus supranominati Willm. Aston, and eum paratum habeo, prout mihi
superius prcaeipitur.

Hugh Pope, John Laston, John Sparrow, Edward Sanders, Thomas Brown, Gregory
Newman, Henry Hudson, John VVoodward, Thomas Bullen, William Lawman, Matthew
Hind, etc. His Keepers appointed.

Christoph. Southows.

The form of a Protection, granted by the Lieutenant of the Tower, to a
Prisoner being in execution for debt, to go at large.
EDwardus Warner Miles, Tur. Land.
Locumtenens Dominae Reginae Turr'. suae praedict. omnibus Officiariis,
ministris, and subditis dictae Dominae Reginae, salutem. Cum secundum
privilegium and consuetudinem in Curia Turris praedictae ab antiquo usitat. and
opprobat. quilibet condemnatus in Curia praedictae ad sectam alicujus in
placito debiti, ac in custodia dicti Locumtenentis sive ejus deputat. pro eodem
debito existen. super certas considerationes ipsum Locumtenentem moventes,
praedict. condemnat. ire and redire quo voluerit infra regnum Angliae permissus
fuerit. Et quia VVillm. Aston de London Civis and Haberdasher, coram me
praefato Locumtenente and Senescall. in Curia Turris praedictae, venit ad
sectam cujusdam Johannis Thomson in placito debiti, super demand. viginti
librarum bonae and legalis monetae Angliae, and xxj. s. pro missis and
custagiis Curiae condemnat. existit, and in prisona Turris praedictae sub
custodia mei praefati Locumtenentis, prout mos est, pro eodem debito existen.
Sciatis me praefatum Locumtenentem considerantem statum and paupertatem
praedicti VVillm. Aston, ac eo quod citius debitum suum praedictum de amicis
and bonis suis propriis levare possit, presentium. VVillm. cum custode seu
latore praeseatium super considerationem praedictam, quo voluerit, dimiss. fore
a die dat. praesentium pro uno Anno integro prox-futuro. Igitur ex part dictae
Dominae Reginae, vobis and cuilibet vestrii mando, Quod praedictu Willm.
prisonarium meum, cum Custode sen latore praesentium, in aliquo non molestatis
nec arrestetis pro aliqua personali action. Nec quantum in vobis ab aliis
infer. permit. periculo incumbent.

Dat. apud Turr. praed. sub sigillo quo utor in hoc officio, Decimo tertio die
Novembris, An. Regni Elizabethae, Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
Reginae, fidei Defensoris, etc. Primo. Edward Warner.

Also in the year of our Lord God, Ex Relatione Hum. Dyson Notaris Pub.
1585. Sir Owen Hopton, Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower of London, by color of
his office, pretending title to a Garden-plot near the Tower, did cause his
servants violently to take possession thereof, and to bring those persons before
him that kept the possession, whom he imprisoned in the Tower. Whereupon, a
Writ of Habeas Corpus was sued forth of the Kings Bench for the removing of the
body of Robert Shapeley, one of the prisoners, which Writ was brought and
delivered unto the Lieutenant by Robert Smith, then Solicitor of the City of
London, but the Lieutenant would not receive nor obey the Writ, but would have
compelled the said Robert Smith to carry it back again with him: which he
refusing, the Lieutenant put the Writ into his pocket, and abused and
imprisoned also the said Robert Smith in the Tower: For redress of which
wrongs, and of many others, there was complaint made to the Lords of the Privy
Council, who referred the hearing of those controversies, and the examination
of the rights and privileges which the Lieutenant pretended to belong unto his
Office, to the Lords chief Justices and to the Master of the Rolls, who were
to certify their opinions thereof in writing, as by the letters of the Lords of
the Council in that behalf sent and directed unto them, of the tenor
following, appears.

The Councels letters to the Lords chief Justices, and to the Master of the
Rolls.
AFter our very hearty Commendations, etc. There has been complaint made unto
us in the behalf of the Lord Mayor and Citizens of London, against Sir Owen
Hopton, Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower, whom they charge with some disordered
dealing by him used toward one Robert Smith, a Soliciter for the City, sent
lately unto him with a Writ of Habeas Corpus, out of the Court of her Majesty's
Bench, for the removing of the body of one Robert Shapeley, a servant to one
William Wikins a Citizen, imprisoned by the Lieutenant upon some pretended
quarrel of privilege; the manner whereof shall best appear unto you by the
several complaints and articles herein enclosed, exhibited unto us by the said
Smith and VVikins.

And forasmuch as the Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of London, have heretofore
oftentimes found themselves grieved, with sundry actions of unkind and violent
dealings, offered by the said Lieutenant and his Officers as they have
informed, to the breach of their Charters and liberties, whereby there is grown
some division and dissension between them (which we desire by all good means
to have removed;) and whereas* the Lieutenant seems to warrant his doings by
ancient privileges and customs of the Tower, whereunto the Citizens on their
parts, upon opinion of the validities of their Charters, refuse to yield: We
considering what inconvenience may ensue of the private dissension between
them, have thought good to require you, calling Master Lieutenant before you,
and the parties, whose complaints are herewith sent unto you; with such proofs
and witness as may be produced, effectually to examine the matters thereby
informed against him: and that you also take knowledge of such other complaints
and controversies, as the L. Mayor and the Recorder of London shall deliver
unto you against the Lieutenant of the Tower concerning their former debates
and strifes, for matter of liberties, prescriptions and customs, and the like
on the behalf of the Lieutenant against them, praying you to take some pains
to ^^are the matters at large on both sides; and to see upon what privileges,
customs, and prescriptions, their several claims are grounded and pretended:
as also to consider of their strength and validity in Law, wherein after you
shall have spent some time, and heard and understood the matters at large, we
require you then to make report unto us what you shall have found on both
sides, as well touching the complains of Smith and Wikins, as of the Lord Mayor
and Citizens, with your opinions of their said complaints and controversies,
and what course were fittest to be taken between them, which we pray you to
do with as convenient speed as you may: And so bid you heartily farewell.

From the Court at Greenwitch. Subscribed by Bromley Cancellarius. Leicester.
Hunsdon, Chamberl. M. Treasurer. M. Controller. M. Secretary. Sir Walter
Mildmay.

Directed to the Lords chief Iusices, and to the Master of the Rolls.



Upon the receipt of which letters, the said Lords chief Justices, and Master
of the Rolls, did at large hear the allegations and proofs of both parties,
and did accordingly certify their opinions thereof to the Lords of the Privy
Council in manner following:

The Certificat, touching as well the Articles and Complaints made to your
Honors, by Robert Smith and William VVikius, against Sir Owen Hopton, Knight,
Lieutenant of the Tower, as the controversies between the Mayor and Citizens of
London and the said Lieutenaut.
FIrst, upon examination of the matter, touching the said Smith and VVikins,
mentioned in your Honors letters, it appears unto us, that (some
controversy being between the Mayor and Citizens, and the said Lieutenant,
touching a Garden-plot near the said Tower) one Ralph Gasken, servant to the
said Lieutenant, violently did draw forth of the said Garden, one Shapeley,
servant to the said VVikins, then laboring there for his said Master, in such
violent manner, as thereby blood was drawn of him in several places, and
carried him to the Tower, and there kept him in prison eight days; and that
one Shawe, another of the Lieutenants servants, was present with the said
Gasken ayding him, but that he did not hurt the said Shapeley; which Gasken and
Shawe did detain some of the apparel of the said Shapeley, and yet do for
any thing knowene to us.

And that likewise one Pain was taken forth of the said Garden, and carried to
the Tower, and there imprisoned three days, and then delivered upon bond, to
render his body to the Tower when he should be required, and that Pain has
left a pawn of the value of ten shillings for his meat and drink.

And that Her Majesty's Writ of Habeas Corpus for the body of Shapeley was
sued forth of her Bench, directed to the Lieutenant, which carried and
delivered to him by the said Smith, who prayed the said Lieutenant to make
allowance thereof, and paid him the Fee due therefore. But forthwith he would
have forced the said Smith to have received the money again and the Writ:
which Smith refused to do, praying him not to be offended for bringing of her
Majesty's Process.

And thereupon Master Lieutenant said he would put his Writ in his pocket, as
he had done many, and therewith rubbed Smith on the cheeks, and threatened to
imprison him, if he would not carry back the Writ again and the money:
whereupon the said Lieutenant imprisoned Smith, and detained him about three
hours, until upon a Bill of his hand to return to prison when the Lieutenant
should send for him, he was delivered; which matter the Lieutenant confesses
to be true.

And touching such liberties as Master Lieutenant claims to have been used
for the Officers and Attendants in the Tower, as not to be arrested by any
Action in the City of London, and Protections to be granted to them by Master
Lieutenant, and not obeying of Writs of Habeas Corpus, we think such persons
as are daily attendant in the Tower, serving her Majesty there, are to be
privileged, and not to be arrested upon any plaint in London. But for Writs
of execution, or Capias ut ligatum, and such like, we think they ought to have
no privilege.

Moreover, touching Protections granted by Master Lieutenant, for such as be
condemned in any action in the Court kept in the Tower, to go at large, and
not to be arrested by any Process out of the Queens high Courts, or
elsewhere, or any other Protection to that effect, for any privileged person,
we think the same against Her Majesty's Laws and dignity.

Item, That Matter Lieutenant ought to return every Habeas Corpus, out of any
Court at Westminst. so as the Justices before whom it shall be returned, (as
the cause shall require) may either remand it with the body, or retain the
matter before them, and deliver the body, as Justice shall require.

As touching the jurisdiction of the Court in the Tower, and the controversies
for certain liberties upon the Tower Hill, and the soil there, and diverse
places about the Tower, we are not yet fully resolved, but desire your
Lordships to have some further time to consider thereupon: for, that there be
many matters alleged, and to be showed in writing for the same, as we are
informed, which we have not yet seen.

Item, The said Lieutenant does claim a liberty, that if any person
privileged in the Tower be arrested in London, that he may take the body of
any Citizen that shall come within the liberties of the Tower, and keep his
body there, until the other be delivered: which we think altogether against
the Laws of this Realm.

Christopher Wray. Edmond Anderson. Gilbert Gerrard.


After the Lords of the Privy Council had received the same Certificat, they
did thereupon make this final Order and Decree following, viz.

At Non such, the third day of October. 1585.
Present, Lord Treasurer. Lord Admiral. Lord Chamberlain. Master Treasurer.
Master Secretary.


WHereas sundry variances and contentions have heretofore arisen, and have of
late years depended, betwixt the Lord Mayor and Communalty of the City of
London, on the one part; and the Lieutenant of Her Majesty's Tower of London,
on the other part, touching matters of liberties, prescriptions, customs, and
other claims and pretenses: by reason whereof, and for lack of order for stay
of those variances and contentions, diverse tumults have heretofore grown, and
Her Majesty's Peace has many times been in hazard to be dangerously broken;
whereupon, several complaints have been heretofore exhibited to the Lords and
others of Her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, by the Lord Mayor and
Communalty aforesaid, against the said Lieutenant, for diverse injuries alleged
to be offered on his part to the Citizens of London, without order of Law or
equity: After consideration had of which several complaints, it pleased their
Lordships (having care to procure an end of those controversies, for avoiding
of inconveniences that might ensue) by their Honorable letters to give order
to Sir Christopher Wray, Knight, Lord chief Justice of England; Sir Edmond
Anderson, Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas; and to Sir Gilbert
Gerrard, Knight, Master of the Rolls, that they (calling the said Lieutenant
and the parties complainants before them) should effectually hear and examine
the controversies (on both sides,) and certify their Lordships what they
should find, together with their opinions touching the same, who having called
the parties accordingly before them, and advisedly and with good deliberation
sundry times heard their Allegations and answers, as well by writing as by
word, with counsel learned on all parts, have signified their opinions of the
said controversies in writing, as hereafter follows:

First, touching such liberties as M. Lieutenant claims to have been used
for the Officers and Attendants in the Tower, as not to be arrested by any
action in the City of London, and protections to be granted to them, by Master
Lieutenant, and not obeying of writs of we think such persons as be daily
attendant in the Tower serving her Majesty there, are to be privileged and
not to be arrested upon any plaint in London, but for writs of Executions, or
(...) and such like, we think they ought to have no privilege.

Secondly, concerning protections granted by Master Lieutenant for such as be
condemned in any action in the Court, kept in the Tower, to go at large, and
not to be arrested by any Process out of the Queens high Courts, or
elsewhere, or any other protection to that effect for any privileged person,
we think the same against her Majesty's laws and dignity.

Thirdly, that M. Lieutenant ought to return every Habeas Corpus out of any
Court at Westminster, so as the Justices before whom it shall be returned (as
the cause shall require) may either remand it with the body, or retain the
matter before them, and deliver the body as Justice shall require.

Lastly, whereas the Lieutenant does also claim a liberty, that if any person
privileged in the Tower be arrested in London, he may take the body of any
Citizen that shall come within the liberties of the Tower, and keep his body
there until the other be delivered, we think the same to be altogether
against the laws of the Realm.

The Lords therefore of her Majesty's said Privy Council, upon grave and
deliberate considerations had of the certificate and opinions of the said Lords
chief Justices and Master of the Rolls, and to the end occasions of
contention, trouble, and disorder, and the danger of breach of her Majesty's
peace, which have heretofore of late years arisen and grown upon the
controversies aforesaid, may from henceforth cease, and be althougher removed
and taken away;

It was this day by their Lordships ordered and decreed, betwixt the Lord
Mayor, Communalty and Citizens of London, and their successors, and the
Lieutenant of her Highness said Tower of London, and all other Lieutenants and
Officers of the Tower at any time hereafter to succeed: That the matters,
points and articles contained in the Certificate of the said Justices and
Master of the Rolls before mentioned, wherein their resolutions, opinions and
determinations be set down, declared and signified, shall at all times from
henceforth stand and remain for rules and resolutions and final determination
and decision: for so much and so many of the points of controversies as are
contained in the said Certificate (whereof they have delivered their opinions)
to be for ever hereafter duly observed and kept, and that nothing be
hereafter at any time done, or attempted on either part, to the violating or
interrupting of the same.

On the North side of this hill, is the said Lord Lumleyes house, and on the
West side, diverse houses lately builded, and other encrochments along South to
Chicke lane, Chicke lane.
on the East of Barking Church, at the end whereof you have Tower-street,
stretching from the Tower Hill, West to Saint Margaret Pattens Church Parsonage.

Now therefore, Tower-street Alhallowes Barking a Parish Church.
to begin at the East end of the Street, on the North side thereof, is the
fair Parish Church, called, Alhallowes Barking, which stands in a large, but
sometime far larger Cemitery or Churchyard. On the North side whereof was
sometime builded a fair Chapel, Barking Chapel of our Lady.
founded by King Richard the first; some have written that his heart was buried
there under the high Altar. This Chapel was confirmed and augmented by King
Edward the first. Edward the fourth gave license to his Cousin John, Earl of
Worcester, to found there a Brotherhood for a Master and Brethren, and he gave
to the Custos of that fraternity, which was Sir John Scot, Knight, Thomas
Colte, John Tate, and John Croke, the Priory of Totingbecke, and the avousion
of the Parish Church of Stretham in the Country of Surrey, with all the members
and appurtenances, and a part of the Priory of Okeborne in Wiltshire, The Kings
Chapel of Barking.
both Priors Aliens, and appointed it to be called the Kings Chapel of
Chantry, In Capella beatae Mariae de Barking.

King Richard the third, new builded and founded therein a College of Priests,
etc. Hamond de Lega was buried in that Chapel. Robert Tate, Mayor of London,
1488. and other were there buried.

This College was suppressed and pulled down in the year 1548. the second
of, John Rowse.
King Edward the sixth, the ground was employed as a Garden-plot during the
reigns of King Edward, Queen Mary, and part of Queen Elizabeth, till at
length a large strong frame of Timber and Brick was set thereon, and employed
as a Storehouse of Merchants goods brought from the Sea, by Sir William
Winter, etc.

Monuments in the Parish Church of Alhallowes Barking, not defaced are these:

Sir Thomas Studinham of Norwich Dioces, Knight, 1469.

Thomas Gilbert Draper, and Merchant of the Staple, 1483.

John Bolt, Merchant of the Staple, 1459.

Sir John Style, Knight, Draper, 1500.

William Thin, Esquire, one of the Clarks of the Green cloth, and Master of
the Household to King Henry the 8. 1546.

Humfery Monmouth, Draper, one of the Sheriffs, 1535. buried in the Church yard.

William Denham, one of the Sheriffs, 1934.

Henry Eoward, Earl of Surrey beheaded, 1546.

Sir Richard Devereux, son and heir to the Lord Ferrers of Chartley.

Richard Brown Esquire, 1546.

Philip Dennis, Esquire, 1556.

Andrew Evenger, Saiter.

William Robinson, Mercer, Alderman 1552.

William Armorer, Clothworker, Esquire, Governor of the Pages of Honor, or
Master of the Hance men, servant to Henry the eight, Edward the sixth and Queen
Mary, buried 1560. Beside, which, there be diverse Tombs without inscription.

John Crolys and Thomas Pike, Citizens of London, founded a Chantery there,
1388.

Upon further view of this Parish Church, and the monuments, I find these
following:

In the Chancell lies a fair Marble stone with a plate of Brass engraven,
bearing this inscription: Hic jacet Ioannes Ruche, All these Mounments are in
the Chancell on the ground near to one another as they are here set down.
Generosius, qui obiit octavo die Mensis Maii, An. Dom. 1493. Cujus animae
propitietur Deus.

Upon a fair large Marble stone, by occasion lately taken up, and being buried
somewhat deep in the ground, on a Brass plate fixed thereon was this
inscription: Hic concluduntur ossa Iacobi Zamboni, illustrissimi Dom. Veneti
Secretarii, Agentis apud Serenissimum hunc Angliae, etc. Regem.

On a fair Marble stone, but without any plate, are these lines following
engraven.

In this Vault hereunder lies Elizabeth, late Wife unto William Denham,
Alderman of London, and Merchant of the Staple at Callis: Who departed unto
God, on Wednesday, at 5. of the clock in the afternoon, in Easter-weeke, the
last day of March, 1540. On whose soul Jesus have mercy, Amen.

And by the Grace of God, the said William Denham, purposing to lie here by
her, departed unto God the day of etc.

Close by it is another stone thus inscribed: Hic jacet Dom. Thomes Vyrby,
quondam Vicari^^ istius Eccles. Qui obiit 2. die Mensis December. 1453. Cujus
anima, etc.

Near unto it is another stone, thus inscribed: Hic jacet Nicholaus
Bremisgrave, quondam Vicarius istius Eccles. Qui obiit II. die Men's. August.
An. Dom. 1416. Cujus, etc.

By it also another stone, thus inscribed: Hic jacet M. Radulphus Darling,
Almae Vniuer. Oxoniae olim Magist. in Artibus, and huius Eccles. quondam
Vicarius peritissimus. Qui obiit An. Dom. 1500. 9. die Men's. October. Cuius, etc.

By it also another stone, thus inscribed: Hic jacet tumulatus M. Thomas Cayfi.
Can. and Baccalaurius in Art. vir perit. and unus Vicar. istius Eccles. Qui
obiit 6. die Men's. Feb. 1475. Cuius, etc.

By it also another stone, thus inscribed: Hic jacet Dom. Willielm. Tylling,
quondam Capellanus istius Eccles. Qui obiit 24. die Men's. Iulii, An. Dom. 1430.
Cuius, etc.

On the same stone: Ac Johannes Vale, nuper Capellanus, and bonus reparator
Cantar. ejusdem Eccles. Qui obiit 10. die November. An. Dom. 1563. Cuius, etc.

Upon a very fair Marble stone, verged about with plates of brass, and
concluding with the like plates in the middle, is thus engraven: Pray for the
soul of M. William Thin, Esquire, one of the Master of the honorable
household to King Henry the 8. our Sovereign Lord. He departed from the prison
of this frail life, the 10. day of August, An. Dom. 1546. in the 38. year of
our said Sovereign Lord the King, which body, and every part thereof, in the
last day shall be raised up again, at the sound of the Lords Trumpet. In
whose coming, that we may all joyfully meet him, our heavenly Father grant us,
whose mercy is so great toward us, that he freely offertth to all them that
earnestly repent their sins, everlasting life, through the death of his
dearly beloved Son, Jesus: To whom be everlasting praise. Amen.

Before the entrance into the Vestrie, lies a fair Marble stone, without any
plate of Brass, but thus engraven upon it:

Nicholas Andrews to his dearest wife Anne, does this last office of love: for
she was, Religious, Chaste, Discreet, Loving, Fair, Obedient.
She lived but 25. years, and dyed at Chigwell in Essex, the 12. day of June,
1606. and was here-under interred (in great sorrow) the monday following:
leaving behind her living, two sons, William and Nicholas.

Hard by it is another stone, thus inscribed: Here rests the body of Agnes
Bond, Widow, sometime the wife of William Bond, Esquire; the which William and
Agnes had issue betwixt them, 8. sons and 8. daughters; which Agnes deceased
the 4. day of February, in the year of our Lord God, 1552.

Lower in the Chancell toward the door, is another fair stone plated, and
thus engraven: Hereunder lies the body of Roger James, late of London, Brewer,
who being of the age of 67. departed this life the second day of March, An.
Dom. 1591. leaving behind him Sara his wife, eight sons, and one daughter.

Near unto it, another stone, thus inscribed: Here under this Marble stone
lies, M. Henry Poulsted, Esquire, and Alice his wife; the which Henry deceased
the 10. of December, 1556. and begot of her body one son and one daughter,
Richard and Mabell, etc.

Close by it, another smaller stone, thus inscribed: Here lies buried Barbara
Thornix, Daughter of Thomas Thornix Esquire, who deceased the eleventh day of
April, 1613. being of the age of three years.

By it another fair stone, thus inscribed: Here lies the body of Mary
Burnell, late wife of John Burnell, Citizen and Merchant of London, the only
daughter of Matthew Brownrig of Ipswich, in Suffolk, Esquire, a woman sincerely
living in the fear of God, and dying constantly in the faith of Christ Jesus.
She departed this life the 5. day of April, 1612. being of the age of 20.
years: Having finished in wedlock with her said husband 2. years and 5.
months, and bearing him issue, one son, whereof she dyed in childbed, and
expects now (with the Elect of God) a joyful resurrection.

Then there is a goodly ancient fair Tomb, dividing the North I Will from the
Chancell, bearing these engraven lines: Hic jacet Johannes Bacon, quondam Civis
and Woolman London, Qui obiit 6. die Men's. Maii, Anno Dom. 1437. Et Ioanna Vx.
eius.

There is a very goodly Tomb, In the North I Will of the Qeire.
but much defaced, and the Brass plates stolen off from it: but so many of the
words as are remaining, are these: Stapulo fuit seniorum, and unius Londi^lls
habitans, sermene fidelis, cum Marga yera Domina costaque beata. Hunc rapuit
Michael ad Coeli gaudi a lati, etc.

By it is a fair Monument in the wall, bearing this inscription: Hic facet
Hieronymus Benalius, Bergami netus, qui dum vixit, pietatem coluit, and futurae
vitae resurrectionem expectat. Obiit 4. dic Martii, An. Dom. 1585. Aetatis
suae, 58.

On the ground in the midst of the way, lies a fair stone, by the
appearance, entering into a Vault. The stone is thus engraven: This stone
belongs to Francis Cherry, Merchant, Vintner, and to his heirs.

Here lies Margaret Cherry, the wife of Francis Cherry, by whom he had issue
11. children, 4. sons, and 7. daughters, and dyed of the 12. child, 1695.



A small Brass plate is fixed in the wall East, thus inscribed: Of your
charity prayser the soul of Philip Dennis, of London, Esquire: whose body
lies buried before this stone. Who dyed the 3, day of September, 1556.

A fair Marble Tomb much defaced, In the South I Will o^ the Q^^re.
whereon are figured kneeling, a man and a woman, he having three sons
kneeling behind him, and she four Daughters. A labell proceeds from his
mouth, with these words: Ego resurgam, and in carne mea videbe te Iesum, Deum
Sabvatorem meum.

Another from her, thus: Qui Lazarum resuscitasti a monumento fetidum, dona
nobis requiem.

Upon the ground, somewhat near to one another, are diverse fair Gravestones,
bearing these inscriptions: Under this stone lies William Roberts, Citizen and
Mc^cer of London, and Merchant of the Staple at Callis, son of William
Roberts, Alderman of the said place: which William his son deceased the
seventh day of January, Anno Domini, 1555.

Here lies buried the body of Christopher Rawson, late Mercer of London, and
Merchant of the Staple at Callis, who deceased the second day of October, Anno
Domini, 1518.

Here-under lies Master William Robinscn, Alderman of London, Citizen and
Mer^^r, and Merchant of the Staple as Callis, and Elizabeth his wife. He
deceased the thirtieth day of December, 1552.

Here under this stone lies buried the body of Mistress Jane Russell, one of
the Genth women of the Privy Chamber to Qu. Mary, andwife to William Russell,
Sergeant of the Celler to our late Sove^aigne Lady, Queen Elizabeth: And
deceased the 16. day of January, Anno Domini, 1558.



Gods blessings bestowed on the poor of this Parish, by the benevolence and
charity of wel-disposed people.

Given by Margaret Martin, of the Parish of Alhallowes Barking in London, in
the year 1557. to and amongst the poor of the said Parish, yearly for ever,
26. s. 8. d. And to the Churchwardens for their pains, 20. d. to each, to be
paid them yearly for ever.

Given by Mr. William Armorer, to hold for ten years, one load of
Charcoales, and two hundred of Faggots, by his wife to be delivered every
Christmasse, to and amongst the poor of the same Parish.

Given by Mistress Alice Polsted, to the use of the poor of the same Parish,
the sum of 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. to be paid them yearly for ever.

Given by Mr. William Haines, 5. l. a year for ever, after the death of Alice
his wife.

Given by Richard Smith, his dwelling house, known and called by the name of
the White-Lion, situate near to the Tower Hill, to the use of the poor of the
said Parish: after the decease of his wife, and Richard and Margaret his
children, if they happen to dye without issue.

Given by Mr. Wilkinson, after the decease of his wife, the lease of the house
situate at Tower Hill, to be let by the Churchwardens of the said Parish: and
they to give out of the same rent, during the said lease, forty shillings
yearly to the poor of the Parish, and twenty shillings yearly to the
Preacher or Lecturer there. And the residue of the said rent to be distributed
in such sort as in her will is mentioned.

Concerning the bounds and limits of this Parish, according to our precedent
order: They go Northward from the Church, so far as the corner, where is the
back gate, sometime belonging to Sir Francis Walsingham, but now to Sir
Nicholas Salter. Thence they go on aalong by the Garden wall belonging to the
Lady Lumley, to the East corner: where going over, they pass on so far as
the house of one Peter Porter, right over against the great gate of the Lady
Lumleyes house, where turning back down a passage to the South part of Mr.
Covelles garden, in the midst whereof Eastward, upon London wall, their mark is
fixed. Returning back that way again, they cross Southward over Tower Hill,
where sometime stood a Cross, distinguishing the Tower liberty and Alhallowes.

So they go on the Tower-docke, to the house of Mr. Clay, Brewer, where they
go up petty Wales, to the Custom House gate. And there they turn up
Water-lane, on the East side only, till they come forth thereof, and cross
over into Mart-lane, so far as Sir Henry Bakers house, where they turn over
East, and so pass on that end of Mart-lane South, where turning again East to
Sydon-lane, they go up that Lane North, so far as part of the house
belonging to Sir Nicholas Salter, and there fix their mark; returning to
Chappell-Alley, and there ending where they began.

Here I confess my self beholding to Mr. Edward Abbot, Parson of Alhallowes
Barking, and the Officers that there gave me friendly assistance.

By the West end of this Parish Church and Chapel, Sydon-lane.
lies Sydon-lane, now corruptly called Sything-lane, from Tower-street up
North to Hart-street.

In this Sydon-lane diverse fair and large houses are builded; namely, one by
Sir John Allen, sometime Mayor of London, and of Council unto King Henry the
eighth: Sir Francis Walsingham, Knight, principal Secretary to the Queens
Majesty that then lived, was lodged there, and so was the Earl of Essex, etc.

At the North-west corner of this lane stands a proper Parish Church of Saint
Olave, Parish Church of S. Olave in Hart-street.
which Church, together with some houses adjoining, and also others over
against it in Hart-street, are of the said Tower-street Ward.

Monuments in this Parish Church of Saint Olave, be these:

Richard Cely, and Robert Cely, Felmongers, principal builders and benefactors
of this Church.

Dame Ioane, wife to Sir John Zouch, 1439.

John Clarentiaulx, King of Arms.

Thomas Sawle.

Sir Richard Haddon, Mercer, Mayor, 1512.

Thomas Burnell, Mercer, 1548.

Thomas Morley, Gentleman, 1566.

Sir John Radcliffe, Knight, 1568. And Dame Anne his wife, 1585.

Chapone, a Florentine Gent. 1582.

Sir Hamond Vaughan, Knight.

George Stoddard, Merchant, etc.

In the wall, In the Chancell.
on the North side, is an ancient Monument, but very much defaced, appearing to
belong to Sir Richard Haddon, Mercer and Lord Mayor of London, with some show
of two wives, two sons, and three daughters: but the plates of memory are
gone.

A fair Marble stone lies by the Communion Table, On the ground.
and a large plate upon it, on the top whereof these Latin Verses are
engraven: Ortu praeclarus curans illustrior Art
Efficier, patriam deserit iste suam,
Discendi studio varias transiverat oras,
Heu tandem febrius Anglia fintiter.
Nobilitas, virtus, pietas, doctrina bearu^t,
Schraderum si vis pergere plura scies.


In the midst are two fair Coats of Arms, the one having Schrader as the
Motto, and the other, Non Wechtelt.

Lower is this inscription fairly engraven: Georgius Schraderus, Brunswigae,
An. 1580. Men's. Februarii, nobili Familia Patre autore Schradero, a Consiliis
secretissimis illustrissimorum Duc. Brunswig and Luneb. Matre Catharina a
Vechtelt natas, in vera Dei notitia educatus, postquam maximum Germaniae
partem, totam Galliam, Brabant. Fland. vidisset, in Angliam se recepit, inde
domum ut rediret, febri vere correptus, placide in Domino obdornivit, 3. October.
An. salutis, 1605. Aetatis suae, 24. and in hoc tumulo requiescit.

Two fair Marble stones lie something near to this, bearing these
inscriptions: Orate pro anima Roberti Byrche, Woolpacker: Qui obiit vicessimo
septimo die Iulii, Anno Dom. 1433. Cuius animae propitietur Deus.

D. O. M.

Matthaeo Babalio, Nobili Ragusino, pietate ac probitate insigni, immaturaque
morte vita defuncto, Anno aetatis suae, 27. Domini vero, 1567. Men's. Iunio.

Nicholaus Gozzius amicus posuit.



A fair Marble Tomb, with a Knight in Armor lying along on it, and his wife
kneeling by him, thus inscribed: Hic jacet Joannes Radcliffe, Miles, filius
Roberti, Comitis Sussexiae: Qui obiit (nullis susceptis liberis) nono die
Novembris, Anno Domini, 1585.

Here lies Dame Anne, the wife of Sir John Radcliffe, Knight, who dyed the
tenth of December. An. Dom. 1568.



A fair Monument, erected behind the Tomb of Sir John Radcliffe, but somewhat
higher, with half the lively figure of the party it concerns, inscribed
thus: Memoriae Sacrum

Petro Turnero, Gulielmi Turneri Patris inclyto filio, probitatis ac
eruditionis fama, illustrique Medicinae Doctori peritissimo; quem Cantabrigia
aluit, Heidelbrigia Doctoris insignibus honoravit, Oxonium cohonestavit, Pascha
Turnera Conjux moestissima aeternum pietatis, amoris ac doloris sui Monumentu^.
L. M. P.

Henricus Parreus Episc. Wigorniensis,

Paschae Turnerae frater moeroris consors,

Piis defucti manibus hoc Epicediu^ pare^tauit. Obiit Maii 27. Anno Dom. 1614.
Aetatis suae, 72.



In the South-east wall, a stone engraven, with out any plate, bearing this
inscription: Gulielmo Turnero, Medico, ac Theologo peritissimo, Decano Wellens.
Per Annos triginta in utraque scientia exercitatissimus, Ecclesiae and
Reipublicae profuit, and contra utriusque pernitiosissimos hosts; maxim vero
Romanum Antichristum fortissimus Jesu Christi Miles acerrime dimicavit, ac
tandem corpus senio and laboribus compertum, in spem beatissim. resurrectionis
hic deposuit; devictis Christi virtute mundi, carnisque civibus cap. triumphat
in aeternum.

Magnus Apollinea,
quondam Turnerus in art,
Magnus and in vera
religione fuit:
Mors tamen obrepens,
majorem reddidit illum,
Civis enim Coeli
regna superna tenet.
Obiit 7. die Iulii, An. Dom. 1568.

Under it, upon a small plate is thus engraven:

In God is my whole trust. I. O. 1591.

John Orgen, and Helen his wife.

As I was, so be ye,
As I am, you shall be.
What I gave, that I have,
What I spent, that I had:
Thus I count all my cost,
What I left, that I lost.
There is a very fair Tomb erected in the South wall of the Quire, whereon
these lines are engraven: Hic juxta in Choro situs est Jacobus Deane, Eques
auratus, vir bonus and in operibus charitatis, qui primo Susanna^ filiam
Christopheri Bumsted Generos. Vxorem habuit, ex qua unicum suscepit filiolum.
Postea Elizab. filiam Hugon. Offley Armigeri, Alderm. Land. Deinde Elizab.
filiam Richardi Thornehill Armig. and viduam Christopheri Web Arm. duxit
conjuge^, ex qua duas genuit filiolas, nullam tamen relinquens prolem, se
moriente, superstitem, An. Aetatis, 63. 15. Maii, 1608. in Domino.

Two fair stones plated, one by another, thus inscribed: Here lies buried (in
the mercy of God) the bodies of Thomas Beckingham, Esquire, Merchant of the
Staple at Callis, and Anne his wife. He deceased the 4. day of December. An. Dom.
1576. And she the 22. of May, 1565.

Here lies Thomas Prenthoit, Citizen and Vpholder of London, and Joane his
wife. He deceased the 7. day of April, Anno Domini, 1521.



A fair Alabaster Tomb, In the Northside of the Quire.
and the figure of a man kneeling on it, thus inscribed: D. O. M.

Hic situs est Petrus Caponius, Florentinus in vita Nobilitate clarus, morum
integritate, summis Principibus gratissimus, exilium quod iniquiore fato
subierat constanter tulit. Obiit An. aetaris, 32. Sal. 1582. 6. Call. Novembris.

Mortuum Britannia, quem vivum in sinu tulerat, in sinu nec dum discincto
conservat.

Petrus Landus, ex parentibus Florentinis, apud Lugdunum Galliae natus, hoc
amoris and moeroris Monumentum P.



Upon two plates fixed in the wall, these inscriptions: Here-under lies buried
the body of Philip Van Wyllender, Esquire, Musician, and one of the privy
Chamber to King Henry the eight of most famous memory, and to King Edward the
sixth. Who dyed the 24. day of February, Ann. Dom. 1553. And had issue by
Frances his wife, four sons, and two daughters, etc.

Here lies buried the body of Thomas Burnell, late Citizen and Mercer of
London, and Merchant of the Staple at Callis. He deceased the 26. day of
February, Ann. Dom. 1448.



Coming now to the charities given to the poor in this Parish, I find no
nomination of any, but of one Mistress Bainham, and Sir James Deane, whose gifts
are benevolence in bread weekly to the poor. There stands also in the lower
part of the Church, a memory of one yet living, inscribed thus: John High-Lord,
senior, of London, Skinner, in his life time, and in the 85. year of his age,
gave forty shillings yearly for ever, to be bestowed in New Castle Coals, for
the relief of the poor in this Parish of S. Olave in Hare-street.

There are many men of great and good account in this Parish, who at diverse
times are bountiful unto the poor in money, and as they send it, it is
faithfully divided among them.

Now for the limits and bounds of the Parish, they go on from the Church West,
and turning down on the East side of Mart-lane, cross the way over to Sir
Henry Bakers house, and so go up on the West side, till turning into
Hartstreet, they go on into Sydon-lane, so far as their mark stands, on
the house of Sir Nicholas Salter, joining to theirs of Barking Parish. Then
they go over on the West side, and so pass down Crochet Friars, to
Tower Hill, to the further part of the Lady Lumleys garden wall, and the back
gate of the foresaid Sir Nicholas, where turning back to Porters house, and
going on Northward, they go into an Alley, which guides them to the North end
of Master Covels garden, and there they fix their mark by theirs of Barking,
on London Wall.

So returning again, they go up toward Aldgate on the East side, so far as
directly against the sign of the Cock, returning back on the West side to
the Pumpe in Crochet Friars, and then to the place where they began.

Here I was favored by Master John Simpson, Parson of S. Olaves, and the
friendly Officers there.

Then have ye out of Tower street also on the North side, Mart-lane, of a Mart
kept about Blanch Chappelton, or Appleton.
one other lane, called Mart-Lane, which runs up toward the North, and is
for the most part of this Tower-street Ward; which lane is about the third
quarter thereof, divided from Aldgate Ward, by a chain to be drawn thwart
the said lane, above the West end of Hart-street. Cokedon-lane, sometime at the
South-west end of Mart-lane, I read of.

A third lane out of Tower-street on the North side, Mincheon lane.
is called Mincheon-lane, so called of Tenements there, sometime pertaining to
the Minchuns or Nuns of S. Helens in Bishopsgate-street: This Lane is all of
the said Ward, except the corner house toward Fen-Church-street.

In this lane of old time dwelled diverse strangers borne, of Genoa and those
parts; these were commonly called Galley-men, Galley-men dwelled there.
as men that came up in the Galleys, brought up Wines and other Merchandises,
which they landed in Thames street, at a place called Galley Key: they had a
certain coin of silver amongst themselves, which were half pence of Genoa,
and were called Galley halfe-pence. These halfe-pence were forbidden in the 13.
year of King Henry the 4. and again by Parliament in the 4. of Henry the 5.
it was enacted, that if any person bring into this Realm Galley halfepence,
Suskins, or Dodkins, he should be punished as a Thief, and he that takes or
pays such money, shall lose an hundred shillings, whereof the King shall have
the one half, and he that will sue, the other half: notwithstanding in my
youth I have seen them pass current, but with some difficulty, for that the
English halfe-pence were then (though not so broad) somewhat thicker and
stronger.

The Cloth-workers Hall is in this Lane. Cloth. workers Hall.
Then at the West end of Tower-street, have ye a little turning toward the
North, Gristes house.
to a fair house, sometime belonging to one named Griste, for he dwelled
there in the year 1449. And Jack Cade, Captain of the Rebels in Kent, being
by him in this his house feasted, when he had dined, like an unkind guest,
robbed him of all that was there to be found worth the carriage.

Next to this is another fair house, sometime builded by Angel Dunne, Grocer,
John Champneis, Alderman blind.
Alderman of London; since possessed by Sir John Champneies, Alderman and Mayor
of London. He builded in this house an high Tower of Brick, the first that
ever I heard of in any private man's house, to overlooke his neighbors in this
City. But this delight of his eye was punished with blindness some years
before his death. Since that time, Sir Percevall Heart, a jolly Courtier, and
Knight Harbenger to the Queen, was lodged there, etc.

From this house somewhat West, is the Parish Church and Parsonage house of
Saint Margaret Pattens, to the which Church and house on the North side, and as
far over against on the South, stretches the farthest West part of this
Ward. And therefore, to begin again at the East end of Tower-street; on the
South side have ye Beare-lane, wherein are many fair houses, and runs down
to Thames Street. The next is Sporiar-lane, Sporiar lane or VVater-lane, or
Hart-lane.
of old time so called, but since and of later time, named, Water-lane, because
it runs down to the Watergate by the Custom House in Thames Street:
Harpe-lane.
then is there Hart-lane for Harp-lane, which likewise runs down into
Thames Street.

In this Hart-lane is the Bakers Hall, sometime the dwelling house of John
Chichley, Bakers Hall.
Chamberlain of London, who was son to William Chichley, Alderman of London,
brother to William Chichley, Archdeacon of Canturbury, Nephew to Robert
Chichley, Mayor of London, and to Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canturbury.

This John Chichley (says our Leyland) had four and twenty children. Sir Tho.
Kitrioll of Kent, after he had been long prisoner in France, married Elizabeth,
one of the Daughters of this Chichley, by whom he had this Chichleyes house.

This Elizabeth was secondly married to Sir Ralfe Ashton, Knight Marshall: and
thirdly, to Sir John Bourchier, Uncle to the late Bourchier, Earl of Essex,
but she never had child. Edward Poynings made part with Bourchier, and
Elizabeth to have Ostenhanger in Kent, after their death, and entered into it
they living.

In Tower-street, between Hart-lane, and Church-lane, Galley Row.
was a quadrant, called Galley Row, Church lane. by East.
because Galley men dwelled there. Church lane in the West.
Then have ye two lanes out of Tower-street, both called Church-lanes, because
one runs down by the East end of Saint Dunstans Church, and the other by
the West end of the same: out of the West lane, turns another lane, West
toward Saint Mary Hill, and is called Fowle-lane, Foul lane.
which is for the most of Tower-street Ward.

This Church of Saint Dunstane is called in the East, Parish Church of S.
Dunstane in the East.
for difference from one other of the same name in the West: it is a fair and
large Church of an ancient building, and within a large Churchyard: it has a
great Parish of many rich Merchants, and other occupiers of diverse trads;
namely Salters and Ironmongers.

The Monuments in that Church be ^hese:

In the Quire John Kennington Parson there buried, 1374.

Willim Islip, Parlon, 1382.

John Kiryoll Esquire, brother to Thomas Kiryoll, 1400.

Nicholas Bond.

Thomas Barry, Merchant, 1445.

Robert Shelley, Esquire, 1420.

Robert Pepper, Grocer, 1445.

John Norwich, Grocer, 1390.

Alice Brom, wife to John Coventry, sometime Mayor of London, 1433.

William Isaac, Draper, Alderman, 1508.

Edward Skales, Merchant, 1521.

John Ricroft, Esquire, Sergeant of the Larder to Henry the seventh and Henry
the eighth, 1532.

Edward Waters, Esquire, Sergeant at Arms, 1558.

Sir Bartholomew James, Draper, Mayor 1479. buried under a fair Monument, with
his Lady.

Ralfe Greenway, Grocer, Alderman, put under the stone of Robert Pepper, 1559.

Thomas Bledlow, one of the Sheriffs, 1472.

James Bacon, Fishmonger, Sheriff, 1573.

Sir Richard Champion, Draper, Mayor 1568.

Henry Herdson, Skinner, Alderman, 1555.

Sir James Granado Knight.

William Hariot, Draper, Mayor, 1481. buried in a fair Chapel, by him
builded, 1517.

John Tate, son to Sir John Tate, in the same Chapel, in the North wall.

Sir Christopher Draper, Ironmonger, Mayor, 1566. buried 1580. and many other
worshipful personages besides, whose monuments (for the most part) are
altogether defaced, but such as remain, and merit memory, I will declare them
in this order following.

On the South side of the Chancell, stands an ancient Marble Tomb, In the
Chancell.
cooped about with filliting of brass plates, bearing these words engraven on
them: Hic jacet Bartholomeus James, Miles, Civis and Pannarius, ac Aldermannus,
necnon quondam Mayor hujus inclitae Civitatis London, etc.

Close by it stands another very fair Alabaster Tomb, richly and curiously
gilded, and two ancient figures of Aldermen in Scarlet kneeling, the one, at
one end of the Tomb in a goodly Arch, the other, at the other end in like
manner, and a comely figure of a Lady between them, who was wife to them both.
By the one stands a Table, with this inscription: Here lies Henry Heardsons
corpse,
within this Tomb of stone:
His soul (through faith in Christ's death,)
to God in Heaven is gone.
VVhiles that he lived an Alderman,
and Skinner was his state:
To Virtue bare he all his love,
To vice he bare his hate.
His Alms that weekly he bestowed,
within this Parish here,
May witness to the poores relief,
what good will he did bear.
He had to wife one Barbara,
which made this Tomb you see:
By whom he had of issue store,
eight Sons and Daughters three.
Obiit 22. December. An. Dom. 1555.


By the other stands the like Table, thus inscribed: The corpse of Richard
Champion, Knight,
Mayor and Draper, herein does rest^
Whose soul by most assured hope,
with Christ in heaven is blessed.
His life was such, and so employed,
to right from wrong; that he
Whom God did so direct in life,
must needs with comfort dye:
Both rich and poor did like him well,
and yet do praise his name:
Though he behind him left no child,
which might declare the same.
His weekly alms that is bestowed,
within this Parish here:
Does witness to the poores comfort,
the good will he did bear.
Obiit 30. Octobris, An. Dom. 1568.


There is a fair Alabaster Tomb, In the South I Will of the Quire.
principally belonging to Sir Christopher Draper, Knight, yet bearing all these
inscriptions following, in regard of the several marriages of his daughters:
Sir Christopher Draper; Knight, Ironmonger, and Lord Mayor of London, 1560.
deceased, being 70. years of age. Lady Margaret his wife made this Monument
for him.

Sir William Web, Knight, Salter and Lord Mayor of London, 1591. deceased the
fourth day of July, 1599. Lady Bennet his Wife, yet living, Daughter to Sir
Christopher Draper, Knight performed this in her love to him.

Sir Wolstane Dixie, Knight, Skinner and Lord Mayor of London, An. Dom. 1582.
deceased, being 69. years of age. Lady Agnes his Wife, Daughter to Sir
Christopher Draper, Knight, deceased in the 37. year of her age.

Sir Henry Billingsley, Knight, Haberdasher, and Lord Mayor of London, 1596.
yet living in An. 1602. Mistress Bridget his Wife, Daughter to Sir Christopher
Draper, Knight, deceased in the 44. year of her age. Master Christopher
Woodroffe, son to the said Mistress Bridget, deceased 37. years of age.

Hoc Monumentum amoris ergo posuit Domina Benet Web superstes in memoriam sui
coniugis dignissimi equitis Guil Web, defuncti 4. Iulii, 1599. Vt etiam in
observantiam officii erga parents suos Dom. Christ. Draper, and Margaretam
Vxorem eius, necnon caeteros tune sorores tum posteros praefixos.



Underneath it is an ancient Marble Monument, and upon a plate are these words
engraven: Here lies buried James Bacon, late of London Alderman, who departed
this mortal life, the 5. day of June, Anno Dom. 1573. Having issue by Mary
(...) first wife, one Son and three Daughters. And by Margaret his second wife,
three sons, and one Daughter. And by Anne his third wife, no child, etc.

On the North side of the Chancell is a fair Monument erected in the wall,
bearing this inscription: Johannes Hawkins, Eques Auratus, clariss. Regiae
Marinarum causarum Thesaurarius. Qui cum XLIIII. annos muniis bellicis, and
longis periculosisque navigationibus detegendis novis regionibus, ad Patriae
utilitatem, and suam ipsius gloriam, strenuam and egregiam operam navasset, in
expeditione, cui Generalis praefuit ad Indiam occidentalem dum in Auchoris ad
portum S. Ioannis in insala Boriquena staret, Placide in Domino ad Coelestem
Patriam emigravit, 12. die Novembris, Anno salutis, 1595. In cujus memoriam ob
virtutem, and resgestas, Domina Margareta Hawkins, Vxor moestissima, hoc
monumentum cum lacrymis posuit.

By the Tomb hangs a fair Table, fastened in the wall, with these Verses in
English: Dame Margaret,
a Widow well affected,
This Monument
of memory erected,
Deciphering unto
the viewers sight,
The life and death
of Sir John Hawkins, Knight,
One fearing God,
and loyal to his Queen,
True to the State
by trial ever seen,
Kind to his Wives,
both Gentlewomen borne,
Whose counterfeits
with grace this work adorn.
Dame Katharine
the first, of rare report,
Dame Margaret
the last, of Court consort,
Attendant on
the Chamber and the Bed
Of Englands Queen
ELIZABETH, our head
Next under Christ,
of whom all Princes hold
Their Scepters, States,
and Diadems of Gold:
Free to their friends
on either side his kin,
Careful to keep
the credit he was in:
Unto the Seamen
beneficial,
As testifies
Chattams Hospital.
The poor of Plymouth,
and of Debtford Town,
Have had, now have,
and shall have many a crown;
Proceeding from
his liberality,
By way of great
and gracious Legacy.
This Parish of
Saint Dunstane standing East,
(Wherein he dwelt
full thirty years at least)
Has of the springs
of his good will a part,
Derived from
the Fountain of his heart,
All which bequests,
with many more unsaid,
Dame Margaret
has bountifully paid.
Deep of conceit,
in speaking grave and wise,
Endighting swift,
and pregnant to devise;
In conference
revealing haughty skill,
In all affairs
having a Worthies will,
On Sea and Land
spending his course and time,
By steps of years
as he to age did climb.
God has his soul,
the Sea his body keeps,
Where (for a while)
as Jonas, now he sleeps;
Till he which said
To Lazarus, Comeforth;
Awake this Knight,
and give to him his worth.
In Christian faith,
and faithful penitence,
In quickening hope,
and constant patience,
He running ran
a faithful Pilgrims race,
God giving him
the guiding of his grace.
Ending his life
with his experience,
By deep decree
of Gods high providence,
His years to six times
ten and three amounting,
The ninth, the seventh
Climactericke by counting:
Dame Katharine,
his first religious Wife,
Saw years thrice ten
and two of mortal life:
Leaving the world the sixth,
the seventh ascending,
Thus he and she,
alike their compass ending,
Asunder both
by death of flesh alone,
Together both insoule,
two making one,
Among the Saints above,
from troubles free,
Where two in one shall meet,
and make up three.
The Christian Knight
and his good Ladies twain,
Flesh, Soul and Spirit
united once again;
Beholding Christ,
who comfortably says,
Come, mine Elect,
receive the Crown of faith.
Lenvoy.
Give God, says Christ,
give Caesar lawful right,
Owe no man, says Saint Paul,
ne mine, ne mite
Save love, which made
this chaste memorial,
Subscribed with
Truths restimoniall.


FINIS.
Now, in regard that this Parish of S. Dunstane is the last (in our account) of
Tower-street Ward, we are to speak of Gods blessings there to the poor, which
I find to be seven shillings three pence every Sunday through the year, given
in ready money, beside bread and other gifts, according to the wills and
dispositions of Sir Richard Champion, and Master Alderman Heardson, with Coals
given beside at certain times. More, I find, that one man has given yearly
for ever, an whole Ox to be distributed by a quarter thereof quarterly, and a
pecke of Oate-meale there withal to the poor. But yet so discreetly ordered,
that they that have the quarter of Beese and pecke of Oate-meale at one
quarter, must stay till other poor be so served, and that it comes to their
turn again. Other charities there are which came in gifts of ready money, and
are accordingly truly distributed.

In the perambulation of this Parish, they go first so far North from the
Church, as to the house next William Offington, and thence returning, walk
down on the North side of Tower-street, so far as Mincheon-lane, and to the
house of Master Dumbelowe, next to Clothworkers Hall, where they return
again, and so go on to the sign of the Dolphine in Tower-street, being a
Tavern. There they cross the way, and go down the West side only of
Water-lane, and then walk along Thames Street, leaving the Custom house,
passing on to Smarts-key; whence returning back into the Crosse-lane, so far
as Sir Cuthbert Buckles house, now in the custody of Sir John Lemnian, Knight,
and Lord Mayor of London, they go home to the place where they began. Here I
was favored by Master John Childerlay, Doctor of Divinity, my worthy good
friend, and his diligent Officers.

Now as concerning the two Church-lanes, they meeting on the South side of this
Church and Churchyard, do join in one: and running down to the
Thames Street, the same is called Saint Dunstans Hill: at the lower end whereof
the said Thames Street (toward the West, on both sides almost to Belins-gate
but toward the East up to the VVater-gate, by the Bulwark of the Tower) is
all of Tower-street Ward. In this street on the Thames side, are diverse large
landing places, called VVharffes, or Keys, for Cranage up of VVares and
Merchandise, as also for shipping of Wares from thence to be transported.

These Wharffes and Keys commonly bear the names of their owners, and are
therefore changeable. I read, in the 26. of Henry the sixth, that in the Parish
of Saint Dunstane in the East, a tenement called Passekes Wharffe, Passekes
VVharffe, and Horners Key.
and another called Horners Key in Thames Street, were granted to William
Harindon Esquire. I read also, that in the sixth of Richard the second, John
Churchman Grocer, for the quiet of Merchants, did newly build a certain house
upon the Key, called Wool-wharffe, Wool-wharffe by Customers Key.
in the Tower-street Ward, in the Parish of Alballewes Barking, betwixt the
tenement of Paul Salisbury, on the East part, and the Lane called the
Watergate on the West, Watergate by Wool Key.
to serve for Tronage, or weighing of VVools in the Port of London: Custom
house.
Whereupon, the King granted, that during the life of the said John, Tronage of
Wools.
the asoresaid Tronage should be held an kept in the said house, with easements
there for the Balances and Weights, and a counting place for the Customer,
Controwlers, Clerks and other Officers of the said Tronage, together with
ingresse and regresse to and from the same, even as was had in other places,
where the said Tronage was wont to be kept, and that the King should pay
yearly to the said John (during his life) forty shillings, at the terms of S.
Michael and Easter, by even portions by the hands of his Customer, Custom
house.
without any other payment to the said John, as in the Indenture thereof more
at large appears.

Near unto this Customers Key, toward the East, is the said Watergate, and
West from it, Porters Key or Porters lane.
Porters Key: then Galley Key, Galley Key.
where the Galleys were used to unlade, and land their Merchandises and wares:
and that part of Thames street was therefore of some called Galley row, but
more commonly, Petty-Wales. Petty-Wales.


On the North side, as well as on the South of this Thames Street, are many
fair houses, large for stowage, builded for Merchants, toward the East end
thereof, namely, over against Galley Key, Wool Key, and the Custom House.
There have been of old time some large buildings of stone, the ruins whereof
do yet remain, but the first builders and owners of them are worn out of
memory: wherefore the common people affirm Julius Caesar to be the builder
thereof, as also of the Tower it self, but thereof I have spoken already. Some
are of another opinion, and that a more likely, that this great stone building,
was sometime the lodging appointed for the Princes of Wales, when they repaired
to this City, and that therefore the street in that part is called Petty
Wales, Princes of Wales their lodging.
which name remains there most commonly until this day: even as where the
Kings of Scotland were used to be lodged betwxit Charing-crosse, and
White Hall, it is likewise called Scotland: and where the Earls of Britain
were lodged without Aldersgate, the street is called Britain street, etc.

The said building might (of old time) pertain to the Princes of Wales, as is
aforesaid, but is since turned to other use.

It is before noted of Galley Key, that the Galleys of Italy, The Merchants of
Italy their lodging by their Galleys.
and other parts, did there discharge their VVines and Merchandises brought to
this City. It is like therefore that the Merchants and Owners procured the
place to build upon for their lodgings and storehouses, as the Merchants of
Haunce of Almaine were licensed to have an house, called Guilda Teutonicorum,
the Guild Hall of the Germans.

Also the Merchants of Bordeaux were licensed to build at the Vintry, strongly
with stone, as may yet be seen, and seems old, though often repaired: much
more cause have these buildings in Petty Wales (though as lately builded, and
part^y of the like stone brought from Cane in Normandy) to seem old, No
Galleys landed here in memory of men living.
which for many years, to wit, since the Galleys left their course of landing
there, has fallen to ruin, and been letten out for stabling of horses, to
Tipplers of Beer, and such like. Amongst others, one Mother Mampudding (as
they termed her) for many years kept this house, or a great part thereof, for
victualling: and it seems, that the builders of the Hall of this house were
Shipwrights, and not house-Carpenters: for the frame thereof (being but low) is
raised of certain principal posts of maine timber, A strange kind of building
by the Shippe-wrights or Galley-men.
fixed deep in the ground, without any groundsell, boorded close round about on
the inside, having none other wall from the ground to the roof: those boords
not exceeding the length of a Clap-boord, about an inch thick, every board
ledging over other, as in a Ship or Gally nailed with Ship nails called rough,
and clench, to wit, rough nails with broad round heads, and elenched on the
other side with square plares of Iron. The roof of this Hall is also wronght
of the like board, and nailed with rough and clench, and seems as it were a
Gally, the Keele turned upwards: and I observed, that no worm or rottenness
is seen to have entered into either board or timber of that Hall, and
therefore, in mine opinion, of no great antiquity.

I read in the 44. of Edward the third, An Hospital for lunaticke or frenzy
people.
that an Hospital in the Parish of Barking Church, was founded by Robert
Denton Chaplen, for the sustentation of poor Priests, and other both men and
women, that were sick of the Phrenzie, there to remain till they were
perfectly whole, and restored to good memory.

Also I read, that in the sixth of Hen. 5. there was in the Tower ward, a
Message or great house, called Cobhams Inn: Cobhams Inn.
and in the 37. of Henry the sixth, a Message in Thames street, pertaining to
Richard Longvile, etc. Some of the ruins before spoken of, may seem to be of
the foresaid Hospital, belonging peradventure to some Prior Alieu, and so
suppressed amongst the rest, in the reign of Edward the third, or Henry the
fifth, who suppressed them all.

Thus much for the bounds and Antiquity of this Ward, wherein noted, first, the
Tower of London, three Parish Churches, the Custom House, and two Hals of
Companies; to wit, the Cloth-workers, and the Bakers.

This Ward has an Alderman, his Deputy, Common Counselors eight, Constables
thirteen, Scavengers twelve, VVard-mote men thirteen, and a Beadle: it is
taxed to the Fifteen at six and twenty pounds.

EALDGATE WARD.
THE second Ward within the Walls on the East part, Ealdgate ward.
is called Ealdgate Ward, as taking name of the same Gate. The principal
street of this Ward begins at Ealdgate, stretching West to sometime a fair
Well, where now a Pumpe is placed. From thence (the way being divided into
twain) the first and principal street, (called Aldgate-street) runs on the
South side to Lime-street corner, and half that street down on the left hand,
is also of that Ward.

In the mid way on that South side, betwixt Ealdgate and Lime-street, is
Hart-horne Alley, Hart-horne Alley.
a way that goes through into Fen-Church street, over against Northumberland
House. Then have ye Brick-layers Hall, Bricklayers Hall. Sprinkle Alley.
and another Alley, called Sprinkle Alley, now named Sugarloafe Alley, of the
like sign.

Then is there a fair house, with diverse Tenements near adjoining, sometime
belonging to a late dissolved Priory, but since possessed by Misti is
Cornewallies, widow, and her heirs, by the gift of King Henry the eighth, in
reward of fire puddings (as it was commonly said) by her made, wherewith she
had presented him: such was the Princely liberality of those times. Of later
time, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, Knight, was lodged there.

Then somewhat more west is Belzetters lane, Belzetters Lane.
so called of the first builder and owner thereof; now corruptly called
Billitar lane. Betwixt this Belzetters lane and Limestreet, was (of later time)
a frame of three fair houses, set up in the year 1590. in place where before
was a large Garden-plot, enclosed from the high street with a Brick wall, which
wall being taken down, and the ground dug deep for Cellerage, there was
found right under the said Brick wall, another wall of stone, Wall, gate and
windows of stone (...) under ground.
with a gate arched of stone, and gates of timber to be closed in the midst
toward the street; The timber of the gates was consumed, but the hinges of
iron still remained on their scaples on both the sides.

Moreover, in that Wall were square windows, with bars of iron on either
side the gate^ this wall was under ground above two fathomes deep, as I then
esteemed it, and seems to be the ruins of some house burned in the reign of
King Stephen, when the fire began in the house of one Aleward, near London
stone, and consumed East to Ealdgate; whereby it appears, how greatly the
ground of this City has been in that place raised.

On the North side, this principal street stretches to the West corner of
Saint Andrews Church, and then the Ward turns toward the North, by S. Mary
street, S. Mary street
on the East side, to S. Augustines Church in the Wall, and so by Buries marks
again, or about by the Wall to Ealdgate.

The second way from Ealdgate, more toward the South, from the Pumpe
aforesaid, is called Fen-Church street, and is of Ealdgate Ward, till ye come
to Calver Alley, Culver Alley.
on the West side of Ironmongers Hall, where sometime was a lane, which went
out of Fen-church street to the midst of Limestreet: but this lane was
stopped up, for suspicion of Thieves that lurked there by night.

Again, to Ealdgate, (out of the principal street, even by the gate, and wall
of the City) runs a lane South, to Crossed or Cro^^^ed Friars, and then
Woodroofe lane, to the Tower Hill, and out of this Lane West, a street called
Hart-street, Hartstreet.
which of that ward stretches to Sydon-lane, by S. Olaves Church. One other
lane more West from Ealdgate, goes by Northumberland House toward the Crossed
Friars: then have ye on the same side, the North end of Mart lane, and
Blanch-axleton or Chappelton, where that Ward ends.

Thus much for the bounds: Now for Monuments, or places most ancient and
notable. I am first to begin with the late dissolved Priory of the holy
Trinity, called Christs-church, on the right hand within Ealdgate. This Prior^e
was founded by Matilda, Queen, wife to Henry the first, in the same place
where Siredus sometime began to erect a Church, in honor of that Cross, and
and of S. Mary Magdalen, of which the Deane and Chapter of Waltham were wont to
receive thirty shillings. The Queen was to acquire her Church thereof, and in
exchange gave unto them a Mill. King Henry her Husband confirmed her gift. This
Church was given to Norman, Priory of the Trinity of Canons regular.
the first Canon regular in all England.

The said Queen also gave unto the same Church, and those that served God
therein, the plot of Ealdgate, and the Soke thereunto belonging, with all
customs, so free as she had held the same, and 25. l. Blanks, which she had of
the City of Excesser, as appears by her Deed, wherein she names the house
of Christs-church, and reports Ealdgate to be of her Demains, which she
grants, with two parts of the rent of the City of Excest. Norman took on him
to be Prior of Christs-church, in the year of Christ, 1108. in the Parishes of
S. Mary Magdalen, S. Michael, S. Katharine, and the blessed Trinity, which now
was made but one Parish of the holy Trinity, and was (in old time) of the holy
Cross, or holy Rood parish.

The Priorie was builded on a piece of ground in the parish of Saint Katharine,
toward Ealdgate, which lies in length betwixt the Kings street, by the which
men go toward Ealdgate, near to the Chapel of Saint Michael toward the
North, and contains in length eighty thee Else; half quarter, and half
quartern of the Kings Iron Eln, and lies in breadth; etc. The Soke and Ward of
Ealdgate was then bounded, as I have before shown: the Queen was a mean also,
that the land and English Knighten Guild was given unto the Prior Norman, and
the Honorable man Geffrey de Clinton was a great helper therein, and obtained,
that the Canons might enclose the way betwixt their Church and the wall of the
City, etc. This Priorie in process of time became a very fair and large
Church, rich in Lands and ornaments, and passed all the Priories in the City
of London, or shire of Middlesex, Prior of Christs-Church an Alderman of London.
the Prior whereof was an Alderman of London, to wit, of Portsoken Ward.

I read, that Eustacius, the eighth Prior, about the year 1264. because he
would not deal with temporal matters, instituted Theobald Fitz Iuonis,
Alderman of Portsoken Ward under him, and that William Rising, Prior of
Christs-Church, was sworn Alderman of the said Portsoken Ward, in the first of
Richard the second. These Priors have sitten and ridden amongst the Aldermen of
London, in Liverie like unto them, saving that his habit was in shape of a
spiritual person, as I my self have seen in my childhood: at which time,
the Prior kept a most bountiful house of meat and drink, both for rich and
poor, as well within the house, as at the gates, to all comers, according to
their estates.

These were the Monuments in this Church:

Sir Robert Turk, and Dame Alice his wife.

John Tirell, Esquire.

Simon Kempe, Esquire.

James Manthrope, Esquire.

John Ascue, Esquire.

Tho. Fauset of Salset, Esquire.

John Kempe, Gentleman.

Robert Chirwide, Esquire.

Sir John Henningham, and Dame Isabel his wife.

Dame Agnes, wife to Sir William Bardolph, and then to Sir Thomas Mortimer.

John Ashfield, Esquire.

Sir John Deddam, Knight.

Sir Ambrose Charcam.

Ioane, wife to Thomas Nucke, Gent.

John Husse, Esquire.

John Beringham, Esquire.

Thomas Geodwine, Esquire.

Ralfe Walls, Esquire.

Dame Margaret, daughter to Sir Ralfe Cheny, wife to Sir John Barkley, to Sir
Thomas Barnes, and to Sir W. Bursire.

William Roose.

Simon Frances.

John Breton, Esquire.

Helling, Esquire.

John Malwen and his wife.

Anthony Wels, son to John Wels.

Nicholas de Avesey, and Margery his wife.

Anthony, son to John Milles.

Baldwine, son to King Stephen, and Matilda, daughter to King Stephen, wife
to the Earl of Mellen.

Henry Fitzalwine, Mayor of London, 1213.

Geffrey Mandevile, 1215. And many other.

But to conclude of this Priory: King Henry the eighth, minding to reward Sir
Thomas Audley, Speaker of the Parliament against Cardinal Woolsey, as ye may
read in Hall, sent for the Prior, commending him for his hospitality, promised
him preferment, as a man worthy of a far greater dignity; which promise surely
he performed, and compounded with him, though in what sort I never heard,
Priory of the holy Trinity surrendered and suppressed
so that the Priory, with the appurtenances, was surrendered to the King, in the
month of July, in the year 1531. the 23. of the said Kings reign. The Canons
were sent to other houses of the same order, and the Priorie, with the
appurtenances, King Henry gave to Sir Thomas Audley, newly Knighted, and
afterward made Lord Chancelour.

Sir Thomas Audley offered the great Church of this Priorie, with a ring of
nine Bells well tuned (whereof four the greatest were since sold to the Parish
of Stebunhith, and the five lesser to the parish of S. Stephen in
Coleman-street) to the parishioners of S. Katharine Christs-Church, in exchange
for their small Parish Church, minding to have pulled it down, and to have
builded there toward the street: But the parishioners, having doubts in their
heads of afterclaps, refused the offer.

Then was the Priory Church and steeple proffered to whomsoever would take it
down, and carry it from the ground; but no man would undertake the offer.
Whereupon, Sir Thomas Audley was feign to be at more charges, than could be
made of the stones, timber, lead, iron, etc. For the workmen, with great
labor, beginning at the top, loosed stone from stone, and threw them down,
whereby the most part of them were broken, and few remained whole, and those
were sold very cheap: for all the buildings then made about the City, were of
Brick and Timber. At that time, any man in the City, might have a Cart-load
of stone for paving, brought to his door for 6. d. or 7. d. with the carriage.

The said Thomas Lord Audley builded and dwelt on this Priorie during his life,
and dyed there in the year 1544. since the which time, the said Priorie came
(by marriage of the Lord Audleys daughter and heir) unto Thomas, The Duke
Place.
late Duke of Norfolk, and was then called the Dukes Place.

At this time the Inhabitants, The inhabitants the Duke place (...) themselves
Parishionem of St. Katharine Cree (...) by lacked a Church of their own.
dwelling and abiding in the said Dukes place, became utterly destitute of any
Parish Church, for resorting to Gods Divine Service, and the administration of
the blessed Sacraments, which in the time of their former blind zeal, the
demolished Priory not only seemed for their use, but infinite other thereto
resorting. In which respect, the Parish Church of S. Katharine being so near,
and standing in the Coemitery or Churchyard of the late dissolved Priory of
the Holy Trinity, whereby it was called Saint Katharine Christ's Church: they
resorted thither at the hours of Divine Service, and benefit of the blessed
Sacraments; whereby (to speak rightly) they became a burden to the said
Parish, yet well enough borne withal, in regard of the benefit ensuing by
them. So that they carried the respect of equal Parishioners, exercising and
accomplishing all duties there, even as if it had been their own proper
Parish.

The long continuance of them in this kind, The time of such continuance, did
merely make a custom of it in opinion.
although some much misliked, and giadly would have compassed means for remedy
thereof: yet their power not stretching so far, nor the way (as yet fiting for
their purpose; they remained contented against their wills, till time would fit
them with more convenient opportunity. Ground they wanted not, for raising a
sufficient Parish Church to themselves, neither did any good will fail in them
for the effecting their purpose: but only were curbed by the lack of
strength, how and which way to bring it about.

At length, perceiving their ground (intended for so good a use to themselves)
aimed at for buildings to private men's benefits, that so they might be
frustrate of any such help, when occasion should in better manner shine on
them: Some of the best advised among them, by petition solicited the Lord
Archbishop of Canturbury, to make their desire and intention known to the Kings
most excellent Majesty, The Archbishop moved King James in the justice of the
suit.
which most graciously he did. And the King finding the case so truly honest
and religious, for new erecting a Church where such necessity required, and
where superstition had so long time formerly been harbored: not only gave
the Lord Archbishop and the suitors both thanks and commendation; but also
under his Hand and broad Seal, authorizable warrant for their proceeding. The
Lord Mayor and Senate of Aldermen having intelligence in the case, and
perceiving what an honor would redound thereby, first to God, who inspired
them thereto, next to the King for so Royally granting the suit, and then to
the City for furthering it to effect: notwithstanding contrary opposition by
them, who would have had them still continue, as formerly they were, without
benefit of a parish Church of their own, it proceeded on with good and
prosperous success, to the no mean honor and commendation of the Lord Mayor
then being, Sir Edward Barkham by name, The (...), decayed ruins of (...)
Christ-Church in the Dukes place.
the Court of Aldermen, and state of this famous City, by whose good means it
is made a very beautiful and ^^mely Parish Church, it being called in the time
of re-edifying, Trinity Christ's Church, raised out of the long decayed ruins,
of Trinity Priory in the Dukes-place.

On a fair Table hanging in the Chancell, are these Verses depicted: Ac David
could
h^^ eyes no rest afford,
Till he had found
a place out to the Lord,
To build an Altar:
So this man of worth,
The mirror which
these later days brings forth
Barkham the Worthy,
whose immortal name,
Marble's too weak to hold,
for this works fame.
He never ceast
in industry and care,
From ruins to
redeem this House of Prayer;
Following in this
the holy Patriaks ways,
That ready were
him Altars still to raise,
Where they received a blessing:
So this Lord,
Scarce warm in Honors seat,
did first accord
To this most pious work,
in which is shown,
Gods blessing, and his thanks
met both in one.
The charge
the honorable City bears,
Whose bounty
in full Nobleness appears
To acts of best condition,
in such wise,
That al things, bettering
by their ruin, rise.
Two noble faithful
Supervisors then,
Amongst a Senate
of religious men,
Selected wear,
to whom the care they gave,
Generous Hamersley,
and Cambell the grave,
Each being a masterpiece
of zeal and care
Toward Gods own Temple,
fit for truths affair.
Now at the blessed Foundresse
I arrive,
Matilda, whom
Henry the first did wive,
The Christendom she gave it
held the same,
Till James our Sovereign
gave it his own name.
And since I touch
Antiquity so near,
Observe what notes
remarkable appear: Norman, the first Prior, was made an Alderman of London,
and rode with them on solemn days, but in an Ecclesiastical habit.

An Alderman of London
was at first
Prime Prior of this Church.
Falling to worst,
It is now raised
by encouragement and care
Of a Lord Mayor of London,
which is rare,
And worth observing.
Then, as I began,
I end best with
the honor of the man.
This Cities first Lord Mayor
lies buried here,
Fitz-Alwine, This is mistaken by Mr. Stowe.

of the Drapers Company,
And the Lord Mayor,
whose fame now shines so clear,
Barkham,
is of the same Society.


By this time the work is grown to such fullness and perfection, as now
nothing wants but the windows glazing, which was performed in this manner:

The maine and great East light in the Chancell, The windows glazed, and by
whom.
Sir Edward Barkham himself undertook, and effected it at his own charge, as
expressionitestifieth in the same window. The other sideling by it, but
inclining more Southerly, the two Worshipful Gentlemen, Master George
Whitmore, These two Gentlemen were Sheriffs then
and Master Nicholas Ranton, worthily performed. And the third, standing
Northerly in the same Chancell; Mr. Walter Leigh, who had been a Sergeant at
Arms to the Kings Majesty, and now Sword Bearer of London, did likewise at
his own charge perform. The two Western lights in the bottom of the Church,
being (indeed) very fair lights; the honorable Company of Drapers effected
the one, and the Woodmongers worshipful Society finished the other. Beside,
the two Southerly windows, the one done at the charge of Master Cornelius
Fish, Chamberlain of London, and the other by Mr. Waldron, then Marshall. So
now ye have the Church of Saint James complete.

Only there is a fair Monument in the East end of the Chancell, An
artificial Sun, and the ingenious forming of it.
made in resemblance of a golden Sun, with beams and rays very ingeniously
formed, charactering these Verses in and among them: The rising here
of the clear Gospels Sun,
Is through the Senates
free donation.
The Globe of that bright Sun,
the God of might,
Christ Jesus is the rising
and the light.
The heat the blessed Spirit
of Truth and Right:
And as these three,
the Globe, the light, the heat,
Are all one Sun,
so Three One God complete:
Thrice Allelujah
speaks about the rays,
That Three in One
may only have the praise.


This Temple received Consecration the morrow after New-yeeres day, in the
year 1622.

The Right Honorable, Sir Peter Proby being then Lord Mayor; and the Right
Worshipful, Mr. John Hodges, and Sir Humfrey Hanford, Knight, Sheriffs, and
Aldermen.

The names of all the rest of the Honorable Senators, all worthy Patrons of
this pious work, and then present at the consecration: Sir John Garrard.
Sir Thomas Bennet.
Sir Thomas Low.
Sir Thomas Middleton.
Sir John Leman.
Sir William Cokayne.
Mr. Martin Lumley.
Mr. William Goare.
Mr. John Goare.
Mr. Allen Cotton.
Mr. Cuthbert Hacket.
Mr. William Holliday.
Mr. Robert Johnson.
Mr. Richard Hearne.
Mr. Richard Deane.
Mr. Robert Ducie.
Aldermen.


This Sacred Structure,
which this Senate fames,
Our King has styled,
The Temple of S. James.
Nor could I have said so much of this new Church, but only by the firendly
help and assistance of my honest well-willer, George Cooper, Clerk there, who
under his own hand delivered the same to me.

The Parish Church of S. Katharine stands in the Coemetorie of the late
dissolved Priory of the holy Trinity, Parish Church of S. Katharin
Christs-Church, commonly called Cree-church
and is therefore called S. Katharine Christs-Church. This Church seems to
be very old; since the building whereof, the high street has been so often
raised by payements, that now men are feign to descend into the said Church by
diverse steps, seven in number. But the Steeple or Bell-tower thereof has been
lately builded; to wit, about the year 1504. For Sir John Percivall,
Merchant-taylor, then deceasing, gave money toward the building thereof.

Now concerning this Parish Church of Saint Katharine Christ's Church, The new
building of S. Katharin Cree-Church.
commonly Cree-Church, as formerly has been said, it had a descent down into
it by seven steps or stayres. But being now newly built, and made a very fair
Church indeed: the ascenting into the Church is by four or five degrees. Very
gladly would I have delivered further satisfaction concerning the new structure
thereof: but I was answered, they would admit no meddling therewith, until they
had new built the Sreeple, and other necessary occasions thereto belonging.

The Monuments formerly mentioned in my last Edition of this Book, I find (by
their report) to remain their still, with the Tomb of Sir Nicholas
Throckmorton, and the rest there named; but I find no newer, to be spoken of.

There be Monuments of Sir Thomas Flemming, Knight, of Rowles in Essex, and
Margaret his wife, 1464.

Roger Marshall, Esquire.

Lane Horn, wife to Roger Marshall.

Will. Multon alias Bordeaux, Herald.

John Goad, Esquire, and Ioane his wife.

Beatrix, daughter to William Brown.

Thomas Malton, Esquire, son to Bordeaux, Herald.

John Chitcroft, Esquire.

John Wakefield, Esquire.

William Criswicke.

Anne, and Sewch, daughters to Ralfe Shirley, Esquire.

Sir John Rainsford, Knight, of Essex.

Sir Nicholas Throkmorton, chief Butler of England, one of the Chamberlains of
the Exchequer, Ambassador, etc. 1570. who has a fair Alabaster Tomb, in the
South side of the Chancell. His figure lies therein in Armor, with this
description engraven by it: Here lies the body of Sir Nicholas Throkmorton, In
the South side of the Chancell.
Knight, the fourth son of Sir George Throlemorton, Knight. The which Sir
Nicholas was chief Butler of England, one of the Chambelaines of the
Exchequer, and Ambassador Lieger to the Queens Majesty, Queen Elizabeth, in
France. And after his return into England, he was sent Ambassador again into
France, and twice into Scotland. He married Anne Carew, daughter to Sir
Nicholas Carew, Knight, and begat of her ten sons and three daughters. He
dyed the 12. day of February, Anno Dom. 1570. aged 57. years.

Here lies the buried the body of Frances Croke, A fair Tomb in the midst of
the Chancel.
the loved and beloved wife of Paulus Ambrosius Croke, of the inner Temple,
Esquire. She was one of the daughters and heirs of Francis Wellesborne,
Esquire, of Hanny in the County of Berk, who deceased the 10. day of July, Anno
Domini, 1605. aged 22. years.



Well borne she was,
but better borne again.
Her first birth
to the flesh did make her debtor,
The latter, in the Spirit
(by Christ) has set her.
Freed from Fleshes debts,
Deaths first and latter gain.
Wives pay no debts,
whose Husbands live and reign.
Here lies the body of Master John Smith, Esquire, Citizen and Mercer of
London, who had two wives, the first named Anne, A fair stone plated in the
North I Will of the Quare.
the daughter of Fulke Mullert, in the County of Surrey, Esquire, which brought
him one daughter, named Mary. His other wife was Mary, daughter to Sir James
Hawes, Knight, and Lord Mayor of London, by whom he had no issue. He deceased
the 24. day of December, Anno Domini, 1594. Aetatis suae, 63. Gods blessings to
the poor of this Parish, by the gifts of Christian Benefactors.

Mr. William Gilborne, Draper, by his last Will and Testament, gave four
Marks yearly for ever, to be bestowed in one dozen of bread, and to be
distributed on every Sabbath day to the poor of the said Parish: which said
sum is yearly paid out of the rent of his late dwelling house in the said
Parish. Also he gave twenty pounds more, toward the building of a Gallerie in
the said Church.

Mr. John Smith, Mercer, in like manner, gave three pounds yearly for ever,
out of his late dwelling house in the said Parish, to be paid by the
Churchwardens for the time being, to and amongst the poor of the said Parish,
at every Christmas yearly.

Mr. George Lee, Sadler, gave twenty shillings yearly for ever to the poor,
out of his rent in the said Parish.

Mistress Dane, Widow, gave eight shillings yearly for ever to the poor,
paid by the Ironmongers to M. Deputy in a greater sum.

Mistress Alice Bateman, appointed and gave in her life time, the sum of 42.
pounds, 6. shillings, to the said Parish, the profits thereof to be
distributed yearly to the poor for ever.

Mr. John Bedow, Gentleman, gave ten pounds, to be distributed in bread yearly
to the poor.

Mr. George Hothersall, Merchant-taylor, gave four and twenty shillings
yearly for ever out of his Land, to the poor of this Parish.

Mr. John Waddis, Cook, borne in this Parish, gave to the poor thereof three
pounds, to be distributed among them in bread yearly for ever.

Stephen Roberts, Cook, gave also four and forty shillings yearly for ever,
to be distributed in bread.

The bounds and limits of this Parish are in this manner: From the Church into
the Churchyard, to the corner westward, where turning East, they cross the
Churchyard through a great house, where sometime dwelt one Master Wilford, but
bought since by Sir Henry Billingsley, and converted into diverse tenements. So
on into the street to the Pumpe, and westward on to the sign of the Rose,
sometime the dwelling house of one Thomas Shepherd. There crossing the street
to the Smiths house, his name John Tatum, next to the sign of the Moore-fields
Tavern: thence they go back East to the Pumpe, turning at the corner West, to
Harts-horne Alley to the midst, to Homes his house and over against him, so
back to Billeter-lane, to the house of John Lemote, crossing the street there,
to the house of Peter Rutt, Tailor. And so back to the end of Billeter-lane,
turning west to a Brick house, sometime in the custody of Master Leese, but
possessed now by Widow Dewen. There crossing the street to the house next
Master Leaning, they go East to the Church lane, and then North, through a
lane between Heneadge house and the Dukes Place, to Buries marks. Then West
by Heneadge house, to the wall of Sir James Lancasters house, sometime
belonging to Sir Francis Walsingham: where they go back, and cross the way
to London wall to the compast place, where stands the Cities Arms. Thence
forward by the wall to the outer part of Ealdgate, and so South toward the
Croched Friars, to the house of Master Peers, where a piece of an Iron Gun
stands fixed in the ground.

Then back, crossing the street to the house of Mistress Smith, going forward
to the Bell Tavern, and so up to the sign of the Rose, ending where Thomas
Shepherd did dwell. My help here was by Master Stephen Denison, Minister, but
more especially, by John Beard, Clarke.

At the North-West corner of this Ward in the said high street, stands the
fair and beautiful Parish Church of S. Andrew the Apostle, with an addition,
to be known from other Churches of that name, Parish Church of S. Andrew
Undershaft.
of the Knape or Undershaft, and so called S. Andrew Undershaft, because that
of old time, every year (on May Day in the morning) it was used, A shaft or
May Pole higher than the Church Steeple.
that an high or long shaft, or May Pole, was set up there, in the midst of the
street, before the South door of the said Church, which shaft when it was set
on end, and fixed in the ground, was higher than the Church Steeple. Geffrey
Chawcer, writing of a vain boaster, has these words, meaning of the said
shaft.

Right well aloft,
and high ye bear your head, Chawcer chance of dice.

The Weather-cocke with flying,
as ye would kill,
When ye be stuffed,
bet of wine, than bread,
Then look ye,
when your womb does fill,
As ye would bear.
the great shaft of Corne-hill.
Lord so merrily
crowdeth then your croke,
That all the street
may hear your body cloak.
This shaft was not raised at any time since evil May day (so called of an
insurrection made by Prentises, As has bin at large before declared.
and other young persons against Aliens, in the year 1517) but the said shaft
was laid along over the doors, and under the Pentises of one row of houses,
and Alley gate, called of the shaft, Shaft alley, (being of the possessions of
Rochester bridge) in the ward of Limestreet.

It was there, I say, hanged on iron hooks amny years, till the third of King
Edward the sixth, that one Sir Stephen, Shaft or Maypole preached against at
Paul's Cross.
Curate of Saint Katherine Christ's Church, preaching at Paul's Cross, said
there, that this shaft was made an Idol, by naming the Church of Saint Andrew,
with the addition of under that shaft: he persuaded therefore, that the names
of Churches might be altered: Also, that the names of days in the week might
be changed, the fish days to be kept any days, except Friday and Saturday,
and the Lent any time, save only betwixt Shrovetide and Easter. I have
oft-times seen this man, forsaking the Pulpet of his said Parish Church,
preach out of an high Elm tree in the midst of the Churchyard, The said Elm
tree his preaching place is lately taken down.
and then entering the Church, forsaking the Altar, to have sung his high Mass
in English, upon a Tomb of the dead toward the North. I heard his Sermon at
Paul's Cross, and I saw the effect that followed: for in the afternoon of
that present Sunday, the neighbors, and Tenants to the said bridge, over whose
doors the said Shaft had lain, after they had dined, to make themselves
strong, Shaft or Maypole saved in pieces and burnt.
gathered more help, and with great labor raising the Shaft from the hooks
(whereon it had rested two and thirty years) they sawed it in pieces, every
man taking for his share, so much as had layne over his door and stall, the
length of his house, and they of the Alley, divided amongst them so much as had
lain over their Alley gate. Thus was this Idol (as he termed it) mangled,
and after burned.

Soon after was there a commotion of the commons in Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex,
and other shires, by means whereof, straight orders being taken for the
suppression of rumors, diverse persons were apprehended, and executed by
Marshall Law; amongst the which, the Bayliffe of Rumford in Essex was one,
Bayliffe of Rumford executed within Ealdgate for words spoken to the priest of
the parish.
a man very well beloved: he was early in the Morning of Mary Magdalens day
(then kept holy day) brought by the Sheriffs of London, and the Knight
Marshall, to the Well within Ealdgate, there to be executed upon a Gibbet set
up that morning, where being on the Ladder, he had words to this effect;

Good people, I am come hither to dye, but know not for what offense, except
for words by me spoken yester night to Sir Stephen, Curat and Preacher of this
Parish, which were these: He asked me what news in the Country? I answered,
heavy news. Why, quoth he? It is said, quoth I, that many men be up in Essex,
but thanks be to God all is in good quiet about us: and this was all, as God
be my Judge, etc. Upon these words of the Prisoner, Sir Stephen to avoid
reproach of the people, left the City, and was never heard of sinceamongst them
to my knowledge. I heard the words of the prisoner for he was executed upon the
pavement of my door, where I then kept house.

Thus much by digression: Parish Church of Saint Andrew Undershaft new builded.
now again to the parish Church of Saint Andrew Undershaft, for it still
retains the name, which has been new builded by the Parishoners there,
since the year 1520. every man putting to his helping hand, some with their
purses, other, with their bodies. Stephen Iennings Marchant-Taylor, sometime
Major of London, caused (at his charges) to be builded the whole North side of
the great middle I Will, both of the body and Quire, as appears by his Arms
over every pillar graven, and also the North I Will, which he roofed with timber
and seeled: also the whole South side of the Church was glazed, and the Pewes
in the South Chapel made of his costs, as appears in every Window, and upon
the said Pewes. He deceased in the year 1524. and was buried in the Gray
Friars Church. John Kirby Marchant-Taylor, sometime one of the Sheriffs, John
Garland, Merchant Tailor, and Nicholas Levison, Mercer, Executor to Garland,
were great benefactors to this work: which was finished (to the glazing) in
the year 1529. and fully finished 1532.

Buried in this Church, Philip Malpas, one of the Sheriffs, 1439.

Sir Robert Dennie, Knight, and after him Thomas Dennie his son, in the year,
1421.

Thomas Stokes, Gentleman, Grocer, 1496.

In the New Church, John Nichell, Merchant-Taylor, 1537.

William Draper, Esquire, 1537. Isabel and Margaret his wives.

Nicholas Levison, Mercer, one of the Sheriffs, 1534.

John Gerrard, Woolman, Merchant of the Staple, 1546.

Stepten Kyrton, Merchant-Taylor, Alderman, 1553.

David VVoodroffe, Haberdasher, one of the Sheriffs, 1554.

Stephen VVoodroffe his son, gave 100. l. in money, for the which, the poor
of that Parish receive two shillings in bread weekly for ever.

Sir Thomas Offley, Merchant-Taylor, Mayor, 1556. he bequeathed the one half
of all his goods to charitable actions, but the Parish received little benefit
thereby. Stephen Woodroffe the best Benefactor to the poor in that Parish.


Thomas Starkey, Skinner, one of the Sheriffs, 1578.

Hugh Offley, Letherseller, one of the Sheriffs, 1588.

William Hanbury, Baker.

These other Monuments I find there beside: Nicholai de Nate, On a fair plated
Stone in the Chancell.
Rag^sini caro hoc in tumulo repulverescit, spiritus ad Celum reversus
reassumptionem carnis expectat. Obiit die 1. Ianuar. 1566. A nativitate vixit,
An. 50. Men's. 7. dies 29. Augustinus amantissimo fratri moerens ponere curavit.

Henry Man, Before the door within the Chancell.
Doctor of Divinity in the University of Oxenford, and sometime Bishop of Man.
Which Henry departed this life the 19. day of October, An. Do. 1556. and lies
buried under this stone.

Memoriae Sacrum.

Resurrectionem in Christo hic expectat Ioannes Stowe, At the upper end of the
North I Will in the Quire.
Civis Londinensis: Qui in antiquis Monumentis eruendis accuratissima
diligentia usus, Angliae Annals, and, Civitatis Londini synopsim been de sua,
been de postera aetate meritus luculente s^ripsit, vitaeque study pie and
probe decurso. Obiit Aetatis Anno 80. die 5. Aprilis, 1605.

Elizabetha Coniux, ut perpetuum sui amoris testimonium dolens.

Near to this place, A fair gilded plate in the wall.
lies buried the body of Simon Burton, Citizen and Wax-Chandler of London, a
good Benefactor to the poor of this Parish. Who was three times Master of his
Company, and one of the Governors of Saint Thomas Hospital and of the Common
Council of this Ward 29. years. He had two Wives, Elizabeth and Anne, and had
issue by Elizabeth one son and four daughters. He deceased the 23. day of
May, Anno Dom. 1593. being aged 85. years: In whose remembrance, his loving
Daughter Alice Coldocke erected this Monument.

Near unto this Monument, lies Alice Byng in a Vault with her Father, Simon
Burton: In the wall close by the other.
she had three husbands, all Batchelers and Stationers. Her first was Richard
Waterson, by him she had a Son. Next him was Francis Coldock, by birth a
Gentleman, he bare all the Offices in his Company, and had issue two daughters,
Ioane and Anne, with whom she lived 40. years. Lastly, Isaac Byng, Gent. who
dyed Master of his Company. She dyed the 21. day of May Anno Dom. 1616. Aged
73. years, 5. Months, and 25. days.

Near unto this Monument, lies buried the body of Dorothy Greswolde, A
handsome small Monument in the wall, South in the Quire.
the only Daughter of Roger Greswolde, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London:
which Roger was the third Son of Richard Greswolde, of Solyhull, in the County
of Warwick, Esquire. She was first married to John Weld, Citizen and
Haberdasher of London, who was the second Son of John Weld of Eaton, in the
County of Chester, Gent. By whom she had four Children, viz. John, Elizabeth,
Ioane and Dorothy. After his decease, she married Hugh Offley, Citizen and
Alderman of London, and by him had only one Daughter, named Susanna. After his
death she lived a Widow sixteen years, and being of the age of 60. years,
dyed in the true faith of Christ, and hope of eternal happiness, the 29. of
June, 1610.

Here before this place, lies buried the body of Margery, In the I Will beneath
the Quire and on the same side, a comely Monument in the wall.
late the Wife of Humfrey Turner, Gent. who deceased the 10. day of December,
1607. being of the age of 56. years. As also the body of her first husband,
Master Isaac Sutton, late Citizen and Goldsmith of London: who deceased the 2.
day of May, 1589. By which Husband she had issue, 6. Sons and 6. Daughters. All
deceasing at the time of her death, only Ioane excepted, daughter and heir of
the said Isaac, married unto William Howpill, Gent.

Tempus and Patientia.



Death has added to the ornaments of this place, the blessed memorial of
Edward Warner Esquire a worthy Citizen and Merchant of London, who departed
this mortal life the 28. day of October, 1628. he was the second Son of
Francis Warner, of Parham in the County of Suffolk Esquire, by Mary his second
wife, Daughter and Coheire of Sir Edmund Rowse of the said County, Knight.
Which Francis Warner was truly and lineally descended from the ancient and
generous Family of the Warners, who possessed a place of their own name at
Warners Hall in great Waltham in the County of Essex.

He dyed without issue, and made Francis Warner of Parham aforesaid Esquire,
his Nephew and next heir in blood, the Executor of his Will, and principal
heir to his estate, who out of duty and affection to the memory of his dear
Uncle, has dedicated this Monument.

He had to his first wife Mary, In the lower part of the Monument.
daughter of Master Aylmer of Risden in Hartfordshire; And to his second,
Margaret, daughter of Master John Cheynie.



At entrance into the Quire, and before the Pulpet: Here lies buried Ioane
Cartwright, A fair Gravestone, with the persons of him and her engraven in
brass.
the Wife of Abraham Cartwright, Citizen and Draper of London; who had issue by
him four Sons and five daughters. And dyed the 24. of November, An. Dom. 1609.

Gods blessings by Christian Benefactors, to the poor of this Parish.

Master Stephen Woodroffe, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, by his last will
and testament, bearing date the 20. of April, 1576. gave one hundred pound in
money, to the use of the poor of this Parish: with which sum, and 20. l. 12.
s. 4. d. more laid out by the said Parish, they purchased a house, called by
the name of the White Horse in Holy-well street, in the Parish of S. Leonard in
Shorditch, in the County of Middlesex. Out of which, is and has been given to
the poor of the said Parish, every Sabbath since his death, 2. s. in bread,
and so shall continue for ever, 5. l. 4. s. per annum.

Master Simon Burton, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, by his deed
indented, dated the 14. of January, 1579. has appointed 32. s. to be given
yearly for ever to eight poor Widows, or poor householders of the said
parish: to be issuing out of all that Message or Tenement, set and being in
the said parish, late in the tenure or occupation of Peter Hewes, and Edward
Hide: to be paid to the Churchwardens of the said parish, for the use of the
poor aforesaid, every quarter 8. s. or within 40. days after every quarter
for ever quarterly, to every of the said 8. persons, 12. d. a piece.

Also, he gave unto S. Thomas Hospital, two Closes of Land or Meadow ground,
lying in the parish of Shorditch, upon condition, that the Governors of the
said Hospital, or their Assigns, shall give unto 30. poor persons of the
said parish (whereof the Minister, Clark and Sexton to be three of them) on the
21. 22. or 23. days of December, yearly for ever, the sum of 26. s. whereof
20. s. to be paid amongst the 30. poor, by 8. d. apeece, and the other 6. s.
for a Sermon yearly to be made for ever in Lent.

Master Hugh Offley Citizen and Alderman of London, by his last will and
testament, dated the 2. day of October, 1594. and by an Indenture of the same
date, explaining his mind; gave to the Parson and Churchwardens of the said
parish, and their successors for ever, an Annuity or rent charge of 4. l. to be
issuing out of his Messuages or tenements in Limestreet, London, and within the
said parish: then or lately in the several tenures of Thomas Offley his son,
John Norman, James Boomer, Susanna Garret, Widow, Thomas Blomefield, and
Widow Allison, or their assigns: To be paid yearly at the Feast of the Birth
of our Lord God, and the Nativity of S. John Baptist, or within 14. days next
ensuing either the said Feasts, by even portions, with a distress for non
payment thereof* to the end and intent, that on the first Sunday in every month,
monthly for ever, there shall be given to 12. of the poorest persons inhabiting
in the said parish, to be named and appointed by the Parson and Churchwardens,
for the time being, receiving the Communion in the said Church, if any be there
celebrated, each of them 3. d. apeece in money and a penny loaf of bread. And
to the Clarke monthly 4. d. in money, and to the Sexton 3. d. in money, and
one penny loaf, being the advantage of the 12. d.

Also, he gave 5. s. a year, for ever yearly, to be paid to such Parson or
Curate, as shall monthly minister the Communion to the said poor people: and
to a learned Preacher for four several Sermons, to be made in the said
parish Church at four several days yearly for ever, five shillings for
every Sermon.

Master William Hanbury, Citizen and VVhite-Baker of London, by a surrender,
bearing date the 11. day of August, 1595. did give unto his daughter, Mistress
Elizabeth Spearing, wife of Master George Spearing Merchant, certain
coppy-hold land, lying and being in Stebunheath and Radcliffe, in the County of
Middlesex. Upon condition, that she, her heirs or assigns, shall pay to the
Parson and Churchwardens of the said parish, for the use of the poor people
there, 52. s. yearly for ever, at the Birth of our Lord God and the
Purification of our Lady the Virgin: which (by consent of the parish) is
bestowed among the poor abroad, on Wednesday weekly 12. d.

Mistress Alice Hanbury, widow, by her last will and testament, dated the 3.
day of December, 1595. did give unto the said Master George Spearing, one
tenement in the said parish, wherein William Bridges a Tailor then dwelled:
upon condition, that the said George, his heirs or assigns, shall pay to the
Churchwardens of the said parish, and their successors, to the use of the
poor and impotent people there, 13. s. 4. d. yearly for ever, at the Feasts
of the Annunciation of our Lady, and Saint Michael the Archangell, by even
portions: Or else to assure to the said parish, the like value in some other
place: which sum (by consent of the parish) is given in coals amongst the
poor yearly for ever at Christmas.

Mr. Ralfe Carter, Citizen and Salter of London, by his Deed indented, dated
the 22. day of October, 1576. has given to diverse Feoffees, between the
Parishes of Alhallowes in Lumbard-street, and Saint Andrews Undershaft, after
the decease of Alice his wife, one Message, with a Garden, called the
Halfe-moone in East-Smith-field, in the parish of Saint Buttolphs without
Ealdgate, to the end that there should be distributed to the poor in either
Parish, in bread every Sunday weekly for ever, twelve pence, and thirty
shillings in Coals to either parish, between Midsummer and Christmasse for
ever.

Mistress Margaret Moore, widow, late wife of William Moore, Citizen and
Merchant-taylor of London, by her deed indented, dated the tenth day of May,
1583. has given to diverse Feoffees of the said parish, one message, which she
had by the gift of her said husband, and situate in the same parish, now in the
occupation of Thomas Fitall; to the end that there should be distributed to the
poor there yearly for ever, 20. shillings, at the discretion of the Parson
and Churchwardens: And to a Preacher to make four Sermons quarterly, every
year for ever 20. shillings.

Dame Mary Ramsey, late wife to Sir Thomas Ramsey, Knight, Alderman and Lord
Mayor of London, by her Testament and last Will, dated the 19. of Jan. 1596.
gave to the L. Mayor, Communalty and Citizens of London, one message or
tenement, situated in the Parish of Saint Peter the poor, in Broadstreet Ward,
London, then or late in the occupation of Richard Hull, Citizen and Draper; to
the end that they should yearly (after her decease) pay to the Parson and
Churchwardens of this Parish, forty shillings, to be distributed among the
poor of the said Parish, at the discretion of the Parson and the Churchwardens
then being, and by direction and allowance of two of the chiefest Parishioners:
And to the like use for ever, twenty shillings more yearly for ever, after
decease of one Elizabeth Worley, in the County of Northhampton, to be paid and
distributed in the like manner.

Mr. John Hide, Citizen and Merchant Tailor of London, by his last Will and
Testament, dated the 8. day of September, 1604. did give unto the Parson and
Churchwardens of the said Parish and their successors, a yearly rent of
Coals, to be issuing out of all his Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in the
Precinct of the Minories without Ealdgate, London, to be paid yearly at the
^east of the Nativity of S. John Baptist for ever, or within 30 days next
ensuing with distress for non-payment thereof: To the intent that there should
be bestowed yearly in old clift Char-coles, 30. shillings thereof, and one
other 12. d. yearly given to some trusty body, to see the due measuring
thereof: And the same coal to be delivered to the poor of the same Parish,
always two days before S. Michael the Archangel yearly, by advice of the
Parson and Churchwardens for the time being, and 3. or 4. Ancients of the said
parish.

Mr. Edmond Hill, Citizen and Draper of London, by his testament and last will,
dated the 5. day of August, 1609. did give and bequeath to the Churchwardens
and parishioners of this parish the sum of 52. pounds, to be employed by the
parishioners, as in a stock for ever, and the benefit thereby arising, to be
given weekly to the poor in bread.

Master Laurence Overton, Citizen and Mercer of London, by his testament and
last will, dated the 3. day of Sept. 1612. did give and bequeath to the poor
of the said parish (whereof then he was a parishioner) the sum of 20. pounds,
to be distributed at the discretion of the Churchwardens for the time being,
and his Executors.

Their bounds and limits are thus: First they go East, so far as the house of
one Allen Barker, Grocer, over against Billeter lane end, and so North all the
side of the high street, to Mr. Francis Philips house, over against the
Kingshead Tavern, West. There, on the South side of the high street, beginning
at the Italian Ordinary of Ieronymo di Soldi, they turn East to one Thomas
Georges, two houses beyond the Pewter Pot. Then they turn back into
Limestreet, South, on both sides the way, so far as the house of Nicholas
Hobland, Merchant stranger, on the one side, and William Ruddock, Tailor, on
the other. Returning back, they cross the way into S. Mary Axe, all the West
side throughout the whole street, with some certain houses over against London
wall toward Bishopsgate, the last whereof is the dwelling house of Griffin
Martin, Trumpeter. So turning back into S. Mary Axe, they go upon the East
side, from the house of Master John Holding, commonly called Fletchers hall,
and so on to Master George Sares, adjoining to the Church, and there end.
Master Henry Mason is Parson there, but my friendly furtherance was by Thomas
Johnson the Clarke.

Now down St. Mary street, by the West end of the Church toward the North, S.
Mary street.
stand diverse fair houses for Merchants, and other: namely, one fair great
house builded by Sir William Pickering the father, possessed by Sir William his
Son, Pickering house.
and since by Sir Edward Wootton of Kent. North from this place is the
Fletchers hall, Fletchers Hall.
and so down to the corner of that street over against London wall; and again
Eastwards to a fair house lately new builded, partly by Mr. Robert Beale, one
of the Clerks of the Council.

Then come you to the Papey, Papey a brother hood or Hospital for poor
Priests.
a proper house, wherein sometime was kept a Fraternity or brotherhood of S.
Charity, and Saint John Evangelist, called the Papey, or poor impotent
Priests, (for in some language, Priests are called Papes) founded in the year,
1430. by William Oliver, William Barnabie and John Stafford Chaplens, or
Chauntry Priests in London, for a Master, two Wardens, etc. Chaplens, Chauntry
Priests, Conducts, and other brethren and sisters, that should be admitted into
the Church of Saint Augustine Papey in the wall. The brethren of this house
becoming lame, or otherwise into great poverty, were here relieved, as to have
Chambers, with certain allowance of bread, drink, and cole, and one old man
and his wife to see them served and to keep the house clean. This brotherhood
(amongst others) was suppressed in the reign of Edward the sixth, since the
which time, in this house has been lodged Master Morris of Essex, Sir Francis
Wal^ingham, principal Secretary to her Majesty, Master Barret of Essex, etc.

Then next is one great house, large of rooms, fair courts and garden plots,
sometime pertaining to the Bassets, since that, The Abbot of Bury his Inn.
to the Abbots of Bury in Suffolk, and therefore called Buries marks,
corruptly, Bevis marks.
Bevis marks, and since the dissolution of the Abbey of Bury, to Thomas Heneage
the father, and to Sir Thomas his son. Then next unto it, is the before
spoken Priory of the holy Trinity, to wit, the West and North part thereof,
which stretches up to Ealdgate, where we first begun.

Now in the second way from Eald-gate, more toward the South, from the Well or
Pumpe aforesaid, Fenne Church street.
lies Fenne-Church street, on the right hand whereof, somewhat west from the
South end of Belzetters lane, Ironmongers hall.
is the Ironmongers hall: which company was incorporated in the third of Edward
the fourth: Richard Fleming was their first Master, Nicholas Marshall and
Richard Coxe were Custos or Wardens. And on the left hand or South side (even
by the gate and wall of the City) runs down a lane to the Tower Hill the
South part whereof is called Woodroffe lane, Woodroffe lane by the wall of the
Tower hil^.
and out of this lane toward the West, a street called Hart-street. In this
street, at the South-east corner thereof, Crossed F^^ers Church.
sometime stood one house of Crouched or (Crossed) Friars founded by Ralph
Hosier; and William Sabernes, about the year, 1298. Stephen the 10. Prior of
the Holy Trinity in London, granted three tenements for 13. s. 8. d. by the
year, unto the said Ralph Hosiar and William Sabernes, who afterward became
Friars of S. Cross: Adam was the first Prior of that house. These Friars
founded their house in the place of certain tenements, purchased of Richard
Wimblush, the 12. Prior of the Holy Trinity, in the year, 1319. which was
confirmed by Edward the third, the seventeenth of his reign, valued at 52. l.
13. s. 4. d. surrendered the 12. of November, the 30. of Henry the eighth.

In this house was buried Master John Tirres.

Nicholas the son of William Kyriell, Esquire.

Sir Thomas Mellington, Baron of VVemese, and Dame Elizabeth his Wife,
daughter of Will. Botear, Baron of Women.

R^. Mellington, Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter to Ferreis of Ousley.

Henry Lovell, son to Will. Lord Lovell.

Dame Isabel, wife to William Edwards, Mayor of London, 1471.

Will. Norborow, and Elizabeth his wife.

Will. Norborow, and Beatrix his wife.

William Brosked, Esquire.

William Bows.

Lionel Mollington, Esquire, son of Robert Mollington.

Nicholas Couderow, and Elizabeth his wife.

Sir John Stratford, Knight.

Sir Tho. Asseldey, Knight, Clerk of the Crown, Submarshall of England, and
Justice of the Shire of Middlesex.

John Rest, Grocer, Mayor of Land. 1516.

Sir John Skevington, Knight, Merchanttaylor, Sheriff, 1520.

Sir John Milborne, Draper, Mayor in the year 1521. was buried there, but
removed since to S. Edmonds in Lumbard street.

Sir Rice Griffith, beheaded on the Tower hill, 1531.

In place of this Church is now a Carpenters yard, a Tennis-court, and such
like: the Friars Hall was made a glasse-house, or house wherein was made glass
of diverse sorts to drink in; which house in the year 1575. on the 4. of
September. burst out into a terrible fire, The glass house burned.
where being practiced all means possible to quench it, notwithstanding, as
the same house in a small time before, had consumed a great quantity of wood by
making of glasses, now it self, having within it about 40000. billets of wood,
was also consumed to the stone walls, which nevertheless greatly hindered the
fire from spreading any further.

Adjoining unto this Friars Church, Alms houses by Crossed Friars.
by the East end thereof in Woodroffe lane, toward the Tower hill, are certain
proper Almes-houses, Testamo^t of Sir John Milborne.
14. in number, builded of brick and timber, founded by Sir Ioh. Milborn,
Draper, sometime Mayor, 1521. wherein be placed 13. aged poor men and their
wives, if they have wives: these have their dwelling rent-free, and 2. s. 4. d.
apiece, the first day of every month for ever.

Whereas there is mention made by Mr. Stow (in this his Survey) of a monthly
pension of 4. s. to belong to a foureteenth house, being one of the said
almshouses; also of certain bread and coals, to be delivered to the Parishes
of S. Edmund in Lumbard street and S. Michael in Cornehill: and of diverse
messuages and garden-plots in the Parish of S. Olave in Hart-street, London,
mentioned to be given to the Company of Drapers, for the performance thereof:
Upon a perfect view of the Will it self, by which the said Almes-houses were
given to the Company of Drapers, and upon other writings touching the same; And
withal, upon diligent and painful search touching that matter; I find that
Mr. Stowe was much deceived or mistaken in that matter; and that there was no
such bread and coals given to those Parishes, neither at any time had the
Company and such houses or gardens, whereby to perform the same. But the
Company, by the Will, had lands given them in other Parishes, (which now they
do enjoy) only to maintain the Almes-houses, and for payment of the pensions
there, and to pay some small sums of money to the Officers and others of that
Company, for the looking to the houses, and pains taking in paying the
pensions, according as by the Will is limited, and for no other use or purpose.

Next to these Almes-houses is the Lord Lumleyes house, L. Lumleys house.
builded in the time of King Henry the 8. by Sir Thomas Wiat the father, upon
one plot of ground of late pertaining to the foresaid Crossed Friars, where
part of their house stood: And this is the farthest part of Ealdgate Ward
toward the South, and joins to the Tower hill. The other side of that Lane,
over against the Lord Lumleys house, on the wall side of the City, is now for
the most part (or altogether) builded, even to Ealdgate.

Then have ye on the South side of Fenne-Church street, over against the wall
or Pumpe, amongst other fair and large-builded houses, one that sometime
belonged to the Prior of Monte Jove's, Prior of Horne-Church in Essex.
or Monastery Cornute, a Cell to Monte Jove's beyond the Seas. In Essex it was
the Priors Inn, when he repaired to this City. Then a Lane that leads down
by Northumberland house, toward the Crossed Friars, as is aforeshewed.

This Northumberland house, in the Parish of Saint Katharine Coleman, belonged
to Henry Percy, Northumb. house.
Earl of Northumberland, in the 33. of Hen. the 6. but of late being left by
the Earls, the gardens thereof were made into Bowlingalleys, and other parts
into Dicing-houses, common to all comers for their money, there to bowl and
hazard. But now of late, so many Bowling-Alleys, and other houses for unlawful
gaming, have been raised in other parts of the City and the Suburbs, that
this their ancient and only patron of misrule, is left and forsaken of her
Gamesters, and therefore turned into a number of great rents, small cottages,
for strangers and others.

At the East end of this lane, in the way from Ealdgate toward the Crossed
Friars, The poor Jurie.
of old time, were certain tenements, called the Poor Jury, of Jews
dwelling there.

Next unto this Northumberland house, Parish Church of S. Katharine Coleman.
is the Parish Church of S. Katharine, called Coleman; which addition of
Coleman, was taken of a great Haw yard, or Garden, of old time called Coleman
haw, in the parish of the Trinity, now called Christs-Church, and in the Parish
of S. Katharine, and All Saines, called Coleman Church.

Monuments in this Church, I find none recorded by Mr. Stowe; and upon my
view, these were the most remarkable that I found there: Here lies the body of
Henry Web, In the Northeast end of the Chancell, an ancient Tomb.
Esquire, Gentleman Usher to King Henry the eighth. And here lies also Barbara
his wife. She dyed the 5. day of February, An. Dom. 1552. And he the last day
of March, 1553.

Here lies the body of Sir Henry Billingsley, A fair stone on the ground by
the Communion Table.
Knight, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, who dyed the 22. day of November,
An. Dom. 1606. And also the body of Elizabeth his first wife, who departed this
life the 29. of July, 1577.

Here lies the body buried, A small Alabaster Monument fixed in the wall.
of Elizabeth, late wife to Henry Billingsley, one of the Queens Majesty's
Customers in the Port of London, who dyed the 29. day of July, An. Dom. 1577.



In obitum ejus.
Stat sua cuique dies,
atque ultima funeris hora,
Cum Deus hinc and Mors
insidiosa vocant.
Nec tibi, vel pietas tua,
velforma Elizabetha,
Praesidium fate
ne trahereris erat,
Occidis exactis terris
cum conjuge lustris,
At septem vitae
lustra fuere tua.
Fecerat and proles
jam te numerosa parentem,
Filiolae trinae
caetera turba mores,
Vndecimo in partu,
quum Mors accessit and una
Matrem te and Patrem
sustulit undecimum,
Scilicet ex mundo,
ex terrena faece malisque
Sustulit, at superis
reddidit atque Deo,
Est testis sincera fides,
testis tua virtus.
Grata viro virtus,
grata fidesque Deo,
Hic charitas dormit, At the door (...) to the (...) Cha^^^ a very (...) fair
(...) on the ^ gro^^

nominata beata Beatrix,
Atque Dei donum,
quoniam fuit optima Conjux.
Filia Georgii Cotton, Arm. Vxor Roberti Barners.

Obiit 5. Nove^b. Anno Dom. 1616.

I had rather be a Doore-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the
Palaces of Princes.

An Epitaph on the death of the Noble, virtuous, and charitable Gentlewoman,
Mistress Barners, whose body lies under the stone you tread on.
IN ancient times, In the north (...) just against the Gravestone.

the friends surviving gave
Some rich memorial
to the dead friends grave,
Gold, Pearls or Gemmes,
which custom did intend,
Our riches ought
to wait upon our friend,
In life and death.
O blessed Ages, when
Men parted fortunes,
and not fortunes men^
But now perverted
are our present ends,
That (for wealth) sell
the fame of living friends:
The dead we live by,
now can scant afford
The rites and sacrifice
of one good word:
Of which, lest I be one,
though I can bring
(For worthy Obsequie)
no precious thing;
My gratitude
presents unto her Hearse,
My tears for Balme^
For Offering, my sad Verse.
Give leave then, grief,
let my drowned Muse declare
What she that is dead was,
unto them that are.
The Rule and Index
to find all the good
That ever Heaven dealt
upon woman-hood:
For if we but
anatomize her life,
We find both a good woman,
and good wife:
First, she loved God,
Not like the Pharisee,
In ostentation
and hypocrisy;
But even with all her heart,
and all her soul:
She secretly
did raging sin control:
For she (for goodness sake)
was innocent,
And not for glory,
or fear of punishment.
Next, to her neighbor
did her love extend,
Ready to help at need,
and to befriend
The poor, and those
that never could repay,
But with their prayers
at the latter day:
The remnant of her love
she did bestow
Upon her Husband,
not in outward show,
Or else in feigned
adulterate flattery;
But in sound truth,
and deep sincerity.
Thus did she live,
divided in her love
From this unworthy world:
and Nature then,
Which had but lent her,
took her back again.
Where let us live in peace,
and let us try
To live like her,
that we like her may dye.
Come hither, Women,
leave your vanities,
Your lust, your scorns,
your pride, your fooleries?
For hither you must all.
The Dust and grave
All your adored
braveries must have:
And all those beauties
that are now afraid
Of Air, of Sun,
must in the ground be laid.
Then deck your souls,
unto whose quintessence,
Nor time, nor death,
nor grave can bring offense.
For so you may
(for ever) beautify
Your selves as Angels,
in eternity.
FINIS.
Concerning Charity to the poor in this Parish, besides the Christian
disposition of the parishioners themselves, I find by information, that Sir
James Deane has given two shillings weekly in bread for ever, which is duly
performed every Friday. And as much they themselves do give in bread every
Sunday.

Sir Henry Billingsley (by his will) gave the sum of 200. l. for relief of the
poor in this Parish; but by not making his own eyes Overseers, and his hands
his trustiest Executors, his good intent is injured, and the poor disappointed.

The limits and bounds of this Parish need no relation, because they are
contained within so small a compass, and at every place where their mark is
fixed, there is likewise a Katharine wheel of iron, not easy to be broken off
or removed. Mr. Wright, the learned Parson here, gave me his gentle
furtherance, showing me a glass window in the South I Will of the Church, where
is figured the shape of an Alderman in Scarlet, kneeling on his knees, and the
words set down by him, do express his name to be William White, Mayor of
this honorable City. Whereby his is persuaded, and I am likewise of his
opinion, (by diverse opinions thereto inducing) that all that I Will was either of
his building, or (at least) repairing, it appears so novell to the rest.

Then have ye Blanch Apleton, Manor of Blanch Apleton.
whereof I read in the thirteenth of Edward the first, that a lane behind the
same Blanch Apleton, was granted by the King to be enclosed and shut up. This
Blanch Apleton was a Manor, belonging to Sir Thomas Roos of Hamelake, Knight,
the seventh of Richard the second, standing at the North-east corner of Mart
lane, Mart lane.
so called, of a privilege sometime enjoyed to keep a Mart there; long since
discontinued, and therefore forgotten, so as nothing remains for memory, but
the name of Mart lane, and that not uncorruptly termed Mark lane.

I read that in the third of Edward the fourth, all Baskert-makers,
Basket-makers at Blanch Apleton,
Wyer-drawers, and other Forrainers, were permitted to have shops in this
Manor of Blanch Apleton, and not elsewhere within this City, or suburbs
thereof.

And this also being the farthest West part of this Ward on that South Side, I
leave it, with three Parish Churches; Saint Katharine Christs-Church, S. Andrew
Undershaft, and S. Katharine Coleman; and three Halls of Companies; the
Brick-layers Hall, the Fletchers Hall, and the Ironmongers Hall.

It has an Alderman, his Deputy, common Counselors, six; Constables, six;
Scavengers, nine; Ward mote men for Inquest, eighteen, and a Beadle. It is
taxed to the Fifteen in London, at five pounds.

LIMESTREET WARD.
THe next is Limestreet Ward, Limestreet Ward
and takes the name of Limestreet, Limestreet.
of making or selling of lime there (as is supposed:) the East side of this
Limestreet, from the North corner thereof, to the midst of Ealdgate Ward, as
is aforesaid: the West side, for the most part, from the said North corner,
southward, is of this Limestreet Ward: the South end on both sides is of
Langbourn Ward: the body of this Limestreet Ward, High street of Cornehill.
is of the high street called Cornhill street, which stretches from Limestreet
on the South side, to the West corner of Leaden Hall: and on the North side,
from the South-west corner, to S. Mary street, to another corner over against
Leaden Hall.

Now for Saint Mary street, the west side thereof is this Limestreet Ward, and
also the street which runs by the North end of this S. Mary street, on both
sides; from thence west to an house called the Wrestbers, a sign so called,
almost to Bishopsgate. And these are the bounds of this small Ward.

Monuments or places notable in this Ward, be these: In Limestreet are diverse
fair houses for Merchants and others: there was sometime a mansion house of
the Kings, An house in Limestreet, called the Kings Artirce.
called the Kings Artirce, whereof I find record in the 14. of Edward the
first, but now grown out of knowledge. I read also of another great house in
the West side of Limestreet, having a Chapel on the South, and a Garden on
the West, then belonging to the Lord Nevill, which Garden is now called the
Green yard of the Leaden hall.

This house, in the ninth of Richard the second, pertained to Sir Simon Burley,
and Sir John Burley his brother: and of late the said house was taken down,
and the forefront thereof new builded of timber, by Hugh Offley, Alderman.

At the North-west corner of Limestreet, was (of old time) one great Message,
Benbridges Inn.
called Benbridges Inn: Raph Holland, Draper, about the year 1452. gave it to
John Gill, Master, and to the Wardens and Fraternity of Tailors, and Linen
Armorers of Saint John Baptist in London, and to their successors for ever.
They did set up in place thereof a fair large frame of Timber, containing in
the high street one great house, and before it, to the corner of Limestreet,
three other tenements, the corner house being the largest: and then down
Limestreet diverse proper Tenements. All which the Merchant-taylors in the
reign of Edward the sixth, sold to Stephen Kirton, Merchant-taylor and
Alderman: he gave with his daughter Grisild, to Nicholas Woodroffe, the said
great house, with two tenements before it, in lieu of an hundred pounds, and
made it up in money, three hundred sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings, four
pence. This worshipful man, and the Gentlewoman his widow after him, kept
those houses down Limestreet in good reparations, never put out but one
Tenant, took no fines, nor raised rents for them, which was ten shillings
the piece yearly: But whether that favor did over-live her Funeral, the
Tenants now can best declare the contrary.

Next unto this on the high street was the Lord Sowches message or tenement,
Message of the L. Sowch.
and other. In place whereof, Richard Wethell, Merchant-Taylor, builded a fair
house, with an high Tower, the second in number, the first of timber that ever
I learned to have been builded, to overlooke neighbors in this City.

This Richard, then a young man, became in short time so tormented with gouts in
his joints, of his hands and legs, that he could neither feed himself, nor go
further than he was led, much less was he able to climb, and take the
pleasure of the height of his Tower.

Then is there another fair house, builded by Stephen Kirton, Alderman:
Alderman Lee did then possess it, and again new builded it: but now it is in
the custody of Sir William Cravon.

Then is there a fair house, Message called the Green-gate.
of old time called the Greene-gate, by which name one Michael Pistoy, a
Lumbard, held it, with a tenement and nine shops, in the reign of Richard the
second, who in the 15. of his reign, gave it to Roger Corphull and Tho.
Bromester, Esquires, by the name of the Greene-gate, in the Parish of S. Andrew
upon Cornehill, in Limestreet Ward: since the which time, Philip Malpas,
sometime Alderman, and one of the Sheriffs, dwelled therein, and was there
robbed and spoiled of his goods, Philip Malpas robbed
to a great value, by Jack Cade, and other Rebels, in the year 1449.

Afterward, in the reign of Henry the seventh, it was seized into the Kings
hands, and then granted first unto John Alston, after that, unto William de la
Rivers, and since by Henry the eighth, to John Mutas, a Pickard, or Frenchman,
who dwelled there, and harbored in his House many Frenchmen, that kalendred
wolsteds, and did other things, contrary to the Franchises of the Citizens.
Wherefore on evil May day, which was in the year 1517. the Prentises and
other spoiled his house, and if they could have found Mutas, Mutas house
spoiled.
they would have stricken off his head. Sir Peter Mutas, son to the said John
Mutas, sold this house to David Woodroofe, Alderman, whose son, Sir Nicholas
Woodroofe, Alderman, sold it over to John Moore, Alderman, that then possessed
it.

Next is a house called the Leaden Porch, Leaden Porch.
lately divided into two tenements, whereof one is a Tavern, and then one
other house for a Merchant, likewise called the Leaden Porch, but now turned to
a Cooks house.

Next is a fair house and a large, wherein diverse Maioralties have been kept,
whereof twain in my remembrance; to wit, Sir William Bowyer, and Sir Henry
Huberthorne.

The next is Leaden Hall, Manor of Leaden Hall.
of which I read, that in the year 1309. it belonged to Sir Hugh Nevill,
Knight, and that the Lady Alice his wife, made a Feoffment thereof, by the name
of Leaden Hall, with the advousions of S. Peter on Cornehill, and other
Churches, to Rich. Earl of Arundell and Surrey, 1362.

More, in the year 1380. Alice Nevil, widow to Sir John Nevill, Knight, of
Essex, confirmed to Thomas Cogshall, and others, the said Manor of Leaden
Hall, and the advousions, etc.

In the year 1384. Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, had the said Manor.
And in the year 1408. Robert Rikeden of Essex, and Margaret his wife,
confirmed to Richard Whittington, and other Citizens of London, the said Manor
of Leaden Hall, with the Appurtenances, the advousion of S. Peter's Church, S.
Margaret Pattens, etc.

And in the year 1411. the said Whittington and other confirmed the same to
the Mayor and Communalty of London, whereby it came to the possession of the
City.

Then in the year 1443. the 21. of Henry the sixth, John Hatherley, Mayor,
purchased license of the said King to take up 200. License to take up Lead to
the building of a common granary.
fodder of Lead, for the building of water Conduits, a common Granarie, and the
Cross in West Cheap, more richly, for the honor of the City.

In the year next following, the Parson and Parish of Saint Dunstane in the
East of London, seeing the famous and mighty man (for the words be in the
Grant; Cum nobilis and potens vir,) Simon Air, Citizen of London, among other
his works of Piety, effectually determined to erect and build a certain
Granarie, upon the soil of the same City at Leaden Hall, of his own charges,
for the common utility of the said City; to the amplifying and enlarging of
the said Granarie, granted to Henry Frowicke, then Mayor, the Aldermen and
Communalty and their successors for ever, all their tenements, with the
appurtenances, sometime called the Horse-mill in Grasse-street, for the annual
rent of four pounds, etc.

Also, certain Evidences of an Alley and Tenements pertaining to the
Horse-mill, Horse-mill in Grasse-street.
adjoining to the said Leaden Hall in Grasse-street, given by William
Kingstone, Fishmonger, unto the parish Church of St. Peter upon Cornehill, do
specify the said Granary, to be builded by the said honorable and famous
Merchant, Simon Air sometime an Vpholster, then by changing of his Copy a
Draper. Leaden Hall new builded to be a common Garner.
Simon Air, sometime an Vpholster, and then a Draper, in the year, 1419. He
builded it of squared stone in form as now it shows, with a fair and large
Chapel in the East side of the Quadrant, over the porch of which he caused
to be written, Dextra Domini exaltavit me, The Lords right hand exalted me.

Within the said Church, A Chapel builded in Leaden hall.
on the north wall was written, Honorandus famosus Mercator Simon Air, hujus
operis, etc. In English thus: The honorable and famous Merchant Simon Air,
founder of this work, once Mayor of this City, Citizen and Draper of the same,
departed out of this life the 18. day of September, the year from the
incarnation of Christ, 1459. and the 38. year of the reign of King Henry the
6. He was buried in the Parish Church of St. Mary Wolnoth in Lumbard street:
he gave by his Testament, which I have read, to be distributed to all Prisons
in London, or within a mile of that City, somewhat to relieve them.

More, Legacies given by Simon Air. Daily Service by note, etc. and three free
schools in the Leaden Hall.
he gave 2000. Marks upon a condition, which not performed, was then to be
distributed to maids marriages, and other deeds of charity: he also gave 3000.
Marks to the Drapers, upon condition, that they should within one year after
his decease, establish perpetually a Master or Warden, five secular Priests,
six Clerks, and two Queristers, to sing daily Divine Service by note for
ever, in his Chapel of the Leaden Hall: Also, one Master, with an Usher for
Grammar, one Master for Writing, and the third for Song, with houses there
newly builded for them for ever, the Master to have for his Salary, ten
pounds, and every other Priest 8. pounds, every other Clerk, 5-pounds, 6.
shillings, 8. pence, and every other Chorister, five Marks. And if the Drapers
refused this to do, within one year after his decease; then the three
thousand Marks to remain to the Prior and Covent of Christs-church in London,
with condition to establish as is aforesaid, within two years after his
decease. And if they refused, then the three thousand Marks to be disposed by
his Executors, as they best could devise in works of charity.

Thus much for his Testament, not performed by establishing of divine service
in his Chapel or Free Schools for Scholars; Liber albus.
neither how the stock of three thousand Marks (or rather five thousand
Marks) was employed by his Executors, could I ever learn: he left issue
Thomas, who had issue Thomas, etc. True it is, that in the year 1464. the
third of Edward the fourth, it was agreed by the Mayor, Beam for Tronage of
wools at Leaden Hall.
Aldermen and Co^munalty of London, that notwithstanding the King Letters
patents, lately before granted unto them, touching the Tronage or weighing of
Wares to be holden at the Leaden Hall; yet suit should be made to the King for
new letters patents, to be granted to the Mayor of the Staple, for the Tronage
of Wools to be holden there, and order to be taken by the discretion of Thomas
Cook, then Mayor, the Counsel of the City, Geffrey Filding then Mayor of the
Staple at Westminster, and of the Kings Council, what should be paid to the
Mayor and Aldermen of the City, for the laying and housing of the Wools there,
that so they might be brought forth and weighed, etc.

Touching the Chapel there, A brotherhood of 60 Priests in the Chapel of
Leaden hall.
I find, that in the year 1466. by license obtained of King Edward the fourth
in the 6. of his reign, a Fraternity of the Trinity of 60. Priests (beside
other brethren and sisters) in the same Chapel, was founded by William Rouse,
John Risby, and Thomas Ashby Priests, some of the which 60. Priests, every
Market Day in the fore-noone, did celebrate Divine Service there, to such
Market people as repaired to prayer, and once every year they met all
together, and had solemn Service, with Procession of all the Brethren and
Sisters. This foundation was in the year 1512. by a common Council confirmed
to the 60. Trinity Priests and to their successors, at the will of the Mayor
and Communalty.

In the year 1484. a great fire happened upon the Leaden Hall, Leaden Hall
burned.
by what casualty I know not, but much housing was there destroyed, with all
the stocks for Guns, and other provision belonging to the City, which was a
great loss, and no less charge to be repaired by them.

In the year 1503. the eighteenth of Henry the seventh, Rich. Arol.
a request was made by the Commons of the City, concerning the usage of the
said Leaden Hall, in form as follows:

Please it the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, A request of the
Citizens to the Mayor and Aldermen.
to enact, that all Frenchmen bringing Canvas, Linen cloth, and other wares to
be sold, and all Forreins bringing Wolsteds, Says, Stamins, Kiverings, Nails,
Iron work, or any other wares, and also all manner Forreins, bringing Lead to
the City to be sold; Shall bring all such their wares aforesaid, to the open
Market of the Leaden Hall, Leaden hall Market for Canvas and linen cloth.
and no where else to be showed, sold, and uttered, like as of old time it has
been used, upon pain of forfeiture of all the said wares, showed or sold in
any other place than aforesaid: And the show of the said wares to be made
three days in a week, that is to say, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. It is
also thought reasonable, that the common Beam be kept from henceforth in the
Leaden Hall, and the Farmer to pay therefore reasonable rent to the Chamber:
for better it is that the Chamber have advantage thereby, than a foreign
person. And also the said Leaden Hall, which is more chargeable now by half
than profitable, shall better bear out the charges thereof. Also the common
Beam for Wool at Leadenhall, Common Beam to be kept in Leaden hall. Leaden
hall pertaining to the Communalty.
may pay yearly a rent to the Chamber of London, toward the supportation and
charges of the same place: for reason it is, that a common Office occupied upon
a common ground, bear a charge to the use of the Communalty. Also that
Forraines bringing Wools, Fels, or any other Merchandises or wares to
Leaden Hall, Wools, Fels, and other Merchandises to be sold in Leaden Hall.
to be kept there for the sale and Market; may pay more largely for keeping of
their goods, than freemen. Thus much for the request of the Commons at that
time.

Now to set down some proof, Leaden hall used as a Garner.
that the said Hall has been employed and used as a Granary for Corn and
grain (as the same was first appointed) leaving all former examples, Roger
Achley Mayor made good provision for the City.
this one may suffice: Roger Acheley Mayor of London in the year 1512. the
third of Henry the 8. when the said Mayor entered the Maioralty, there was not
found 100. quarters of Wheat in all the Garners of this City, Bread Carts of
Stratford the Bow.
either within the liberties, or near adjoining. Through the which scarcity,
when the Carts of Stratford came laden with Bread to the City (as they had been
accustomed) there was such press about them, that one man was ready to destroy
another, in striving to be served for their money. But this scarcity lasted not
long: for the Mayor (in short time) made such provision for Wheat, that the
Bakers both of London, and of Stratford, were weary of taking it up, and were
forced to take much more than they would, and for the rest the Mayor laid out
the money and stored it up in Leaden Hall, and other Garners of the City. This
Mayor also kept the Market so well, that he would be at the Leaden Hall, by
four a clock in the Summers mornings, and from thence he went to other
Markets, to the great comfort of the Citizens.

I read also, that in the year, 1528. the 20. of Henry the 8. Surveyors were
appointed to view the Garners of the City, namely, the Bridgehouse and the
Leaden Hall, how they were stored of Grain for the service of the City. And
because I have here before spoken of the bread Carts coming from Stratford at
the Bow, ye shall understand, that of old time, the Bakers of bread at
Stratford were allowed to bring daily (except the Sabbath and principal
Feasts) diverse long Carts laden with bread, the same being two ounces in the
penny wheaten loaf heavier than the penny wheaten loaf baked in the City, the
same to be sold in Cheap, three or four Carts standing there, between
Gutherans lane and Fausters lane end, one cart on Corne-hill, by the Conduit,
and one other in Grasse-street. And I have read, that in the fourth year of
Edward the second, Richard Reffeham being Mayor, a Baker named John of
Stratford, for making Bread lesser than the Assise; Liber. D. A Baker of
Stratford punished in London for baking bread under the Assize.
was with a fools hood on his head, and loaves of bread about his neck, drawn
on a Hurdle through the streets of this City. Moreover, in the 44. of Edward
the third, John Chichester being Mayor of London, I read in the visions of
Pierce Plowman, a Book so called, as follows.

There was a careful commune, John Malverne.
when no Cart came to town with Basket bread from Stratford: Bread Carts from
Stratford missed in this City in time of scarcity.
tho began beggars weep, and workmen were aghast, a little this will be thought
long in the date of our Dirte, in a dry Averell a thousand and three hundred,
twice thirty and ten, etc.

I read also in the 20. of Henry the 8. Sir James Spencer being Mayor* six
Bakers of Stratford were merced in the Guild Hall of London, for baking under
the size appointed. These Bakers of Stratford left serving this City, I know
not upon what occasion, above forty years since.

In the year 1519. a petition was exhibited by the Commons to the Common
Council, A Petition of the Commons concerning the use of the Leaden hall.
and was by them allowed, concerning the Leaden Hall, how they would have it
used, viz.

Meekely beseeching, shows unto your good Lordship, and Masterships, diverse
Citizens of this City, which (under correction) think, that the great place
called the Leaden Hall, should nor ought not to be letten out to farm, to any
person or persons, and in especial, to any fellowship or company incorporate,
to have and hold the same Hall for term of years, for such inconveniences as
thereby may ensue, and come to the hurt of the Common weal of the said City in
time to come, as somewhat more largely may appear in the Articles following.

First, if any assembly, or hasty gathering of the Commons of the said City,
for suppressing or sub duing of misruled people within the said City, hereafter
shall happen to be called or commanded by the Mayor, Aldermen and other
Governors and Counselors of the said City for the time being; there is none
so convenient, meet and necessary a place to assemble them in, within the said
City, as the said Leaden Hall, both for largeness of room, and for their sure
defense in time of their counselling together about the premises. Also, in that
place has been used the Artillery, Guns, and other Armors of the said City,
to be safely kept in a readiness, for the safeguard, wealth and defense of the
said City, to be had and occupiedat times when need required. As also the store
of timber, for the necessary reparations of the tenements belonging to the
Chamber of the said City, there commonly has been kept.

Item, if any Triumph or Nobleness were to be done, or showed by the
Communalty of the City, for the honor of our Sovereign Lord the King, and
Realm, and for the worship of the said City: the said Leaden Hall is the most
meet and convenient place, to prepare and order the said Triumph therein, and
from thence to issue forth to the places thereof appointed.

Item, at any largess or do^e of any money, made unto the poor people of this
City; it has been used, to be done and given in the said Leaden Hall, for
that the said place is most meet therefore.

Item, (...) the people to stand dry.
the honorable Father, that was ma^^r of the said Hall, had a special will,
intent and mind, that (as it is commonly said) the Market men and women, that
came to the City with victuals and other things, should have their free
standing within the said Leaden Hall in wet weather, to keep themselves and
their wares dry, and thereby to encourage them, and all other, to have the
better will and desire, the more plentiously to resort to the said City, to
victual the same. And if the said Hall should be letten to farm, the will of
the said honorable Father should never be fulfilled, nor take effect.

Item, if the said place, which is the chief fortress and most necessary
place within all the City, for the tuition and safeguard of the same, should be
letten out to farm, out of the hands of the chief heads of the same City, and
especially to any other body politic, it might at length (by likelihood) be an
occasion of discord and debate between the said bodies politic, which God
defend.

For these and many other great and reasonable causes, which hereafter shall be
showed to this honouoable Court, your said beseechors think it much necessary,
that the said Hall be still in the hands of this City, and to be surely kept
by sad and discreet Officers in such wise, that it might always be ready to be
used and occupied, for the common weal of the said City when need shall
require, and in no wise to be letten to any body politic. Thus much for the
petition.

About the year 1534. great means was made about the Leaden Hall, Leaden
Hall, meant to have been made a Burse for Merchants.
to have the same made a Burse for the Assembly of Merchants, as they had been
accustomed in Lumbard-street: many Common Councels were called to that end but
in the year 1535. John Champneis being Mayor, it was fully concluded, that the
Burse should remain in Lumbard-street, as before, and Leaden Hall no more to be
spoken of concerning that matter.

The use of Leaden Hall in my youth was thus: In a part of the North Quadrant,
on the East side of the North gate, were the common beams, for weighing of
Wool and other Wares, as had been accustomed: On the West side of the gate was
the Scales to weigh meal: the other three sides were reserved (for the most
part) to the making and resting of the Pageants showed at Midsummer in the
watch: the remnant of the sides and Quadra^ts were employed for the stowage of
Woolsacks, but not closed up: the lofts above were partly used by the Painters,
in working for the decking of Pageants and other devices, for beautifying of
the Watch and Watchmen, the residue of the lofts were letten out to Merchants,
the Wool-winders and Packers therein to wind and pack their Wools. And thus
much for Leaden Hall may suffice.

Now on the North of Limestreet Ward, in the high street are diverse fair
houses for Merchants, and proper tenements for Artificers, with an Alley also
called Shaft Alley, of the Shaft or May Pole sometime resting over the gate
thereof, as I have declared in Ealdgate Ward.

In the year 1576. partly at the charges of the parish of S. Andrew, A Pumpe
in the high street of Lime-street Ward.
and partly at the charges of the Chamber of Land. a water-Pumpe was raised in
the high street of Limestreet Ward, Cornchill street in some place raised two
fadome higher than of old time, as appeared by buildines found so deep.
near unto Limestreet corner: for the placing of the which Pumpe, having
broken up the ground, they were forced to dig more than two fadome deep,
before they came to any maine ground, where they found a Harth made of
Britain, or rather Roman Tile, every Tile half yard square, and about two
inches thick: they found Coal lying there also (for that lying whole will
never consume) then digging one fadome in the maine, they found water
sufficient, made their prall, and set up the Pumpe, which Pumpe, with o^^
repairing and great charges to the parish, continued not 24. years, but being
rotted, was taken up, and a new set in the place, in the year 1600. Thus much
for the high street.

In Saint Mary street had ye (of old time) a parish Church of Saint Mary the
Virgin, St. Mary street Parish Church of Mary, St. Vrsula, and 11000. Virgins,
called at the Axe, letten out of a warehouse.
St. Vrsula, and the 11000. Virgins, which Church was commonly called Saint
Mary at the Axe, of the sign of an Axe, over against the East end thereof, or
Saint Mary Pellipar, of a plot of ground lying on the North side thereof,
pertaining to the Skinners in London. This parish about the year, 1565. was
united to the parish Church of Saint Andrew Undershaft, and so was Saint Mary
at the Axe suppressed, and letten out to be a warehouse for a Merchant. Against
the East end of this Church, was sometime a fair wall, now turned to a pumpe.
Also against the North end of this St. Mary street, was sometime one other
parish Church of Saint Augustine, Parish Church of S. Augustine in the wall,
made a Chapel to the Papey, and since pulled down and made a stable.
called Saint Augustine in the wall, for that it stood adjoining to the wall of
the City, and otherwise called Saint Augustines Papey, or the Poor, as I have
read in the reign of Edward the 3. About the year, 1430. in the reign of
Henry the sixth, the same Church was allowed to the brethren of the Papey, the
house of poor Priests, whereof I have spoken in Ealdgate Ward. The Parishioners
of this Church were appointed to the Parish Church of Alhallowes in the wall,
which is in Broadstreet Ward: and this brotherhood called Papey, being
suppressed, the Church of Saint Augustine was pulled down, and in place
thereof one Gray, Apothecary, builded a Stable, a Hay-loft, etc. It is now a
dwelling house. Those two Parish Churches, both lying in the Ward of
Limestreet, being thus suppressed, there is not any one parish Church or place
for Divine Service in that Ward, but the inhabitants thereof repair to Saint
Peter in Corne-hill Ward, Saint Andrew in Ealdgate Ward, Alhallowes in the
wall, in Broadstreet Ward, and some to Saint Dennis in Langbourne Ward.

Now because of late there has been some question, to what Ward this Church of
S. Augustine Papey should of right belong; for the same has been challenged by
them of Ealdgate Ward, and (without reason) taken into Bishopsgate Ward, from
Limestreet Ward, I am somewhat to touch it.

About thirty years since, Houses by London wall in the ward of Limestreet.
the Chamber of London granted a Lease of ground (in these words) Lying near
London Wall, in the Ward of Limestreet, from the West of the said Church or
Chapel of Saint Augustine Papey, toward Bishopsgate, etc. On the which plot
of ground, the Leasee builded three fair tenements, and placed Tenants there:
these were charged to bear scot and lot, and someof them to bear office in
Limestreet Ward: all which they did willingly without grudging. And when any
suspected or disordered persons were by the Landlord placed there, the Officers
of Limestreet Ward fetched them out of their houses, committed them to ward,
procured their due punishments, and banished them from thence: whereby in short
time that place was reformed, and brought into good order: which thing being
noted by them of Ealdgate Ward, they moved their Alderman, Sir Thomas Offley,
to call in those houses to be of his Ward. But I my self showing a fair
Ledgier book, sometime pertaining to the late dissolved Priory of the holy
Trinity within Ealdgate, wherein were set down the just bounds of Ealdgate
Ward, before Sir Thomas Offley, Sir Rowland Hayward, the Common Counsel, and
Ward. mote Inquest of the said Limestreet Ward; Sir Thomas Offley gave over
his challenge, and so that matter rested in good quiet, until the year 1579.
that Sir Richard Pype (being Mayor, and Alderman of Bishopsgate Ward)
challenged those houses to be of his ward, A part of Limestreet ward unjustly
withheld by Bishopsgate ward.
whereunto (without reason showed) Sir Rowland Hayward yielded: and thus is
that side of the street, from the North corner of S. Mary street, almost to
Bishopsgate, (wherein is one plot of ground, letten by the Chamberlain of
London, to the parish of S. Martins Oteswich, to be a Churchyard or
burying-place for the dead of that Parish, etc.) unjustly drawn and
withheld from the ward of Limestret.

Dives other proofs I could set down, but this one following may suffice. The
Mayor and Aldermen of London made a grant to the Fraternity of the Papey, in
these words:

Be it remembered, that where now of late the Master and Wardens of the
Fraternity of the Papey, have made a brick wall, closing in the Chapel of S.
Augustine, called Papey Chapel, situate in the Parish of All Saints in the
Wall, in the Ward of Limestreet of the City of London: from the South-east
corner of the brick wall, is a Scutcheon of 12. foot of assize from the said
corner Eastward: And from the said Scutcheon there, to a Message of 55. foot
and an half Westward: the said Scutcheon breaks out of line right Southward,
betwixt the measures aforesaid, three foot and five inches of assise, upon the
common ground of the City aforesaid: Ralph Verney, Mayor, and the Aldermen of
the same City, the 22. day of October, the 6. year of Edward the 4. granted
to John Hod, Priest, M. John Bolt, and Tho. Patchet, Priests, wardens of the
Fraterniey of Papey aforesaid, and to their successors for ever, etc. yielding
4. d. sterling yearly at Michaelmas. Lib. Papey.
And this is (says my book) enrolled in the Guild Hall of London: which is a
sufficient proof, the same plot of ground to be of Dimestreet ward, and never
otherwise accounted or challenged.

On the South side of this street, stretching west from Saint Mary street,
toward Bishopsgate street, there was (of old time) one large Message builded
of stone and timber, in the parish of S. Augustine in the wall, now in the
parish of Alhallowes in the same wall, belonging to the Earl of Oxford;
Patent. Oxford Place.
(for Rich. de Vere, Earl of Oxford, possessed it in the 4. of Henry the 5.)
but in process of time, the Lands of the Earl fell to Females; amongst the
which, one being married to Wingfield of Suffolk, this house with the
appurtenances, fell to his lot, and was by his heir, Sir Robert Wingfield,
sold to Mr. Edward Cook, at the time when this was written, the Queens
Attorney General. This house being greatly ruinated, of late time, for the
most part has been let out to Poulters, for stabling of Horses and stowage of
Poultrie, but now lately new builded into a number of small tenements, letten
out to strangers, and other mean people.

It was ordered by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, Hum. Dyson
at a Court holden on Thursday, the 24. of April, in the 4. year of Edward the
6. That the Chamberlain of London should yearly pay unto the Scavenger of
Limestreet ward, twenty shillings by even portions, out of the profit coming
by the Butchers stalles in Leaden Hall, toward the clesing and sweet keeping of
the same Ward.

One note more of this Ward, and so an end: I find of record, that in the
year 1371. the 45. of Edward the 3. a great Subsidy of 100000. pounds was
granted toward the Kings wars in France, whereof the Clergy paid 50000.
pounds, and the Laity 50000. pounds, to be levied in 39. shires of England,
containing Parishes 8600. of every parish, 5. l. 16. s. the greater to help
the lesser. This City (as one of the Shires) then containing 24. wards, and in
them 110. Subsidy of parishes, Limestreet ward, in the year 1371.
was therefore assessed to 635. l. 12. s. whereof Limestreet Ward did bear 34.
s. and no more; so small a Ward it was, and so accounted, as having no one
whole parish therein, but small portions only, of two parishes in that Ward.

This Ward has an Alderman, his Deputy, common Counselors, four;
Constables, four; Seavengers, two; VVard-mote Inquest, sixteen, and a Beadle.
It is taxed to the Fifteen at 1. l. 19. s. 2. d. ob. q.

BISHOPSGATE WARD.
THe next is Bishopsgate Ward, Bishopsgate Ward.
whereof a part is without the Gate, and of the Suburbs, from the Bars by S.
Mary Spittle to Bishopsgate, and a part of Hounds-ditch, almost half thereof,
also without the Wall, of the same Ward.

Then within the Gate is Bishopsgate street, so called of the Gate, to a pumpe,
where sometime was a fair Well with two buckets, by the East end of the parish
Church of S. Martin Oteswich, and then winding by the west corner of Leaden
Hall, down Grassestreet, to the corner over against Grasse-Church: and these
are the bounds of that Ward. Parish Church of S. Buttolph without Bishopsgate.


Monuments most to be noted, are these: The parish Church of Saint Buttolph
without Bishopsgate, in a fair Churchyard, adjoining to the Towne-Ditch, upon
the very bank thereof, but of old time enclosed with a comely wall of brick,
lately repaired by Sir William Allen, Mayor in the year 1571. because he was
borne in that parish, where also he was buried.

An Anchoresse (by Bishopsgate) received forty shillings the year of the
Sheriffs of London.

The Monuments that I observed in the Church of Saint Buttolph without
Bishopsgate, were these:

Johannes Threll Armig. Fair plared stones lying one by another on the ground
in the Chancell.
Nobilli familia Sussexiae ortus, hic jacet. Vixit usque ad annum sexagesimum
tertium: Mortuus est sexto die Octobris, Anno Domini, 1609.

Sub hoc Marmore jacet corpus Johannis Redman, quondam hujus Ecclesiae Rectoris
been meriti: qui ab hac luce migravit tertio die Iulii, Anno Domini, 1523.

Hic jacet Johannes Picking, Magister Artium, nuper Rector istius Ecclesiae,
qui Obiit 6. die September. An. Dom. 1490.

Hereunder lies the body of Joane Wood, At the entrance into the Quite, in the
middle I Will.
wife to Robert Wood, Citizen and Brewer of London, who had issue, two sons,
and three daughters; viz. John, Richard, Ioane, Anne and Francis. She deceased
the 25. day of November, An. Dom. 1600. She gave large gifts and legacies to
this Parish, as hereunder is expressed:

At her burial she gave ten pounds to the poor.

She gave ten shillings yearly for a Sermon on Midsummer day.

For a friendly meeting among the neighbors, forty shillings.

In bread weekly to the poor for ever, two shillings.

Also four load of Char-coales yearly to the poor for ever.

To the Parson of the parish yearly for ever, ten shillings.

To the Two Churchwardens, ten shillings to each in like manner.

To the Clerk 6. s. 8. d. and to the Sexton, 5. s. yearly for ever.

For a friendly meeting of the Parson and parishioners, accompanying him
yearly in walking the bounds of the parish, thirty shillings.

To the poor of the parish, in money yearly (for ever) to be distributed,
eight pounds.

And the remainder of the yearly rents for the half Moon, and half Moon
Alley, to remain in the Church stock, toward the repairing of the Church.

Over and beside the memorable charity of this worthy Widow, Mistress Wood, God
has raised diverse other good Benefactors to the poor in the same Parish, as
appears by this small recordation.

John Heyward, This gift is performed by the Company of Tallow-Chandlers
yearly.
Citizen and Alderman of London, had his last Will and Testament enrolled in
the Court of Hustings in the Guild Hall of London, on monday next before the
Feast of Saint Cuthbert the Bishop, in the thirteenth year of Edward the
fourth, after the Conquest.

Wherein he gave to the poor people of this Parish, five and twenty Quarters
of Char-coales, yearly to be delivered by the Company of Tallow-Chaundlers,
betwixt the Feast of All Saints, and the Nativity of our blessed Savior; with
a penalty of for-feiture of twenty shillings for the first Quarter, if they be
not delivered as aforesaid; and forty shillings for the second Quarter; four
pounds for the third Quarter; and eight pounds for the whole year, if they be
not delivered: And so double still from Quarter to Quarter, if defect of
payment herein be made.

John Bricket, Citizen and Toothdrawer of London, (by his last Will and
Testament, dated the eleventh day of February, 1554.) gave for ever at the
Feast of Easter, twelve Sackes of Char-coales, to the poor of this Parish: out
of two Tenements, the one now in the occupation of Andrew Partridge,
Tallow-Chaundler; the other late in occupation of Andrew Seywell, Bricklayer,
both joining together at the South side of Bell Alley gate in this Parish.

We receive of the gift of Mistress Mary Wilkinson deceased, out of 2. fair
houses in S. Mary Spittle, 4. load of coals out of each house, 30. quarters
being. 2. load: the first 30. quarters to be given to the poor of this parish,
in the month of November for ever; the next thirty quarters to be likewise
given to the poor of this parish, in December for ever: provided that out of
each load, the Overseers of the Precinct of Norton Folgate shall have ten
Sacks, to be by them given to the poor of that Precinct.

Likewise is paid yearly by the Company of Ironmongers, the sum of thirty
shillings per annum, of the gift of Sir William Allen, to be distributed among
the poor in bread.

Also of the Company of Vintners, the sum of twenty shillings, yearly for
ever, of the gift of Sir Stephen Scudamore, Knight, and Alderman of London.

Also of Mistress Wood, the Relict of Master Thomas Wood, late of Saint
Buttolphs without Ealdgate, the sum of ten shillings yearly for ever, to
be received on Saint Thomas day, issuing out of certain Tenements in
Katharinwheele Alley, in this Parish, of the gift of Mary Webster, Widow.

Mistress Price, The mirror of this Age for a matchiefe woman.
in the time of her widdow-hood, did at her own charge new build the Pulpit,
in the year of our Lord, 1614. and shortly after, did likewise send (to
furnish the same) fair and rich Ornaments for the said Pulpit, as also for the
Communion Table. For the Pulpit, a costly Cloth of Crimson Velvet, edged in the
bottom with a deep gold fringe, and laced about with a fair gold lace.

Likewise, a Cushion suitable to the same, with a very fair Verge to adorn the
upper part of the Pulpit, edged likewise with a deep gold fringe.

And for the Communion Table, a goodly large Carpet of Crimson Velvet, Nor did
she this worthy service to God here only, but in other Parishes beside, as at
Paul's, Christs-Church, etc.
edged with a deep gold fringe; also a fair Table-cloth of fine Cambricke, to
be used upon the Communion days, with a Cambricke Cloth laced, to cover the
Bread upon the Table: Also a fair Surplice of Cambricke, for the Parsons use:
all which were, with a new hair Brush, kept in a Sarsanet Case, to be locked
up in a new wainescot Chest, by her bought for the same purpose, and so
carefully kept for their several uses. To the which Chest was set two Locks;
the two several Keys whereof the one to be kept by the Parson of the parish,
the other by the Churchwarden of the same parish, for the safe keeping thereof.

As for the Kings Arms imbroidred upon the said Pulpit Cloth; The thankful
gratitude to God of Humfrey Swanne Imbroide, rer.
it was made, set on and freely given by Humfrey Swan of this parish,
Imbroiderer, in remembrance of Gods great mercy extended toward him, in the
year of the great visitation, 1625. for in that year he had buried his wife,
with diverse of his family; himself also, lying a long while under the Lords
heavy hand, without all hope of recovery; by Gods gracious providence he was
at the last restored to his former health. In regard whereof, and to express
his further thankfulness to Almighty God, he adorned the said Pulpit Cloth
as now it is.

Moreover, in the same Parish Church of Saint Buttolph, among other
benevolences given thereto, may not be omitted the bountiful gift of Master
William Hobby, Citizen and Ale-brewer of London, to wit, the Tenor Bell in the
Steeple, bearing his own name, and called Hobby, which he caused to be
founded at his own cost and charges: And afterward to be re-cast two
several times, only to make it tunable with the other Bells in the Steeple;
which was performed accordingly, and they are now as perfect and pleasing a
ring of Bells, as can be wished.

When he gave this Bell to the Parish, he enjoined this condition, that at
what time soever any man deceased, that had borne any place of eminence and
office in the Parish, and afterward happened (by any cross or misadventure) to
fall in decay: That yet he should have the benefit of this Bells service freely
bestowed on him at his burial, not paying any costs or duties therefore to the
Church. No doubt but this man had an honest meaning, and most charitable mind,
both in the promise (which was in merriment, and when he expected not place of
degree or office to fall on him) and likewise in the performance; wherein he
showed himself no way slack, but so forward as any man could be. Let his
worthy example incite on others; to the like good inclination (one way or
other) toward the Church.

Mr. Ralph Pinder, Citizen and Draper of London, Aldermans Deputy of this Ward,
M. Pinder gift of three ^core pounds.
who was buried the 28. of May, 1622. gave to the poor of this Parish in money
60. l. for which is given to 13. poor people every Sunday in the year for
ever 2. pence a piece in good wheaten bread.

In the year, 1626. Nichlas Reive, The benevolence of Nicholas Reive a
Scrivener in Cornehill
Scrivener in Cornehill (whose Father was Clerk of this Parish) gave by his
last will and testament, the sum of 406. l. 5. s. to the said parish, to buy
so much land as the said moneys will extend unto, and the rents and profits
thereof to be given and distributed to the comfort of such people within this
parish. With which moneys was purchased certain lands lying at Stratford Bow,
now in the tenure of Henry Chester, the rent of which lands is 25. l. per annum.

In the year, 1628. the 20. of June, The charity of the Eearle of Devonshire.
William Earl of Devonshire dyed at Devonshire house without Bishopsgate, and
gave 100. l. for ever, to the use of the poor of this parish, for which the
Churchwardens do give every Sunday in the year to 15. poor people of this
parish 2. d. a piece in good wheaten bread.

WHereas the sixth day of November last past, T. C. Citizen and Armorer of
London, humbly petitioned unto the Court, that they would be pleased to
receive into the Chamber of London the sum of 100. l. presently to be paid,
in allowing and paying therefore yearly from the Birth of our Lord God 1629. for
ever to the relief and comfort of 5. aged poor Widows of the Parish of
Saint Buttolph without Bishopsgate, London, the sum of five pounds to be
given and equally distributed to and amongst them, eighteen days before
Christmas yearly, as of the free gift and benevolence of him the the said T.
C. at the oversight and direction of the Parson and Churchwardens, for the
time being of that parish. whereupon in furtherance of that pious and
charitable work, this Court was pleased to accept of the said 100. l. and to
grant performance of that his petition: As by an order in that behalf made it
may and does appear: which said 100. l. was the 13. day of the said month of
November last, accordingly paid and delivered by the said T. C. into the said
Chamber of London, to and for the intent and purpose aforesaid. Now the said T.
C. in further declaration of his full mind and intent concerning the
distribution of the said five pounds, yearly and for ever, as aforesaid; he
has expressed and declared, that the same shall be done and performed in this
manner, viz. tha^ of and with the same five pounds yearly and for ever, there
shall be bought and provided by the said T. C. during his life, and after his
decease by the Parson and Churchwardens of the said parish of Saint Buttolph
without Bishopsgate aforesaid for the time being and their successors, five
Wastcoats and five Kirtles, ready made up of good Kersey or Cloth, the Kersey
or Cloth of every Wastcoat and Kirtle to be worth fifteen shillings at the
least, and five pair of Stockings and five pair of shoes, every pair of the
same Stockings to be worth eighteen pence at the least, and every pair of the
said shoes to be worth two shillings at the least. Which Wastcoats, Kirtles,
Stockings and shoes, shall be yearly and for ever delivered on the Feast day
of S. Thomas the Apostle, as the free gift of the said T. C. After in the
parish Church of St. Buttolph without Bishopsgate aforesaid, unto five aged
poor Widows within the same parish, being known or reputed to be of honest
life and conversation, and past their labor (that is to say) to every of the
same five poor Widows a Wastcoat and Kirtle, a pair of Stockings and a
pair of Shoes. And that the same five ^oore Widows shall be yearly
nominated and appointed by the said T. C. during his life, and after his
decease the same five poor Widows shall be at the nomination and appointment
of the Parson and Churchwardens of the said parish of S. Buttolph without
Bishopsgate aforesaid, for the time being, and their successors yearly and for
ever. Wherein the meaning and desire of the said T. C. is, that those five
poor Widows, or so many of them which shall be living at the time of his
decease, that shall be nominated by him in his life time, for to have receive
the gifts and benevolences aforesaid, shall and may every one of them yearly,
during their lives, respectively have and receive one Wastcoat and Kirtle, a
pair of Stockings and a pair of Shoes, of the gift aforesaid; provided that
they and either of them be of good life and conversation.

Now without this Churchyard wall, was a Cawsey, Petty-France, near to the
Town ditch.
leading to a Quadran^ called Petty-France, of diverse Frenchmen dwelling
there, and to other dwelling houses, lately builded on the bank of the said
ditch by some Citizens of London, that more regarded their own private gain,
than the common good of the City. For by means of this Cawsey raised on the
bank, and soylage of houses, with other filthiness cast into the ditch, the
same became enforced to a narrow channel, and almost filled up with unsavory
things, to the danger of impoisoning the whole City.

For prevention whereof, and in a worthy charitable disposition of so
honorable a City (in regard that this parish was greatly unprovided of the
burial for their dead) that needless Cawsey or passage to Petty-France, was
given by the City to the said Parish, A new place of burial, made by the
other Churchyard.
for the same intent; which they have (since then) made good and firm ground,
walling it about with a good strong brick wall, serving as a lower and
supplying Churchyard by it self; and toward the charges whereof, diverse good
Parishioners (that desire to be namelesse) gave large and honest contribution.
And because they would not show themselves unthankful to the City for so
great a benefit, their expression stands thus fixed over the Gate, at
entrance into the said Churchyard.

Coemeterium hoc inferius Civitate Londinensi huic Parochiae concessum,
sumptib^s ejusdem Parochiae mure lateritio septum est. An. Dom. 1615. Stephano
Gossono, Rectore, Thomo Johnsono and Johanne Hedicio, Ecclesiae Gardianis.

This Churchyard being consecrated the 4. day of June, 1617. the first man
buried therein chanced to be a Frenchman borne; upon whose burial, these
Verses were written by my friend Mr. Th. Collins.

A Frenchman borne,
hight Martin de la Toure,
Was the first man
was buried in this ground,
A Schoolmaster he was:
And this a part of our
Neere-neighbouring point,
of Petty France small bound,
So Martin of the Tower
may well be said
To Have dyed in England,
yet in France was laid.
August 10. 1626.
In Petty France out of Christian burial, The memory of a Persian buried out
of the Churchyard.
was buried Hodges Shaughsware a Persian Merchant, who with his son came over
with the Persian Ambassador, and was buried by his own Son, who read certain
prayers, and used other Ceremonies, according to the custom of their own
Country, This was thus Englished by his interpreter.
Morning and Evening, for a whole month after the burial: for whom is set up
at the charge of his Son, a Tomb of stone with certain Persian Characters
thereon; the exposition thus, This Grave is made for Hodges Shaughsware, the
chiefest servant to the King of Persia, for the space of 20. years, who came
from the King of Persia and dyed in his service. If any Persian comes out of
that Country, let him read this and a prayer ^er him, the Lord receive his
soul, for here lies Maghmore Shanghsware, who was borne in the Town of Novoy
in Persia.

The bounds of Saint Buttolphs Parish without Bishopsgate, London, are thus:
From Bishopsgate (under a part of which the City Ditch runs) Westward,
close by the Ditch, they pass along by Petty France, into Moore-field: under
the wall and Cawsey thereof (toward Bethelem;) there did run a ditch, and
from the North part of the said Field, still does, so far as Hog lane, which
is at the upper end of the Garden Alleys. Close to which ditch, the Parish
extends all along on the inside, and takes in one side of Hog-lane.

Thence straight forth, it begins on the further side of Norton Folgate:
thence into S. Mary Spittle, and thence into a part of Petticoat lane, so far
as Gravell-lane end: and so through diverse Gardens on the back side of
Fishers-Folly, into Hounds-ditch, at the sign of the Hand and Still. So to the
Ditch and City Wall: thence right opposite, on to Bishopsgate again. My
friendly furtherance here, was by the help of Mr. Richard Weoley, Parish
Clerk there.

Next unto the Parish Church of S. Buttolph, Hospital of Bethelem.
was a fair Inn for receipt of Travellours: then an Hospital of Saint Mary
of Bethlem, founded by Simon Fitz Mary, one of the Sheriffs of London, in the
year 1246. He founded it to have been a Priory of Canons, with Brethren and
Sisters: and King Edward the third granted a Protection (which I have seen)
for the brethren, Militiae beatae Mariae de Bethlem, within the City of
London, the 14. year of his reign. It was an Hospital for distracted people.
Stephen Gennings, Merchant-taylor, gave 40. l. toward purchase of the
Patronage, by his Testament, 1523. The Mayor and Communalty purchased the
patronage thereof, with all the Lands and Tenements thereunto belonging, in the
year 1546.

The Copy of an ancient Deed of Gift, given to Bethlem or Bedlem, by Simon the
son of Mary.
TO all the children of our Mother holy Church, to whom this present writing
shall come; Simon the son of Mary sends greeting inour Lord. Where among
other things, and before other Lauds, the high altitude of the heavenly
Counsels, marvelously wrought by some readier devotion, it ought to be more
worshipped; of which things the mortal sickness (after the fall of our first
Father Adam) has taken the beginning of this new repayring: Therefore
forsooth, it beseems worthy, that the place, in which the Son of God is
become man, and has proceeded from the Virgins womb, which is increaser and
beginner of man's redemption, namely ought to be with reverence worshipped, and
with beneficial portions to be increased. Therefore it is, that the said
Simon, son of Mary; having special and singulor devotion to the Church of
the glorious Virgin at Bethelem, where the same Virgin of her brought forth our
Savior incarnate, and lying in the Cratch, and with her own milk nourished;
and where the same Child to us there borne, the Chivalrie of the heavenly
Company, sang the new Hymn, Gloria in excelsis Deo. The same time, the
increaser of our health, (as a King, and his Mother a Queen) willed to be
worshipped of Kings: a new star going before them at the honor and reverence
of the same Child, and his most meek Mother: And to the exaltation of my most
Noble Lord, Henry, King of England; whose wife and child the foresaid Mother of
God, and her only Son, have in their keeping and protection: And to the
manifold increase of this City of London, in which I was borne: And also for
the health of my soul, and the souls of my predecessors and successors, my
Father, Mother, and my friends: And specially for the souls of Guy of Marlowe,
John Durant, Ralph Ashwye, Maud, Margaret, and Dennis, women: Have given,
granted, and by this my present Charter, here have confirmed to God, and to the
Church of S. Mary of Bethelem, all my Lands which I have in the Parish of S.
Burtolph without Bishopsgate of London; that is to say, whatsoever I there now
have, or had, or in time to come may have, in houses, gardens, pooles, ponds,
ditches and pits, and all their appurtenances, as they be closed in by their
bounds; which now extend in length from the Kings high street East, to the
great ditch in the West, the which is called Deep ditch and in breadth, to the
Lands of Raph Downing in the North: and to the Land of the Church of Saint
Buttolph in the South. To have and to hold the foresaid Church of Bethelem in
free and perpetual Alms: And also to make there a Priorie, and to ordain a
Prior and Canons, Brothers and also Sisters, when Jesus Christ shall enlarge
his grace upon it. And in the same place, the Rule and order of the said Church
of Bethelem solemnly professing, which shall bear the token of a Star openly
in their Coapes and Mantles of profession, and for to say divine Service there
for the souls aforesaid, and all Christian souls: And specially to receive
there the Bishop of Bethelem, canons, Brothers and Messengers of the Church of
Bethelem for evermore, as often as they shall come thither. And that a Church
or Oratory there shall be builded, as soon as our Lord shall enlarge his
grace: under such form, that the order, institution of Priors, Canons,
Brothers, Sisters of the visitation, correction and reformation of the said
place, to the Bishop of Bethelem and his successors, and to the Charter of his
Church, and of his Messengers, as often as they shall come thither, as shall
seem them expedient, no man's contradiction notwithstanding, shall pertain for
evermore: Saving always the services of the chief Lords, as much as pertains
to the said Land. And to the more surety of this thing, I have put my self out
of this Land, and all mine: And Lord Godfrey, then chosen of the Nobles of the
City of Rome, Bishop of Bethelem, and of the Pope confirmed then by his name
in England, in his name, and of his successors, and of his Chapter of his
Church of Bethelem, into bodily possession: I have indented and given to his
possession, all the foresaid lands, which possession he has received, and
entered in form abovesaid. And in token of subjection and reverence, the said
place in London without Bishopsgate, shall pay yearly in the said City, a
Mark sterling at Easter, to the Bishop of Bethelem, his Successors of his
Messengers, in the name of a Pension. And if the faculties or goods of the said
place (our Lord granting) happen to grow more, the said place shall pay more,
in the name of pension, at the said term, to the Mother Church of Bethelem.
This (forsooth) gift and confirmation of my deed, and the putting to of my
Scale for me and mine heirs, I have steadfastly made strong, the year of our
Lord God, Anno 39.
A thousand, two hundred, Hen. 3.
forty seven, the Wednesday after the Feast of S. Luke the Evangelist: These
being witnesses, Peter the son of Allen, then Mayor of London, Nicholas Bet,
then Sheriff of the said City, and Alderman of the said Ward; Raph Sparling,
Alderman; Godfrey of Camps, Simon Comicent, Simon Ronner, Rob. of Woodford,
Thomas of Woodford, Walter Pointell, Walter of Woodford, etc.

The same year, King Henry the 8. gave this Hospital unto the City: the
Church and Chapel whereof were taken down in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
and houses builded there, by the Governors of Christ's Hospital in London. In
this place, people that be distraught in their wits, are (by the suite of their
friends) received and kept as before, but not without charges to their bringers
in. Him. (...)


At a Court of Aldermen, holden on Tuesday, the 20. of January, An. 4. Ed. 6. a
Carre-roome was freely given to the inhabitants of Bishopsgate Ward, to the
intent, that they should cause the utter parts of the said Ward without the
gate to be kept clean.

Also, at a Court of Aldermen, holden on Tuesday the 7. of April, An. 5. Edw.
6. Him. Diso^
It was ordered that the inhabitants within the precinct of Bethlem should be
(from thenceforth) united to the parish Church of Saint Buttolph without
Bishopsgate, and so by the Parson and parishioners of the same parish accepted
and taken; and to be allotted and charged with them, to all offices and
charges (Tithes and Clerks wages excepted:) In consideration whereof, the
Parson of the said parish was to receive yearly out of the Chamber of London
20 shillings, and the Parish Clarke 6. shillings 8. pence.

In the year 1569. Sir Thomas Roe, Burial for the dead prepared.
Merchant-Taylor, Mayor, caused to be enclosed (with a wall of brick) about
one Acre of ground, Deep ditch by Bethlem.
being part of the said Hospital of Bethlem, to wit, on the bank of a deep
ditch so called, parting the said Hospital of Bethlem from the Moore field:
this he did for burial, and ease of such parishes in London, as wanted ground
convenient within their Parishes. The Lady his wife was there buried (by whose
persuasion he enclosed it) but himself borne in London, was buried in the
Parish Church of Hackney.

From this hospital Northward upon the streets side, many houses have been
builded with Allies backward, of late time too much pesterd with people (a
great cause of infection) up to the Bars.

The other side of this high street from Bishopsgate and Hounds-ditch, Dolphin
without Bishopsgate.
the first building is, a large Inn for receipt of travelers, and is called
the Dolphin, of such a sign.

In the year 1513. Margaret Ricroft Widow, gave this house with the Gardens
and appurtenances, unto William Gam, R. Glye, their wives, her daughters, and
to their heirs, with condition, they yearly give to the Warden or Governor
of the Gray Friars Church within Newgate forty shillings, to find a Student
of Divinity in the University for ever.

Then is there a fair house of late builded by John Powlet. Next to that, a
far more large and beautiful house, with Gardens of pleasure, howling
allies, Fishers folly.
and such like, builded by Jasper Fisher, free of the Goldsmiths, late one of
the six Clerks of the Chancery, and a Justice of peace. It has since (for a
time) been the Earl of Oxfords place. The late Queen Elizabeth has lodged
there: It now belongs to the Earl of Devonshire. This house being so large
and sumptuously builded, by a man of no great calling, possessions or wealth,
(for he was indebted to many) was mockingly called Fishers folly, and a Rithme
was made of it, and other the like, in this manner;

Kirbies Castle, and Fishers Folly,
Spinilas pleasure, and Megses glory.
And so of other like buildings about the City, by Citizens, men have not
let to speak their pleasure.

From Fishers folly, Berwards lane.
up to the west end of Berwards lane, of old time so called, but now Hog
lane, because it meets with Hog lane, which comes from the Bars without
Ealdgate, as is aforeshewed; is a continual building of tenements, with Allies
of Cottages, pestered, Tazell Close.
etc. Then is there a large Close, called Tazell Close, sometime, for that
there were Tazels planted for the use of Cloth-workers: since letten to the
Crosse-bow makers, wherein they used to shoot for games at the Popingey. Now
the same being enclosed with a Brick wall, Artillary yard.
serves to be an Artillery yard, or Garden, whereunto the Gunners of the
Tower weekly do repair; namely, every Thursday, and there levelling certain
Brass Pieces of great Artillery against a But of earth, made for that purpose,
they discharged them for their exercise. Present use is made thereof, by diverse
worthy Citizens, Gentlemen and Captains, using Martial Discipline, and where
they meet (well-neere) weekly, to their great commendation in so worthy an
exercise, whereof hereafter I will speak more at large.

Then have ye the late dissolved Priory and Hospital, Walter Brune Mercer, one
of the Sheriffs of London, 1203.
commonly called, Saint Marie Spittle, founded by Walter Brune, and Rosia his
wife, for Canons regular; Walter, Archdeacon of London, laid the first stone in
the year 1197. William of Saint Mary Church, then Bishop of London, dedicated
it to the honor of Jesus Christ, and his Mother the perpetual Virgin Mary by
the name of Domus Dei, and Beatae Mariae, extra Bishopsgate, in the parish of S
Buttolph, the bounds whereof, as appears by composition betwixt the Parson
and Prior of the said Hospital, Berwards lane.
concerning tithes, begins at Berwards lane toward the south and extends
in breadth to the Parish of S. Leonard of Sores ditch toward the North,
Soreditch so called more than 400. years since.
and in length, from the Kings street on the West to the Bishops of Londons
field, called Lollesworth on the East. The Prior of this Saint Mary Spittle,
for the emortising and propriation of the Priory of Bikenacar in Essex, to his
said house of S. Mary Spittle, gave to Henry the seventh 400. l. in the two and
twentieth of his reign. This Hospital surrendered to Henry the eighth, was
valued to dispend 478. l. wherein was found, besides ornaments of the Church,
and other goods pertaining to the Hospital, 180. beds well furnished, for
receipt of the poor: for it was an Hospital of great relief. Sir Henry
Plesington, Knight, was buried there, 1452.

In place of this Hospital, Pulpit Cross at the Spittle.
and near adjoining, Charnell and Chapel of S. Edmond and of Mary Magdalen.
are now many fair houses builded, for receipt and lodging of worshipful
persons. A part of the large Churchyard pertaining to this Hospital, and
severed from the rest with a Brick wall, yet remains as of old time, with a
Pulpit Cross therein, Sermons in the Easter holidays at the Spittle.
somewhat like to that in Paul's Churchyard. And against the said Pulpit on the
South side before the Charnell and Chapel of Saint Edmond the Bishop, and
Mary Magdalen, which Chapel was founded about the year 1391. by W. Euesham,
Citizen and Peperer of London, who was there buried; remains also one fair
builded house of two stories in height for the Mayor, and other honorable
persons, with the Aldermen and Sheriffs to sit in, there to hear the Sermons
preached in the Easter holidays. In the Loft over them stood the Bishop of
London, and other Prelates; but now the Ladies, and Aldermens Wives do there
stand at a fair Window, or sit at their pleasure.

And here is to be noted, that time out of mind, it has been a laudable
custom, that on good Friday in the afternoon, some especial learned man, by
appointment of the Prelates, has preached a Sermon at Paul's Cross, treating
of Christ's passion: and upon the three next Easter Holidays, Monday, Tuesday,
and Wednesday, the like learned men, by the like appointment, have used to
preach on the forenoones at the said Spittle, to persuade the Article of
Christ's resurection: and then on Low Sunday, one other learned man at Paul's
Cross, to make rehearsal of those four former Sermons, either commending or
reproouing them, as to him (by judgment of the learned Divines) was thought
convenient. And that done, he was to make a Sermon of his own study, which in
all were five Sermons in one. At these Sermons so severally preached, the Mayor
with his Brethren the Aldermen were accustomed to be present in their Violets
at Paul's on good Friday, and in their Scarlets at the Spittle in the Holydaies,
except Wednesday, in Violet, and the Mayor with his Brethren on Low Sunday in
Scarlet, at Paul's Cross, continued until this day.

Touching the Antiquity of this Custom, I find that in the year 1398. King
Richard having procured from Rome, confirmation of such statutes, and
ordinances, as were made in the Parliament, begun at Westminster, and ended at
Shrewsbury, he caused the same confirmation to be read and pronounced at Paul's
Cross and at Saint Mary Spittle, in the Sermons before all the people. Philip
Malpas one of the Sheriffs in the year 1439. gave 20. shillings by the year
to the three Preachers at the Spitle. House in S. Mary Spittle Churchyard
builded for the Mayor and Aldermen Pulpit Cross in Spittle Churchyard new
builded.
Stephen Forstor Mayor in the year 1594. gave forty pounds to the Preachers of
Paul's Cross and Spittle. I find also, that the aforesaid house, wherein the
Mayor and Aldermen do sit at the Spittle, was builded (for that purpose) or
the goods, and by the executors of Rich. Rawson Alderman, and Isabel his wife,
in the year 1488. In the year 1594. this Pulpit being old, was taken down,
and a new one set up, the Preachers face turned toward the South, which was
before toward the West. Also a large house (on the East side of the said
Pulpit) was then builded, A house in Spittle Churchyard builded for the
Governers and Children of Christ's Hospital.
for the Governors and Children of Christ's Hospital to sit in: and this was
done of the goods of William Elkin Alderman, late deceased. But within the
first year, the same house decaying, and like to have fallen, was again (with
great ^ost) repaired at the Cities charge.

Here I may not omit an especial matter, because in my remembrance, nor else
(in my reading) I find not the like. On Monday in Easter week, On Monday in
Easter week, An. Dom. 1617. A Saint Mary Spittle.
being April 21. 1617. our most Gracious Sovereign King James, being gone on
his Journey to Scotland: It pleased diverse Lords and other of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, to visit this place of Saint Mary Spittle, and
there to remain in company (during the Sermon time) with the Lord Mayor, Sir
John Lemman, and his worthy Brethren the Aldermen of this City. The Sermon
being ended, they rode home with the Lord Mayor to his house near Belingsgate,
where they were lovingly and honorably both welcomed and entertained with a
most liberal and bountiful Dinner, and all the Gentlemen attending on them.
The Lords, were the right reverend Father in God, George Lord Archbishop of
Canturbury, Sir Francis Bacon, Lord keeper of the great Seal of England; the
Earl of Worcester; the Lord Lis^e, Lord Chamberlain to her Majesty, the Lord
Bishop of London; the Lord Carew; the Lord Knivet; Sir Julius Caesar; Sir
Thomas Edmonds; Sir John Digby, with diverse other Knights and worthy Gentlemen,
etc. And the Preacher that then preached, was Master Doctor Page, of Detford in
Kent.

On the East side of this Churchyard lies a large field, Lolesworth field.
of old time called Lolesworth, Burial of the Romans in Spittle field.
now Spittle field, which about the year 1576. was broken up for Clay to make
Brick: in the digging thereof many earther pots called Vrnae, were found full
of Ashes, Old Monuments of the Romans found.
and burnt bones of men, to wit of the Romans that inhabited here. For it was
the custom of the Romans, to burn their dead, to put their Ashes in an Vrne,
and then bury the same with certain Ceremonies, in some field appointed for
that purpose near unto their City.

Every of these pots had in them (with the Ashes of the dead) one piece of
Copper money, with the inscription of the Emperor then reigning: some of them
were of Claudius, some of V^spasian, some of Nere, of Antoninus Pius, of
Trajanus, and others. Besides those Vrnes, many other pots were found in the
same place, made of a white earth, with long necks, and handles, like to our
stone Jugs: these were empty, but seemed to be buried full of some liquid
matter, long since consumed and soked through. For there were found diverse
Vials, and other fashioned Glasses, some most cunningly wrought, such as I have
not seen the like, and some of Crystal, all which had water in them, nothing
differing in clearness, taste, or savor from common spring water; whatsoever
it was at the first. Some of these Glasses had Oil in them very thick, and
earthly in savor. Some were supposed to have Balm in them, but had lost the
virtue: many of these pots and Glasses were broken in cutting of the Clay, so
that few were taken up whole.

There were also found diverse Dishes and Cups, of a fine red colored earth,
which showed outwardly such a shining smoothness, as if they had been of
Currall. Those had (in the bottomes) Roman letters printed, there were also
Lamps of white earth and red, artificially wrought with diverse Antiques about
them, some three or four Images, made of white earth, about a span long each
of them: one I remember was of Pallas, the rest I have forgotten. I my self
have reserved (amongst diverse of those antiquities there) one Vrne, with the
Ashes and bones, and one pot of white earth very small, not exceeding the
quantity of a quarter of a wine pint, made in shape of a Hare, squatted upon
her legs, and between her ears is the mouth of the por.

There has also been found (in the same field) diverse Coffins of stone,
Troughs of Stone found in the Spittle field.
containing the bones of men: these I suppose to be the burials of some
special persons, in time of the Brittons, or Saxons, after that the Romans had
left to govern here. Moreover, there were also found the scuis and bones of
men, without Coffins, or rather whose Coffins (being of great timber) were
consumed. Great Nails of Iro^ found in the field and fond opinions of men.
Diverse great Nails of Iron were there found, such as are used in the Wheels
of shod Carts, being each of them as big as a man's finger, and a quarter of a
yard long, the heads two inches over. Those Nails were more wondered at than
the rest of the things there sound, and many opinions of men were there uttered
of them, namely, that the men there buried, were murdered by driving those
Nails into their heads; a thing unlikely: for a smaller Nail would more aptly
serve to so bad a purpose, and a more secret place would lightly be employed
for such burial.

But to set down what I have observed concerning this matter, I there beheld
the bones of a man lying (as I noted) the head North, the feet South, and round
about him (as thwart his head, along both his sides, and thwart his feet) such
Nails were found. Wherefore I conjectured them to be the nails of his Coffin,
which had been a trough, cut out of some great tree, and the same covered with
a planke of a great thickness, fastened with such Nails, and therefore I
caused some of the Nails to be reached up to me; and found under the broad
heads of them, the old wood, skant turned into earth, but still retaining both
the grain and proper color. Of these Nails (with the wood under the head
thereof) I reserved one, as also the nether jaw bone of the man, the teeth
being great, sound, and fixed, which (amongst many other Monuments there found)
I have yet to show; but the Nail lying dry, is by scaling greatly wasted. And
thus much for this part of Bishopsgate Ward, without the Gate: for I have in
another place spoken of the Gate, and therefore I am to speak of that other
part of this Ward, which lies within the Gate.

And first to begin on the left hand of Bishopsgate street, Clerks Hall and
their almshouses in Bishopsgate street.
from the Gate ye have certain Tenements of old time pertaining to a
brotherhood of St. Nicholas, granted to the Parish Clerks of London for two
Chaplens to be kept in the Chapel of St. Mary Magdalen, near unto the Guild
hall of London, in the 27. of Henry the sixth. The first of these house toward
the North, and against the Wall of the City, was sometime a large Inn or
Court, called the Wrastlers of such a sign, and the last in the high street
toward the South, was sometime also a fair Inn called the Angel, of such a
sign. Amongst these said Tenements was (on the same street side) a fair Entry
or Court to the common Hall of the said Parish Clarks, with proper
Almes-houses, seven in number, adjoining, for Parish Clerks, and their Wives,
their Widows, such as were in great years not able to labor. One of these,
by the said Brotherhood of Parish Clerks, was allowed sixteen pence the
week, the other six had each of them nine pence the week, according to the
Patent thereof granted. This Brotherhood (amongst other) being suppressed: In
the reign of Edward the sixth, the said Hall with the other buildings there,
was given to Sir Robert Chester, a Knight of Cambridge-shire, against whom the
Parish Clerks commencing suit, in the reign of Queen Mary, and being like to
have prevailed, the said Sir Robert Chester pulled down the Hall, sold the
timber, stone and lead, and thereupon the suit was ended. The Almes-houses
remained in the Queens hands, and people were there placed, such as could make
best friends. Some of them taking the pension appointed, have let forth their
houses for great rent, giving occasion to the Parson of the Parish, to
challenge tithes of the poor, etc.

Next unto this is the small Parish Church of Saint Ethelburge, Parish Church
of S. Ethelbiage.
Virgin, and from thence some small distance is a large Court, called little S.
Helens, because it pertained to the Nuns of St. Helens, Priory of S. Helens
and almes-houses.
and was their house: there were seven Almes-roomes or houses for the poor,
belonging to the Company of Leathersellers. Then somewhat more West is another
Court with a winding lane, which comes out against the West end of Saint
Andrew Vndershafts Church. In this Court stands the fair Church of Saint
Helen, Parish Church of S. Helen.
sometime a Priory of black Nuns, and in the same a parish Church of S.
Helen.

This Priory was founded before the reign of Henry the third. William Basing,
Deane of Paul's was the first Founder, and was their buried, and William Basing,
one of the Sheriffs of London, in the second year of Edward the second, was
holden also to be a Founder, or rather an helper there. This Priory being value
at 314. l. 2. s. 6. d. was surrendered the 25. of November, the 30. of Henry the
8. The whole Church, the ^rtition betwixt the Nuns Church and Parish Church
being taken down, remains now to the Parish, and is a fair Parish Church,
but wants such a steeple, as Sir Thomas Gresham promised to have builded, in
recompense of ground in their Church filled up with his Monument.

The Nuns Hall, and other housing thereto pertaining, Leathersellers Hall.
was since purchased by the Company of Leather sellers, and is their common
Hall: which Company was incorporate in the 21. year of Richard the second.

In the Church of S. Hellen, have ye these Monuments of the dead:

Thomas Langton, Chaplain, buried in the Quire, 1350.

Adam Francis, Mayor 1354.

Elizabeth Vennar, wife to William Vennar, Alderman, one of the Sheriffs of
London, 1401.

Ioane, daughter to Henry Seamer, wife to Richard, son and heir to Robert
Lord Poynings, dyed a Virgin, 1420.

John Swinflat, 1420.

Nicholas Marshall, Ironmonger, Alderman, 1474.

Sir John Crosby, Alderman, 1475. and Anne his wife.

Thomas Williams, Gentleman, 1495.

Ioane Cocken, wife to John Cocken, Esquire, 1509.

Mary Orrell, wife to Sir Jews Orrell, Knight.

Henry Summer, and Katharine his wife.

Walter Huntington, Esquire.

John Langthrop, Esquire, 1510.

John Gower, Steward of Saint Helens, 1512

Robert Rochester, Esquire, Sergeant of the Pantrie to Henry the eighth.

Sir William Sanctlo, and Sir William Sanctlo, father and fonne.

Elianor, daughter to Sir Thomas Butler, Lord Sudley. John Southworth.

Nicholas Harpsfield, Esquire.

Thomas Sanderford, or Sommerford, Alderman.

Alexander Cheney.

Walter Dawbeney.

George Fastolph, fonne to Hugh Fastolph.

Robert Liade.

Thomas Benolt, alias Clarentiaulx, King at Arms, 1534.

William Hollis, Mayor, 1540.

John Fauconbridge, Esquire, 1545.

Hacket, Gentleman of the Kings Chapel.

Sir Andrew Iud, Mayor, 1551.

Sir Thomas Gresham, Mercer, 1579.

William Skegges, Sergeant Poulter.

Richard Gresham, fonne to Sir Thomas Gresham, 1564.

Quiescit hic Gulielmus Pickeringus, Pater, Equestris Ordinis vir, Miles
Mariscallus. Qui obiit 19. die Maii, Anno Salutis a Christo, 1542.

Iacet hic etiam Gulielmus Pickeringus, Films, Miles, corporis animique bonie
in-signiter ornatus; Literis excultus, and Religione Sincerus; linguas exact
percalluit. Quatuor Principibus Summa cum laud inservivit: Henrico Scilicet
octavo, Militari virtue: Edvardo sexto, Legatione Gallica: Regine Mariae,
negotiatione Germanica: Elizabethae, Principi omnium illustrissimae, summis
officiis devotissimus. Obiit Londini, in adibus Pickeringiis, Etate 58. Anno
Gratie, 1574. Ianuarii quarto.

Cujus Memory, Thomas Henneagius, Miles, Camer and Regi and Thesaurarius;
Johannes Asteley, Armiger, Iocalium Magister; Drugo Drureius, and Thomas Wotton
Armig. Testamenti Sui Executores, Monumentum hoc posuere.

Here lies the body of William Bond, Alderman, and sometime Sheriff of
London; A Merchant Adventurer, and most famous (in his age) for this great
adventures both by Sea and Land. Obiit 30. die Maii, 1576.

Flos Mercatorum,
quos terra britanna creavit,
Ecce sub hoc tumulo
Gulielmus Bondus humatur.
Ille mari multum
pass us per saxa per undas,
Vitavit Patrias
Peragrinis mercibus oras.
Magnanimum Greci
mirantur Iasona vates,
Aurea de gelido
retulit guiavellera Phasi.
Grecia decta tace,
Graii concedite vates,
Hicjacet Argolico
Mercator Iafone Major.
Vellera multa tulit,
magis aurea vellere phryxi,
Etsreta multa Scidit
magis ardua Phasidos undis:
Hei mihi quod nullo
morsest Superabilis auro,
Fles Mercatorum,
Gulielmus Bondus humatur.
Hicsitus eft Ioannes Spencer, Eques Aurasus Civis and Senator Loadinenfis,
ejufdem Civitatis Praetor, An. Dom. 1594. Lui ex Alicia Bromefeldia Vxore,
unican reliquit Filiam Elizabeth, Gulielmo, Earoni Compton enuptam. Obit 30.
die Martii, Anno falutis. M.D. C.IX.

Socero been merico Gulielmus Baro Compton gener pofuis.

Within this monument lies the earthly parts of John Robinson, Merchant of the
Staple in England, free of the Merchant Tailors, and sometime Alderman of
London: And Christian his wife, eldest daughter of Thomas Anderson, Grocer.
They spent together in holy wedlock 36. years, and were happy (besides other
worldly blessings) in nine Sons and Seven Daughters. She changed her mortal
habitation for a heavenly, on the 24. day of April, An. Dom. 1592. Her Husband
following her, on the 19. day of February, 1599. Both much beloved in their
lives, and more lamented at their deaths; especially by the poor, to whom
their good deeds (being alive) begot many prayers, now (being dead, many
tears. The Glaffe of his life held 70. years and then ran out. To live
long, and happy, is an honor; but to dye happy, a greater glory: Both these
aspired to both. Heaven (no doubt) bath their fowls, and this house of stone
their bodies, where they Sleep in peace, till the summons of a glorious
resurrection wakens them.

Here lies the body of William Kerwin, A comely Alabaster Tomb, standing in
the midst of the Church below.
of this City, free Mason. Who departed this life the 26. day of December. 1594.

Aedibus Attalicis
Londinum qui decoravi,
Exiguum tribuunt
hanc mihi fata domum.
Me duce surgebant
aliis regalia tecta,
Me duce conficitur
ossibus urna meis.
Here also lies the body of Magdalen Kerwin, his wife, by whom he had issue,
two sons and two daughters. She deceased the 23. day of August, 1592.

Magdalena jacet
virtus post fata superstes,
Conjugiique fides,
Religioque manen^.
Corpus humo tectum,
Christo veniente resurget,
Vt mentis consors
astra suprema colat.
Christus mihi vita.
Mors mihi lucrum.
Nos quos certus amor
primis conjunxit ab annis,
Iunxit idem Tumulus,
junxit idemque polus.
There is a fair Gravestone, engraven on the plain stone, being there laid
in memorial of Mr. Abraham Orelius, a learned Preacher of the French Church;
it lies near to Sir John Spencers Tomb, in the South I Will of the Chancell;
but none new else beside.

A young newborn child was taken up, A printed memory hanging up in a Table,
at the entranced to the Church door.
between the great Warehouse and Sir John Spencers back gate, being (by a
most unnatural mother) there buried in a great dunghill of Sea-coale ashes,
with the face upward; yet found alive by Richard Atkinson, who used to make
clean the passage there of the soil, carrying it thence with his
wheel-barrow. The child had not any ragge or cloth about it, but was all
bloudied, by reason that the Navillstring was untyed, and the body merely
crusted over with the Sea-coale dust. Yet being made clean by the poor man's
wife, it was found to be a most goodly Manchild, strong and well featured,
without any blemish or harm upon it: but strangled inwardly, by sucking in the
noisome filth and ashes.

It was christened, and named Job clnere extractus; Job taken out of the ashes.
It lived 3. days, and dying, lies buried in the Churchyard, the 5. of
September, 1612. Richard Ball, Minister; William Robinson, and Richard Westney,
Churchwardens; Thomas Edwards and Abraham Gramer, Sidemen; John Harvey,
Clerk.

The charity that I find in this Parish given to the poor, is 2. s. every
Sunday (for ever) in Bread, allowed by the gift of the fore-remembred Mr.
Robinson. And 1. s. also in Bread every Sunday given by Mistress Scioll.

The bounds and limits of S. Helens Parish, called Bishopsgate-street, the
furthest house on the East side, wherein Thomas Child now dwells, toward
the South, abutteth upon the tenement now in the occupation of James Austen, in
the Parish of Saint Martins Oteswich. The furthest house, wherein Edward
Higges, Sadler, now dwells, toward the North, abutteth upon the Parsonage
house of Saint Ethelburges Parish, enclosing (withal) little S. Helens Close,
wherein the Leather-sellers Hall, other Tenements, and Almes-houses belonging
to the said Company, do stand. As also great Saint Helens Close; wherein the
Parish Church, with a thorow-fare to the backe-gate, leading into S. Mary at
the Axe; and the utmost house belonging to the said Parish, is next adjoining
to the said gate toward the South, and opens into the street there, commonly
called Saint Mary at Axe.

On the West side of the street, called Bishopsgate-street, the furthest house,
wherein Thomas Goodson now dwells, (toward the South) abutteth upon the
gate, wherein Mr. Richard Fox, Aldermans Deputy, (...) dwelled, in the Parish
of S. Martin Oteswich. And the furthest house, wherein Nathaniel Wright then
also dwelled, toward the North, abutteth upon the message or Tenement Inue,
called the Black Bull, in the said Parish of Saint Ethelburge. By me, Io.
Warner, Parish-Clerke there.

Then have ye one great house, Of (...) place, and of Sir John (...)
called Crosbie Place, because the same was builded by Sir John Crosbie, Gracer
and Woollman, in place of certain Tenements, with their appurtenances, letten
to him by Alice Ashfeld, Prioresse of S. Helens, and the Covent, for ninety
nine years, from the year 1466. unto the year 1565. for the annual rent of
eleven pounds six shillings eight pence. This house he builded of stone and
timber, very large and beautiful, and the highest at that time in London: he
was one of the Sheriffs, and an Alderman in the year 1470. knighted by Edward
the fourth, in the year 1471. and deceased in the year 1475. so short a time
enjoyed he that his large and sumptuous building.

He was buried in Saint Helens, the Parish Church, a fair Monument of him and
his Lady is raised there: he gave toward the reforming of that Church five
hundred marks, which was bestowed with the better, as appears by his Arms,
both in the stone-worke, roof of Timber, and glasing.

I hold it a fable said of him, to be named Crosbie, of being found by a
cross; for I have read of other to have that name of Crosbie before him;
namely, in the year 1406. the 7. of Henry the 4. the said King gave to his
servant John Crosbie, the wardship of John, daughter and sole heir to John
Iordaine, Fishmonger, etc. This Crosbie might be Father or Grandfather to Sir
John Crosbie.

Richard Duke of Gloucester, and Lord Protector, afterward King, by the name of
Richard the third, was lodged in this house: since which time, among other,
Anthony B^nvice, a rich Merchant of Italy, dwelled there; after him Garmain
Cioll. Then William Bond, Alderman, increased this house in height, with
building a Turret on the top thereof: He deceased in the year 1576. and was
buried in Saint Helens Church. Diverse Ambassadors have been lodged there;
namely, in the year 1586. Henry Ramelius, Chancellor of Denmark, Ambassador
unto the Queens Majesty of England, from Frederick the second, King of
Denmark: An Ambassador of France, etc. Sir John Spencer, Alderman, lately
purchased this house, made great reparations, kept his Maioralty there, and
since builded a most large warehouse near thereunto.

From this Crosby place, up to Leaden Hall corner, and so down Grasse-street,
among other tenements, are diverse fair and large-builded houses for Merchants
and such like.

Now for the other side of this Ward, namely the right hand, Water-conduit at
Bishopsgate.
hard by within the Gate, is one fair water-Conduit, which Tho. Knesworth,
Mayor in the year 1505. founded, he gave 60. pounds, the rest was furnished at
the common charges of the City. This Conduit has since been taken down, and
new builded. David Woodroffe, Alderman, gave 20. pounds toward the conveyance
of more water thereto. From this Conduit have ye (amongst many fair tenements)
diverse fair Innes, large for receipt of travelers, and some houses for men of
Worship; namely, one most spacious of all other there about, builded of brick
and timber, Sir Thomas Greshams house builded.
by Sir Thomas Gresham, Knight, who deceased in the year 1579. and was buried
in S. Helens Church, under a fair Monument, by him prepared in his life: he
appointed by his Testament, this house to be made a College of Readers, as
before is said in the Chapter of schools and houses of learning.

Somewhat West from this house, is one other fair house, wherein Sir William
Hollis kept his Maioralty, and was buried in the Parish Church of Saint Helen.
Sir Andrew Iud also kept his Maioralty there, and was buried at S. Helens. Sir
Andrew Iud his Alms houses.
He builded Almes-houses for six poor Almes-people, near to the said Parish
Church and gave Lands to the Skinners, out of which they are to give 4.
shillings every week to the six poor Almes-people, 8. d. the piece, and 25.
s. 4. d. the year in Coals amongst them for ever.

Then in the very West corner, over against the East end of S. Martins Oteswich
Church, (from whence the street windeth toward the south, you had, of old
time, a fair Well with two Buckets, so fastened, that the drawing up of the one
let down the other; but now of late that Well is turned into a Pumpe.

From this to the corner over against the Leaden Hall, and so down
Grasse-street, are many fair houses for Merchants and Artificers, and many
fair Innes for travellours, even to the corner where that Ward ends, over
against Grasse-Church.

Thus much for this Bishopsgate Ward shall suffice: which has an Alderman, two
Deputies, one without the Gate, another within; Common Counselors, 6.
Constables, 7. Scavengers, 7. for Wardmore inquest, 13. and a Beadle: it is
taxed to the Fifteen at 13. l.

BROADSTREET WARD.
THe next is Broadstreet Ward, Broadstreet Ward.
which begins within Bishopsgate, from the Water Conduit, Westward, on both
sides of the street, by Alhallows Church, to an Iron grate on the channel,
which runs into the watercourse of Walbrooke, before ye come to the
Posterne called Mooregate: and this is the farthest West part of that Ward.
Then have ye Broadstreet, whereof the Ward takes name, which stretches out of
the formerstreet, from the East corner of Alhallowes Churchyard, somewhat
South, to the Parish Church of Saint Peter the poor, on both sides; and then
by the South gate of the Augustine Friars, West, down Throkmorton street, by
the Drapers hall, into Lothbury, to another grate of Iron over the channel
there, whereby the water runs into the course of Walbrooke, under the East
end of S. Margarets Church; certain posts of timber are there set up: and this
is also the farthest West part of this Ward, in the said street. Out of the
which street, runs up Bartholomew Lane, South, to the North side of the
Exchange: then more East out of the former street, from over against the Friars
Augustines Church South gate, runs up another part of Broadstreet, south, to
a Pump over against S. Bennets Church.

Then have ye one other street, Three Needle street.
called Three Needle street, beginning at the Well with two buckets, by S.
Martins Oteswich Church wall. This street runs down on both sides to Finkes
lane, and half way up that Lane, to a gate of a Merchants house on the West
side, but not so far on the East. Then the aforesaid street, from this Finkes
lane, runs down by the Royal Exchange, to the Stocks, and to a place
formerly called the Scalding house, or Scalding wicke, but now, Scalding Alley,
by the west side whereof, under the Parish Church of Saint Mildred, Parish
Church of Alhallowes in the wall.
runs the course of Walbrooke: and these be the bounds of this Ward.
Especial Monuments therein are these:

First, the Parish. Church of Alhallowes in the wall; so called of standing
close to the wall of the City, in which have been buried:

Thomas Durrem, Esquire, and Margaret his wife.

Robert Beale, Esquire, 1601.
Deo Opt. Max. Sacrum and Memoriae. A fair Menume^t in the wall close by the
Pulpit, on the west side thereof.


Nobilis viri Dominici ab Heila, ex antiqua apud Flandros Equestri familia, ob
singularem sidem in Principem and Patriam, in Historiis subinde celebrata
oriundi, qui cum Orthodoxae Religionis ergo, relicta Patria, cui cum laud diu
inservierat; in Angliam, ut tutum fidelium refugium, se recepisset, ibidem
XXIV. Postremos senectutis annos in Diveni verbi jugi studio, pauperumque
subventione potissimii transegisset, and diu ante, ut quotidie moriturus, de
domo sua disposuisset. Dissolvi, and cum Christo esse cupieus: tandem satur
dierum placide in Deo Salvatore obdomivit, 28. Aprilis, An. Christi, M.D.CVIII.
Aetatis, 82. Londini Anglorum.

Item Memoriae.
Nobilis Matronae, Gulielmae ab Heila, Conjugis ipsius, natae Patre Joanne
Domino Haleme and Finae, prope Insulas Flandorum, ex Salopia Equaestri spud
Artesios Familia.. Quae marito Patriam ob Religionem relinquenti, in utraque
fortuna fida socia, and in educandis pie liberis, curandaque re domestica
Materfamilias incomparabilis. Obiit in Christo, die ult. Maii. An. M.D.CV.
Aetatis 70. Conjugii, LI.

Huic utrique Parenti optime de se merito, debiti Honoris and gratitudinis
ergo, Petrus ab Heila, F. Serenissimi Electoris Palatini Consiliarius,

H. M. Moest. P.
Charities in this Parish are few or none, but ordinary benevolences from the
parishioners themselves: except some slender moity, issuing from certain
Almes-houses, builded by London wall, near to Bishopsgate, by Mr. Kempe, and
in his life time, as I have been informed.

The bounds of the Parish are needless to be spoken of, because their circuit
contains no great extent of ground. Carpenters Hall.
Mr. Andrew Geneway, the Parson, used me here very kindly.

On the otherside of the street, among many proper houses, (possessed for the
most part by Curriers) is the Carpenters Hall, which Company was incorporated
in the 17. year of Edward the fourth. Curriers Row.


Then East from the Curriers Row, is a long and high wall of stone, enclosing
the North side of a large garden, adjoining to as large an house, builded in
the reigns of King Henry the eighth, and of Edward the sixth, by Sir William
Powlet, Lord Treasurer of England. Through this Garden, which (of old time)
consisted of diverse parts, now united, was sometimes a fair foot way, Lane
stopped up.
leading by the west end of the Augustine Friars Church straight North, and
opened somewhat West from Alhallowes Church against London wall, toward
Mooregate, which foot-way had gates at either end, locked up every night; but
now the same way (being taken into those Gardens) the gates are closed up with
stone, whereby the people are enforced to go about by Saint Peter's Church, Sir
William Powlet, L. Treasurers house in Broad-street.
and the East end of the said Friars Church, and all the said great place and
Garden of Sir Wiliam Powlet to London wall, and so to Mooregate.

This great house adjoining to the Garden aforesaid, stretches to the North
corner of Broadstreet, and then turns up Broadstreet, all that side, to and
beyond the East end of the said Friars Church. It was builded by the said Lord
Treasurer, in place of Augustine Friars house, cloister, and gardens, etc. The
Friars Church he pulled not down, but the west end thereof, enclosed from the
Steeple and Quire, was in the year 1550. granted to the Dutch Nation in
London, to be their Preaching place. The other part, namely, the Steeple,
Quire, and side Isles to the Quire adjoining, he reserved to household uses, as
for stowage of corn, coal, and other things; his son and heir, Marquess
of Winchester, sold the Monuments of Noblemen (there buried) in great number,
the paving stone, and whatsoever, (which cost many thousands) for one hundred
pounds, and in place thereof made fair stabling for horses. He caused the lead
to be taken from the roofes, and laid tile in place; which exchange proved not
so profitable as he looked for, Sir Tho. Gresams Almes-houses.
but rather to his disadvantage.

On the East side of this Broadstreet, amongst other buildings, on the back
part of Gresham house, which is in Bishopsgate street, he placed eight proper
Almes-houses, builded of brick and timber, by Sir Thomas Gresham, Knight, for
eight Almes-men, which be now there placed rent-free, and receive each of them
by his gift, 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. yearly for ever. Parish Church of S. Peter the
poor.


Next unto Powlet house, is the Parish Church of S. Peter the poor; so called
for a difference from other of that name; sometime (peradventure) a poor
parish, but at this present there be many fair houses, possessed by rich
Merchants, and others.

Buried in this Church:
Richard Fitzwilliams, Merchant-taylor, 1520.

Sir William Roch, Mayor, 1540.

Robert Calthrope, Mayor, 1588.

Dominus Joannes Hales, On a fair ancient place, in the wall North the Quire.
a pueritia literis deditus, excellenti ingenio, docilitati, memoriae, studio
and industria singulari, adjuncta Linguarum, disciplinarum juris
antiquitatis-rerum di-vinarum, atque humanarum, magna and multiplici doctrina
instructissimus, evasit innocentia, integritate, gravitate, constantia, fide,
pietate, Religione, gravissimae etiam aegrotationis, and rerum difficilium
diuturna perpessione, and in patientia ornatissimus fuit, vitae honestissime
sanctissimeque actae, diem supremum quinto Call. Ianuar. 1572. clausit anima
excorporis; reliquiae hoc loco sitae sunt.

Expecto resurrectionem morta^^orum, and vitam aeternam.

Two other Plates there are beneath in the same wall, the one of John Quarles,
Draper, and the other of Edward Catcher, Pewterer.

Here under this stone, A fair plated stone on the ground in the Chancell.
are buried the bodies of John Lucas, of S. John's beside Colchester, Esquire,
Master of the Requests to the most virtuous, Noble, and worthy Prince, King
Edward the sixth. He departed this life the 26. day of Octeber, An. Dom. 1556.
And his daughter Margaret, late wife to Thomas Penny, Doctor of Physic, here
buried the 13. day of November, 1587.

Here lies the body of the Worshipful Mr. William Cockaine the elder, A
comely Monument fixed in the wall, at the east end of the Chancell.
Citizen and Skinner of London, who departed this life the 18. day of November,
1599. Also here lies the body of Elizabeth Medcalfe, his first wife; by whom
he had 7. sons and 4. daughters. All which daughters departed this life,
before any of them accomplished the age of 10. years. The 7. sons lived, and
the youngest of them (at his death) was fully 28. years of Age. which said
Elizabeth departed this life, the 5. day of April, 1589. Here also lies the
body of Katharine Wonton, his second wife, who dyed the 19. of September, 1596.
by whom he had no issue.

In the East end of the North I Will, A beautiful Monument in the North I Will.
there is a fair and comely Monument, There raised and placed, in the
remembrance of Sir William Garaway, Knight, and his wife. This Monument
stands highest of all, next to the doors entrance.

Thomas Low, Too mean a remembrance (in my mind) for a man so deserving.
Eques Auratus, D. Majoris Civitatis London, Ann. Domini, 1604. Vir probus and
prudens. Obiit 11. die Aprilis, An. 1623. Aetat. 78. Cui 28. die Ian. 1615.
Aetatis suae 67. a^^essit Anna lectissima foemina ex eodem Thoma matter, 15.
liberorum; vixerum suavissima conjunctione, An. 48.

The Charities given yearly to the poor of this Parish, are these ensuing:

The Lady Payton, deceased, has given yearly for ever, in bread and
otherwise, the sum of 40. s.

The Lady Ramsey, deceased, has given the sum of 4. l. yearly for ever.

Mr. John Quarles, Citizen and Draper of London, deceased, has given the sum
of 5. l. yearly for ever.

Mr. William May, Merchant-taylor, deceased, has given yearly for ever, 2. s.

Other gifts have been there bestowed, to the poores relief, as one of forty
shillings, and another of twenty shillings yearly: but being tied to no
certainty, I am the more willing to omit them.

Then next have ye the Augustine friars Church and Churchyard, Friars Augustines
Church, part whereof is the Dutch Church.
the entering thereunto, by a South gate, to the West Porch, a large Church,
having a most fine spired steeple, small, high, and straight, I have not seen
the like: founded by Humphry Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, in the year
1253. Reginald Cobham gave his Message in London, to the enlarging thereof, in
the year 1344. Humphry Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, re-edified this
Church in the year 1354. whose body was there buried in the Quire. The small
spired steeple of this Church was overthrown by tempest of wind, in the year
1362. but was raised of new, as still it might have stood, had not private
benefit (the only devourer of Antiquity) pulled it down. Both that goodly
Steeple, and all that East part of the Church, has lately been taken down,
and houses (for one man's commodity) raised in the place, whereby London has
lost so goodly an ornament, and times hereafter may more talk of it.

This house was valued at 57. pound, and was surrendered the 12. of November. the
13. of Henry the 8.

There lie buried in this Friars Church, amongst others, Edmond, first son to
Ioane, Mother to King Richard the second.

^uy Meri^ ^arle of S. Paul. What persons of note and name. (...) bu^^ed in the
^ugustine (...).


Lucie, Countess of Kent, and one the Heirs of Barnaby, Lord of Mill^^ with an
Epitaph.

Dame I Would, wife to Sir Thomas*

Dame Margaret West.

(...) Steven Lindericle, Esquir^^^

(...) Humfrey Bohun, (...) and Essessex, Lord of Bre^^^ (...).

Ric^^^ (...) great ^rundell, Surrey^ (...) 1397.

Sir (...) Dame Elizabeth his wife.

Sir Francis Atcourt, Earl of Pembroke, which married Alice, Sister to the
Earl of Oxeford.

Dame Lucie Knowles, of Kent.

Sir Peter Garinsers of France.

The Lord John Vere, Earl of Oxford, beheaded on the Tower Hill, 1463.

Aubery de Vere, son and heir to the Earl of Oxford.

Sir Thomas Tudnam, Knight.

William Bourser, Lord Fitz Warren.

Sir Thomas de la Land, Knight.

Dame Ioane Norris, the Lady of Bedford.

Anne, Daughter to John, Viscount Wells.

Walter Nevell, Esquire.

Sir John Manners, Knight.

The Wife of Sir David Cradocke, Knight.

The Mother to the Lord Spencers Wife.

Sir Bartlemew Rodlegete.

John, son to Sir John Wingfielde.

Sir Walter Mewes.

Robert Newenton, Esquire.

Philip Spencer, son to Sir Hugh Spencer.

Dame Isabell, daughter to Sir Hugh Spencer.

The Lords Barons, slain at Barnet field, buried there, 1471. In the body of
the Church.

Dame Julian, Wife to Sir Richard Lacy.

Sir Thomas Courtney, son to the Earl of Devonshire, and by him his sister,
wedded to Cheverstone.

The Daughter of the Lord Beaumont.

Two sons of Sir Thomas Morley, to wit, William and Ralph.

Sir William Talmage, Knight.

Nicholas Blondell, Esquire.

Sir Richard Chamberlain.

John Halton, Gentleman.

Sir John Gifford, Knight.

Thomas Manningham, Esquire.

Sir William Kenuda, Knight.

Sir William, son to Sir Thomas Terrill.

Ioha Surill, Gentleman.

In the East Wing, Margaret Barentine, Gentlewoman.

John Spicer, Esquire, and Lettis his wife.

John le Percers, Esquire.

Roger Chibary, Esquire.

Peter Morens, Esquire.

Thomas, son to Sir William Beckland.

James Cuthing, Esquire.

John Chornet, Esquire.

William Kenely, Esquire.

Margery, wife to Thomas Band, and daughter to John Huch.

The L. William, Marquess of Barkeley, and Earl of Nottingham, and Dame Ioane
his wife.

In the West Wing, Sir John Tirrell, and Dame Katharine his wife.

Sir Walter of Powle, Knight.

Sir John Blanckwell and his wife.

Dame Jane Said, daughter to Sir John Lee.

Sir John Dawbeny, son and heir to Sir Giles Dawbeny.

William, son to Sir Roger Scroope.

Dame Ioane Dawbeny, wife to Sir William Dawbeny.

Thomas Charles, Esquire.

Sir John Dawbeny, Knight, and his son Robert.

Sir James Bell, Knight.

Sir Oliver Manny Knight.

Henry Deskie, Esquire.

Sir Diones Mordaske.

Sir Bernard Rollingcort.

Sir Peter Kayor.

Sir William Tirell, and Sir William his brother, Knights.

William Collingborne, Esquire, beheaded, 1484.

Sir Roger Clifford, Knight.

Sir Thomas Coke, Mayor in the year 1462.

William Edward, Mayor, 1471.

Sir James Tirell, Sir John VVindany, Knights, beheaded, 1502.

Sir John Dawtrie, Knight, 1519.

Dame Margaret Read, 1510.

Edward, Duke of Buckingham, beheaded, 1521.

Gwiscard, Earl of Huntington.

On the South side, and at the West end of this Church, Throkmorton street.
many fair houses are builded, namely in Throkmorton street, one very large
and spacious, builded in the place of old and small tenements, T. Cromwell his
house.
by Thomas Cromwell, Master of the Kings Jewell-house; after that, Master of
the Rolls, then Lord Cromwell, Knight, Lord Privy Seal, Vicar general, Earl
of Essex, high Chamberlain of England, etc. This house being finished, and
having some reasonable plot of ground left for a Garden, he caused the pales
of the Gardens adjoining to the North part thereof, on a sudden to be taken
down, 22. foot to be measured forth-right into the North of every man's ground,
a line there to be drawn, a trench to be cast, a foundation laid, and an high
brick wall to be builded. My Father had a Garden there, and there was a house
standing close to his South pale: this house they loosed from the ground, and
bare upon Rowlers into my Fathers Garden 22. foot, ere my Father heard thereof:
no warning was given him, nor other answer, (when he spoke to the surveyers of
that work) but that their Master, Sir Thomas, commanded them so to do: no man
durst go to argue the matter, but each man lost his Land; and my Father paid
his whole rent, which was 6. shillings 8. pence the year, for that half which
was left. Thus much of mine own knowledge have I thought good to note, that
the sudden rising of some men, causes them to forget themselves.

The Company of Drapers in London bought this house, The Drapers hall.
and now the same is their common Hall. This Company obtained of King Henry the
6. in the seventeenth of his reign, to be incorporate; John Gedney was chosen
to be their first Master; and the 4. Wardens were, 1. Wotton, I. Darby, Robert
Breton, The Drapers Arms.
and T. Cook. The Arms granted to the said Company, by Sir William Bridges,
Knight, first Garter King at Arms, in Blason are thus: Three Sun Beams,
issuing out of three clouds of flame, crowned with three Crowns Imperials of
gold, upon a shield Azure.

From this Hall, on the same side, down to the grates and course of
VValbrooke, have ye diverse fair houses for Merchants and other, from the which
grates back again on the other side in Lotisbury (so called in Record of
Edward the third, Lotisbury or Lothbury.
the 38. year, and now corruptly called Lothbury) are Candlestick-founders
placed, till ye come to Bartholomew Lane, so called of Saint Bartholomews
Church, at the South East corner thereof. In this Lane also are diverse fair
builded houses on both sides, and so likewise have ye in the other street,
which stretches from the Friars Augustines South gate, to the corner over
against Saint Bennets Church. In this street, amongst other fair buildings,
the most ancient was (of old time) an house pertaining to the Abbot of Saint
Albans. John Catcher, Abbot of S. Albans his Inn.
Alderman (after dwelled there. Then is the free school, pertaining to the
late dissolved Hospital of Saint Anthony, S. Anthonies school*
whereof more shall be showed in another place, and so upto Three Needle street.

On the South part of which street, Three Needle street.
beginning at the East, by the Well with two buckets, now turned to a Pumpe, S.
Martins Oteswitch.
is the Parish Church of S. Martin called Oteswitch, of Martin de Otestwich,
Nicholas de Oteswich, William Oteswich, and John Oteswich, founders thereof,
and all buried there, as appears by their ancient Monument.

There be Monuments in this Church, of William Constantine, Alderman, and Emme
his wife.

Katherine, wife to Benedict Augustine.

Sir William Drifield, Knight.

John Oteswich and his wife, under a fair Monument on the South side.

John Churchman, one of the Sheriffs in the year 1385.

Richard Naylor, Tailor, Alderman, 1483.

James Falleron.

John Melchborne.

Thomas Hay and Ellen his wife.

William Clitherow and Margeret his wife.

Oliver and William, sons to John VVoodroofe, Esquire.

Hugh Pemberton, Tailor, Alderman, 1500. and Katharine his wife.

Matthew Pemberton, Merchant-Taylor, about 1514. he gave 50. l. to the
repairing of S. Lawrence Chapel.

Illustri ac Nobilissimo V. Domino Jacobo Falckio, A fair engraven stone on
the South side of the Communion Table.
Domino Zelandiae Thesaurario, summo Consiliario ordinum ejusdem Provinciae,
post plurimas apud plerosque Europae Reges, ac Principes obitas Honorifice
Legationes, and regendarum rerum infinitas, cum omnium laud, ac admiratione
curas, in extremis Ecclesiae ac Patriae cum hostibus luctis defuncto, Legati
munere communi Patriae totius Provinciarum Belgicarum foederatarii apud
Serenissimum and potentissimu^ Jacobu^ 1. Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and
Hyberniae Regem: Hoc intestinorum receptaculum. Reliquum a funere totius molem,
in Patria Zelandia pietati inter planctus posuit affinis ex Sorore Anthonius
Taymon. Obiit 4. Nonas Iunii. 1603.

Part solo recubo
peregrino, part paterno,
Hoc been si didici
vivere, and hocce mori.
I. Murdisonius. Quae natat Oceano
Zelandia corpus, Olympus
Ipse animam, peregre
hoc viscera marmor habet.
A. Hunterus. Viscera terra Britanna
tegit, Zelandia corpus,
Sic mea divisit
funera parce mihi.
I. Meursius. Here lies the body of Clemens Langley, A fair stone, on the
other side of the Table.
late wife of Richard Langley, and Daughter to Thomas Whitton, Gent. And of
Joane his first wife, daughter of Robert Cresset, Esquire: who yielded her
soul to her Redeemer, the last of April, 1603.

Thyzealous care to serve thy God,
thy constant love to Husband dear:
Thy harmless heart to every one
remains alive, though corpse lie here.
Spes vermis and ego. R. L.
Vivit post funera Virtus. C. L.
Also the 19. day of March, 1612. Richard Langley her husband was here buried.

Here rests the body of the Worshipful M. Rich. Staper, A very goodly Tomb
erected in the wall on the South side of the Church.
elected Alderman of this City, 1594. He was the greatest Merchant in his
time, the chiefest Actor in discovery of the Trades of Turkey and East India: A
man humble in prosperity, painful and ever ready in the affairs public, and
discreetly careful of his private. A liberal housekeeper, bountiful to the
poor: an upright dealer in the world, and a devout aspirer after the World to
come. Much blessed in his posterity, and happy in his and their alliances. He
dyed the last day of June, An. Dom. 1608. Intravit ut exiret.

Sir Henry Row allowed 5. l. yearly for ever to the poor of this Parish, to
be bestowed in bread and coals. And Mistress Sotherton yearly for ever in
bread, 50. s.

The aforesaid John Churchman, for William and John Oteswich, (by license of H.
the fourth, the sixth of his reign) gave the Advouson or Patronage of this
Church, four messuages and 17. shops with the appurtenances, in the Parish of
S. Martins Oteswich, etc. to the Master and Wardens of Tailors and Linen
Armorers, keepers of the Guild and Fraternity of S. John Baptist in London, and
to their successors, in perpetual Alms, to be employed upon the poor
Brethren and Sisters. Whereupon, adjoining upon the West end of this Parish
Church, the said Master and Wardens builded (about a proper quadrant or squared
Court) seven Almes-houses, Tailors and Linen Armorers their alms houses in
Broadstreets Ward: look more in Portsoke^^ ward.
wherein they placed seven Almes-men of that Company, and their wives, (if they
had wives) each of these seven, of old time, had 14. pence the week; but now
of later time, their stipend by the said Master and Wardens has been
augmented to the sum of 26. shillings the quarter, which is 5. l. 4. s. the
year to each of them, beside coals. More, to each of them 20. s. the year,
by gift of Walter Fish, sometime Master of that Company, and Tailor to Her
Majesty.

Some small distance from thence is the Merchant-Taylors Hall, Tailors and
Linen Armerers Hall.
pertaining to the Guild and Fraternity of Saint John Baptist, time out of mind
called of Tailors and Linen Armorers of London. Antiquity of the Tailors feast
by authority.
For I find that King Edward the first, in the 28. of his reign, confirmed
this Guild by the name of Tailors and Linen Armorers, and also gave to the
brethren thereof, authority every year at Midsummer to hold a Feast, and to
choose unto them a Governor or Master, with Wardens: whereupon, the same
year, 1300. on the Feast day of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, they chose
Henry de Ryall to be their Pilgrim. For the Master of this Mystery (as one that
traveled for the whole Company) was then so called, until the 11. year of
Richard the second: and the four Wardens were then called Purveyors of Alms,
(now called Quartredge) of the said fraternity.

This Merchant-Taylors Hall, sometime pertaining to a Worshipful Gentleman,
named Edmond Crepin, Dominus Creeping, after some Record: he, in the year of
Christ, 1331. the sixth of Edward the third, for a certain sum of money to
him paid, Tailors purchase their Hall.
made his grant thereof, by the name of his principal Message, in the Wards
of Cornhill and Broadstreet, which Sir Oliver Ingham, Knight, did then hold; to
John of Yakley, the Kings Pavilion-maker. This was called the New Hall, Tailors
Hall.
or Tailors Inn, for a difference from their old Hall, which was about the
back side of the Red Lion in Basing lane, and in the Ward of Cord-wayner
street.

The 21. of Edward the fourth, Thomas Holme, alias Clarentiaulx, King of Arms
for the South part of England, granted by his Patents, to the said fraternity
and Guild of Saint John Baptist, of Tailors and Linen Armorers, to bear in a
Field Silver, The Merchant-tailors Arms.
a Pavilion between two Mantles Imperial, purple, garnished with gold, in a
chief Azure, a holy Lamb, set within a Sun, the Creast upon the Helm, a
Pavilion purple, garnished with gold, etc.

After this, King Henry the 7. was himself a Brother of this Fraternity, or
Guild of S. John Baptist, of Tailors or Linen Armorers, (as diverse others of
his predecessors Kings had been) to wit, Richard the 3. Edward the 4. Henry
the 6. Henry the 5. Henry the 4. and Richard the 2. And for that diverse of that
Fraternity had (time out of mind) bin great Merchants, and had frequented all
sorts of merchandises into most parts of the world, to the honor of the Kings
Realm, and to the great profit of his subjects, and of his Progenitors, and
the men of the said mystery, (during the time aforesaid) had exercised the
buying and selling of all wares and Merchandises; especially, of woollen cloth,
as well in gross, as by retaile, throughout all this Realm of England, and
chiefly within the said City: Tailors and Linen Armorers incorporated
Merchant Tailors.
therefore he of his especial grace, did change, transfer and translate the
Guild aforesaid, and did incorporate them into the name of the Master and
Wardens of the Merchant-Taylors, of the fraternity of S. John Baptist, in the
City of London.

Some distance West from this the Merchant Tailors Hall, Finke lane.
is Finkes-Lan; so called of Robert Finke, and Robert Finke his son, James
Finke, and Rosamond Finke. Robert Finke the elder, new builded the Parish
Church of S. Bennet commonly called Finke, of the Founder; his Tenements were
both of S. Bennets Parish, and Saint Martins Oteswich parish: the one half of
this Fink lane is of Broadstreet Ward; to wit, on the West side, up to the
great and principal house, wherein the said Finke dwelled: But on the other
side, namely the East, not so much toward Cornehill. Then without this Lane,
in the aforesaid Three Needle street, Parish Church of S. Bennet Finke.
is the said Parish Church of S. Bennet, a proper Church, in which are these
Monuments:

Robert Simson, and Elizabeth his wife.
Roger Strange, Esquire, Treresse.
William Coolby. John Frey.
Thomas Briar, Plummer, 1410. etc.
By this Pillar was buried the body of Dame Anne Awnsham, who dyed the 23. of
December, 1613. being near 12. years the wife of Sir Gedeon Awnsham, of
Istleworth in the County of Middlesex, Knight: And before the wife to William
Barradaile, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, dwelling in this parish
together some 30. years. He dyed in March, 1600. who by his will gave 5.
pounds to the poor of this parish, and 6. pounds, 13. shillings, 8. pence,
toward the building a loft in the Church, besides his other Legacies to the
poor in other places. And the said Dame Anne, besides her other good deeds to
Istleworth, and other places, she also appointed five pound to the poor of
this Parish, which the said Sir Gedeon paid. As they both (thanks be to God)
lived godly and well: so they could not but dye well, by the only mercy of
Jesus Christ.

Some distance West is the Royal Exchange, whereof more shall be spoken in
the Ward of Cornehill, and so down to the little Conduit, called the Pissing
Conduit, by the Stocks Market, and this is the South side of Three Needle
street.

On the North side of this street, from overagainst the East corner of St.
Martins Oteswich Church, Hospital of Saint Anthony sometime a Synagogue of the
Jews.
have ye diverse fair and large houses, til you come to the Hospital of St.
Anthony, sometime a Cell of Saint Anthonies of Vienna. For I read, that King
Henry the third, granted to the Brotherhood of Saint Anthony of Vienna, a place
amongst the Jews, which was sometime their Synagogue, and had been builded by
them, about the year 1231. Patent record.
But the Christians obtained of the King, that it should be dedicated to our
blessed Lady, and since, an Hospital being there builded, was called Saint
Anthonies in London. It was founded in the Parish of Saint Bennet Finke, for a
Master, two Priests, one Schoolmasters, and twelve poor men: after which
foundation, amongst other things, was given to this Hospital one Message and
Garden, whereon was builded the fair large free school, Free School of S
Anthonies builded.
and one other parcel of ground containing 37. foot in length, and 18. foot in
breadth, whereon were builded the Almes-houses of hard stone and Timber,
Almes-houses of S. Anthony builded.
in the reign of Henry the sixth, which said Henry the sixth, Gift of Henry
the sixth to Saint Anthonies.
in the 20. of his reign, gave unto John Carpenter, Doctor of Divinity, and
Master of S. Anthonies Hospital, and to his brethren and their successors for
ever, his Manor of Poinington, with the appurtenances, with certain pensions
and portions of Milburn, Burneworth, Charlton, and Vp-wimburne, in the County
of Southampton, toward the maintenance of five Scholars in the University of
Oxford, to be brought up in the faculty of Arts, after the rate of ten pence
the week for every Scholar: so that the said Scholars be first instructed in
the rudiments of Grammar, at the College of Eaton, founded by the said King.

In the year 1474. Edward the fourth granted to William Say, Batcheler of
Divinity, Master of the said Hospital, to have Priests, Clerks, Scholars,
poor men, and brethren of the same, Clerks, or Lay men, Queristers, Proctors,
Messengers, Servants in household, and other things whatsoever, like as the
Prior, and Covent of Saint Anthonies of Vienna, etc. He also annexed, united,
and appropriated the said Hospital, unto the Collegiate of Saint George in
Windsor.

The Protectors of this house were to collect the benevolence of charitable
persons, toward the building and supporting thereof. And amongst other things
observed in my youth, I remember, that the Officers (charged with oversight of
the Markets in this City) did diverse time take from the Market people, Pigs
starved, or otherwise unwholesome for man's sustenance: these they did slit in
the ear. Saint Anthonies Pigs fed on the dunghils.
One of the Proctors for St. Anthonies tied a Bell about the neck, and let it
feed on the Dunghils, no man would hurt, or take it up: but if any gave to them
bread, or other feeding, such would they know, watch for, and daily follow,
whining till they had somewhat given them: whereupon was raised a Proverb,
Such an one will follow such an one, and whine as it were an Anthony Pig: but
if such a Pig grew to be fat, and came to good liking (as often times they did)
then the Proctor would take him up to the use of the Hospital.

In the year, 1499. Sir John Tate, sometime Alebrewer, then a Mercer, caused
his Brewhouse, called the Swan near adjoining to the said Free Chapel,
College, or Hospital of Saint Anthony, to be taken for the enlarging of the
Church, which was then newly builded; toward the building whereof, the said
Tate gave great sums of money, and finished it in the year 1501. Sir John
Tate deceased 1514. and was their buried, under a fair Monument by him
prepared. Doctor Tailor Master of the Rolls and other.

Walter Champion, Draper, one of the Sheriffs of London, 1529. was buried
there, and gave to the Beadmen twenty pounds. The Lands by year of this
Hospital, were valued in the 37. year of Henry the 8. to be 55. pounds, 6.
shillings, 8. pence.

One Johnson, Schoolmaster of S. Anthonies made Prebend of Windsor, spoiled
the school and hospital.
(a Schoolmaster of the famous Free-schoole there) became a Prebend of
Windsore, and then (by little and little) followed the spoil of this
Hospital: he first dissolved the Quire, conveyed away the Plate and Ornaments,
then the Bells, and lastly put out the Almes-men from their houses, appointing
them portions of 12. pence the week to each. But now I hear of no such matter
performed; for their houses, with other, be letten out for rent, and the
Church is a Preaching-place for the French Nation.

This School was commended in the reign of Henry the sixth, and sithence
commended above other; but now decayed, and come to nothing, by taking that
from it which thereunto belonged.

Next it the Parish Church of Saint Bartholomew, Parish Church of S.
Bartholomew.
at the end of Bartholomew lane. Thomas Pike, Alderman, with the assistance of
Nicholas Yoo, one of the Sheriffs of London, about the year 1438. new builded
this Church.

Sir John Fray, Knight, was buried there.

Margery his daughter and heir, wife to Sir John Lepington, Knight, founded
there a Chauntry, the 21. of Edward the fourth.

Alderban, a Gascoigne, was buried there.

Sir W. Capell, Mayor, 1509. aded unto this Church a proper Chapel, on the
South side thereof, and was buried there.

Giles Capell was also buried there.

James Wilford, Tailor, one of the Sheriffs, 1499. appointed by his Testament,
a Doctor of Divinity, every Good Friday for ever, to preach there a Sermon of
Christ's passion, from six of the clock till eight before noone, in the said
Church.

Io. Wilford, Merchant-Taylor, Alderman, 1544.

Sir James Wilford, 1550.

Sir George Barn, Mayor, 1552.

John Dent.

Miles Coverdale, Bishop of Excester.

Thomas Dancer, and Anne his wife.

In Obitum Reverendissimi Patris, A fair plated stone on the ground in the
Chancell.
Milanis Coverdal, OGDOASTICON.

HIc tandem requiemque
ferens finemque laborum,
Ossa Coverdali
mortua Tumbus habet.
Oxoniae qui Praesul
erat dignissimus olim,
Insignis vitae
vir probitate suae.
Octoginta annos
grandevus vixit, and nullum
Indigni passus
saepius exilium.
Sic dimitti variis
jactabam casibus, ista
Excepitur gremio
terra benigna sua.
Here lies buried the body of Richard Bowdler, Several fair plated stones in
the Chancell.
Citizen and Draper of London, being one of the Society of Merchants
Adventurers in England, for Moscovia and the East-Indiaes. Here lies also Anne
his wife, by whom he had issue, 7. children, 5. sons, and 2. daughters;
whereof three deceased, but the other four were living at the time of his
death. He dyed the 16. day of November, 1603. And she, etc.

Here lies the body of John Dent, whilst he lived, Citizen and Merchant of
London, borne at Halloughton in Leichestershire, and free of the Salters
Company, as also of the Spanish and Moscovia Companies: but his chief trading
was to France. He was once chosen Sheriff of London, and once Alderman, and
fined for the same. His last fine was 1000. Marks, toward the repairing of
Christ's Hospital in London. He married twice; his first wife was Margaret, by
whom he had one son, who dyed, and the mother. The second wife was Alice, by
whom he had 3. Daughters, Elizabeth, Mary, and Elizab. The first dyed in her
Fathers life time, the rest with the Mother remained living. He being aged
63. years, dyed the 10. of December. 1595.

Here lies the body of Master Thomas Church, Citizen and Draper of London. He
was helpful to many, hurtful to none, and gave every one his due. In memory
of whose love to them, and theirs to him, Mary Bagwell, his sister, William
Bagwell, her son, his Executors, and Bernard Cooper, the second Husband to
the said Mary Bagwell, caused this stone to be laid here, the 28. day of May,
1617. He departed this life in August the 26. day, 1616. being aged 55. years.

A good life has the days numbered, but a good name endures for ever.

To Gods Glory.
In pious Memory of the noblyvertuous, A fair Monument in the North wall or the
Chancell.
and religions Matrone, Margarite, wife of Robert Hall, Doctor of Divinity, and
Pastor of this Parish.

HEre lies a Margarite
that the most excelled,
(Her Father Wyts,
Her Mother Lichterveld,
Rematcht with Metkerke)
of remarke for birth,
But much more gentle
for her genuine worth:
Wyts (rarest) Jewel,
so her name bespeaks)
In pious, prudent,
peaceful, praise-full life,
Fitting a Sara
and a Sacred's Wife,
Such as Saravia,
and (her second) Hill,
Whose joy of life,
Death in her death did kill.
Quam pie obiit, Puerpera, Die 29. Iunii, Anno Salutis, 1615. Anno Aetatis, 39.
Pignus Amoris, Sigum Honoris, ac Moeroris, Posuit Rob. Hill. Composuit Io. Syl.

Vxor Foelix.
Loquitur post Funera Virtus.

FRom my sad Cradle
to my sable Chest,
Poor Pilgrim, I
did find few months of rest.
In Flanders, Holland,
Zeland, England, all,
To Parents, troubles;
and to me did fall.
These made me pious,
patient, modest, wise:
And, though well borne,
to shun the Gallants guise:
But now I rest my soul,
where rest is found,
My body here,
in a small piece of ground,
And from my Hill,
that Hill I have ascended,
From whence (for me)
my Savior once descended.
Live ye to learn that dye you must,
And after come to Judgment just.
Maritus moestissimus.
Thy rest gives me a restless life,
Because thou were a matchless Wife;
But yet I rest in hope to see
That day of Christ, and then see thee.
MARGARITA, a Jewel. I, like a Jewel
tossed by Sea and Land,
Am bought by him,
who wears me on his hand.
MARGARITA, MARGARETA. Margarita beat, sed Margareta beavit.
O utinam possit dicier, ista beat.
One night, two dreams,
made two Propheticals,
Thine of thy Coffin,
mine of thy Fuuerals.
If women all were like to thee,
We men for wives should happy be.
R. H.
MARGARITA surreptus est, Mons exarvit. Then lower down, Parish Church of
Saint Christopher.
toward the Stocks Market, is the Parish Church of Saint Christopher, but
re-edified of new: for Richard Shore, one of the Sheriffs, 1506. gave money
toward the building of the steeple.

There lie buried, Richard Sherington, 1392. who gave Lands to that Church.

The Lady Margaret Norford, 1406.

John Clavering, 1421. who gave lands thereunto.

John Godney, An Alderman of London put to penance by the Clergy, for wedding
a widow professed to chastity.
Draper, Mayor, 1427.

This Godney, in the year 1444. wedded the Widow of Robert Large, late Mayor,
which Widow had taken the Mantle and Ring, and the vow to live chaste to God
term of her life; for the breach whereof, the marriage done, they were
troubled by the Church, and put to penance both he and she.

William Hampton, Mayor, 1472. was a great benefactor, and glased some of the
Church windows. Sir William Martia, Mayor, 1492. Roger Acheley, Mayor, 1511.
He dwelt in Cornhill Ward, in a house belonging to Cobham College, rented by
the year, 26. s. 8. d. Robert Thorn, Merchant-Taylor, a Bachelor, 1532. he
gave by his Testament in charity, more than 4445. pounds.
John Norryholme. Raph Batte.
Alice Percivall. Jane Drew.
William Borresbie. John Broke.
Richard Sutton. William Batte.
James Well.
Henry Beecher, Alderman, 1570.
Robertus cubat hic
Thornus Mercator honestus, A very fair Tomb of pure Touch, in the South side
of the Quire.

Qui sibi legitimas
Art paravit opes.
Huic vitam dederat
puero Bristollia quondam,
Londinum hoc Tumulo
clauserat ante diem.
Ornavit studiis,
patriam virtutibus auxit,
Gymnasium exexit,
sumptibus ipse suis.
Lector quisquis ades,
requiem cineri precor optes,
Supplex et precibus
numina flecte tuis.
Obiit 1532. aetatis vero suae, Au. 40.
Here lie the bodies of Henry Beecher, Alderman, and late Sheriff of London;
and of Alice his first wife, one of the daughters to Thomas Heron of Edgecomb,
in the County of Surrey, Esquire, by who he had 10. children. After whose
decease he married with Jane, the widow of one Oliver Loveband, of London,
Gent. with whom he lived three years, and dyed the 15. day of January, Anno
Dom. 1570.

Here lies the body of John Tryon, who departed this life at Paris in France,
the 15. of August, and was here interred the 14. day of September, An. Dom.
1612.

Having seen and observed the said Parish Church of S. Christopher, Robert
Thorn, a bountiful Batchelour, buried in the same Parish of S. Christopher.
with all the Grave-stones and Monuments therein: and finding a fair Tomb of
Touch, wherein lies the body of Robert Thorn, Merchant-Taylor, and a
Bachelor buried, having given by his Testament in charity, 4445. pounds, and
to pious uses. Then looking for some such memory, as might adorn and beautify
the name of another famous Bachelor, Mr. John Kendrick; and finding none, but
only his Hatchments and Banners, yet he being buried so long since; I thought
it fit to let his own last Will and Testament speak his due and deserved
praises, according, and as (among other) it came to my hands.

The last Will and Testament of Mr. John Kendrick, Citizen and Draper of London:
Who departed this life the 30. day of December, Anno, 1624.
IN the Name of God, Present at thi^ godly work, Io. Skinner, Andrew Kendrick,
Tho. Singleton, etc.
Amen. The nine and twentieth of December, Anno Domini, 1624. And in the two
and twentieth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King James, etc.

I John Kendrick, of the City of London, Draper, being sick in body; but of
good and perfect memory, (for which I give most humble and hearty thanks to
Almighty God) do make, ordain and declare this my last Will and Testament, in
manner and form following: That is to say:

First, Disposition of his soul to God.
and before all things, I commend and commit my soul to Almighty God, my
Creator; trusting most assuredly to be saved by the death, passion and only
merits of Jesus Christ, my Savior and Redeemer.

And I will that my body be decently interred in Christian burial, For burial
of his body.
in the Parish Church of S. Christopher, where I dwell; as mine Executor,
hereafter named, shall order and appoint.

Item, I give and bequeath to threescore poor men, For poor mourners.
to every of them a Gown of broad-cloth, to wear on the day of my burial:
and twelve pence a piece in money, to pay for their dinners. The same poor men
to be such as my Executor shall appoint.

Item, I give and bequeath black Gowns and Cloakes, For kindred, friends, and
servants mourners.
to be worn at my burial by my kindred, friends, and servants, as my Executor
shall think meet: not exceeding the sum of six hundred pounds in the said
Gowns and Cloakes, and the rest of the charges of my Funeral.

Item, I give and bequeath the sum of threescore pounds, A Dinner for his
friends, and the Parish inhabitants.
to be bestowed upon a Dinner, to be provided for my friends, and the
inhabitants of the Parish of Saint Christopher, where I now dwell, upon the day
of my burial, and in such place as my Executor shall think meet and
convenient.

Item, His gift to the Mayor and Burgesses of Reading.
I give and bequeath to the Mayor and Burgesses of the Town of Reading, in the
Country of Berkshire, (I mean, to the body corporate, or Corporation of the
said Town of Reading, by whatsoever name or addition the same is made known)
the sum of seven thousand and five hundred pounds, upon especial trust and
confidence, that they shall therewith perform the uses following: That is to
say:

The said Mayor and Burgesses shall buy and purchase unto them and their
successors for ever, The uses intended for the said sum.
(I say, to the body corporate of the said Town of Reading, by whatsoever name
or addition the same is made or known) Lands and Here ditaments, of the clear
value of fifty pounds by the year, over and above all charges and reprises.
Which sum of fifty pounds a year, my will and (...) aning is, shall be paid
by the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their successors, unto my Sister Anne
Newman, Care of his Sister.
yearly during her natural life. And after her decease, the same yearly sum
of fifty pounds, shall be paid by the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their
successors, to the Overseers of the poor of the said Town of Reading (for the
time being) yearly for ever: And by them the said Overseers (for the time
being) shall be bestowed and distributed to and among the poor people of the
said Town for ever: To wit, the moity thereof every half year, in such sums,
and to such persons, as the said Overseers (for the time being) shall think
meet, according to the necessity and desert of the same several persons.

Provided always, The usual benevolence of the rich is not to be hindered by
this gift.
and my meaning is, that this my yearly gift shall not any way abridge the
said poor of the ordinary allowances, usually assessed and collected of the
wealthier sort of the inhabitants of the said Town, toward the relief of the
said poor people: but shall be unto them as an additament, and clear increase
of relief yearly for ever.

And if this my gift and provision shall happen (which I trust it shall not) to
be by the said Mayor and Burgesses, For negligence in the distribution of this
gift.
or by the said Overseers for the time being, ordered and disposed contrary to
my meaning thus declared; or that my will and desire above expressed, touching
the bestowing and distribution of the said sum of fifty pounds yearly, be
omitted, neglected, or left unperformed by the space of one whole year, after
it is by this my Will appointed to be distributed and bestowed as aforesaid:
Then my will and meaning is, that the said sum and revenue of fifty pounds a
year, shall be by the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their successors for the
time being for ever, paid unto the Treasurer of Christ's Hospital: and by the
Governors of the same Hospital, How to be bestowed upon their negligence.
employed and bestowed in the relief and education of the poor children, of
the said Hospital. Or else, that the said Mayor and Burgesses for the time
being; shall by their Deed in Law, conveigh and make over the Lands and
Hereditaments of the said yearly value of fifty pounds, unto the Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and their successors for ever,
unto the use of the said Hospital, to be employed as aforesaid.

Provided always, that the said fifty pounds a year, be yearly paid unto my
said Sister Anna Newman, Payment to his Sister during her natural life.
during her natural life: And after her decease, to the charitable uses
aforesaid.

Moreover, my will and meaning is, as also my trust and confidence in the said
Mayor and Burgesses of the Town of Reading is, A house to be purchased for
setting the poor to work.
that with another competent part of the said sum of seven thousand five
hundred pounds, so byme devised as aforesaid; they the said Mayor and Burgesses
shall buy and purchase unto them and their successors for ever, a fair plot of
ground, within the said Town of Reading, or the liberties thereof. And
thereupon shall erect and build a strong house of Brick, fit and commodious
for setting the poor on work therein: Or else shall buy and purchase such an
house, being already built, if they can find one already fitting, or that may
with a reasonable sum be made fit for the said use. The house is to have a
Garden thereto adjoining.
The same house to have a fair Garden adjoining, and to be from time to time
kept in good and sufficient reparations, by the said Mayor and Burgesses for
the time being, for ever. Which house and Garden, my will is, shall be used and
occupied by such as the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their successors from
time to time for ever shall appoint and ordain, Employing and using the stock
of money.
for the employing and handling of the stock of money, by me hereby left and
devised to that purpose.

And my will and meaning is, that the said Lands and Hereditaments of the
yearly value of fifty pounds, and also the said house and Garden, being bought
and purchased as aforesaid, with parcel of the said sum of seven thousand
five hundred pounds: Then the whole residue and remainder of the same seven
thousand and five hundred pounds, How the remainder of the money is is to be
employed for a common stock
shall make and be a common stock, to be employed and bestowed in Trades of
clothing; either in making of colored clothes, or whites, as the time shall
require. And also in working of Wool, Hemp, Flax, Iron, grinding of Brazill
woods, and other stuffes for dying, or otherwise, as to the said Mayor and
Burgesses aforesaid, and their successors for ever shall seem meet and
convenient, for the employment of poor people, and for the preservation and
increase of the said common stock.

And the said Mayor and Burgesses, For handling and husbanding the common
stock in the house.
and their successors for ever, shall have the election, placing and ordering,
as also the displacing (if cause be) of all and every person and persons, to
be employed in the handling and husbanding, of the common stock in the house
aforesaid: according to their the said Mayor and Burgesses good discretion,
from time to time for ever.

Wherein yet my desire is, that they shall prefer the poor of the said Town to
the said work and employment; before others of other places.

And for the performance of these premises, In what manner the 7500. pounds is
to be paid.
my will is, that the sum of seven thousand and five hundred pounds, before
(for this end) by me bequeathed to the said Mayor and Burgesses, or their
successors: shall be paid unto them or their successors, in man and form
following; that is to say, Two thousand pounds thereof at the end of one year
next after my decease: Other two thousand pounds thereof, at the end of two
years, next after the day of my decease. And the residue of the said whole
sum, being three thousand and five hundred pounds, at the end of three years
next ensuing, after and from the day of my decease.

But if it shall happen (as my trust is it will not) that the said Mayor and
Burgesses, For misimploying the stock contrary to the Doners will.
or their successors, shall neglect, omit or fail to perform the premises,
according to my will and meaning above declared; or shall misimploy the said
stock, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this my device and
disposition, for the good of the poor, and their honest employment and
maintenance as aforesaid; and that such their neglect shall continue at any
time, by the space of one whole year together: Then my will and meaning is,
that my said whole Legacy of seven thousand and five hundred pounds, and every
part and parcel thereof, shall be thence utterly void, frustrate and of none
effect, as to, for and concerning the said Mayor and Burgesses and their
successors; and as to, for and concerning the uses thereof before limited and
expressed. And that the said whole common stock, shall be by them the said
Mayor and Burgesses, and their successors for the time being; His intent for
London upon their failing.
forthwith paid unto the Mayor and Communalty and Citizens of the City of
London, to the use of Christ's Hospital in London, according as I have above
devised and disposed, touching the revenue of fifty pounds a year for ever,
first bequeathed to the use and relief of the poor people of the Town of
Reading.

As also my will and meaning is, that in this case of nonperformance by the
said Mayor and Burgesses, the house and Garden to be purchased in Reading,
Concerning the house and Garden at Reading devised.
as aforesaid: Shall be by the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their successors,
conveyed and made over by their deed sufficient in Law, unto the said Mayor and
Communalty and Citizens of the City of London, and their successors for ever,
to the like use of Christ's Hospital in London, as aforesaid.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses of the Town of
Newbury in the County of Berks (I mean the body corporate of the same Town,
For purchasing a house and Garden at Newbery to set the poor on work.
) the sum of four thousand pounds, to buy and purchase therewith a
commodious house, and Garden within the same Town, or the liberties thereof;
to set the poor on work. And with the residue of the same sum, to make a
common stock, for the employment of the poor in the said house; according to
the good discretion of the said Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses from time to time
for ever. And according to my meaning before declared, in the devising of the
sum of seven thousand and five hundred pounds, to the Mayor and Burgesses of
the Town of Reading, to the like use.

But my will and meaning is, that if it shall happen (which I trust will not)
that the said Mayor, For neglect and misimployment of the stock committed unto
their trust.
Aldermen and Burgesses of the Town of Newbury, or their successors, shall
neglect or fail to perform my trust and meaning, hereby committed unto them,
or shall misimploy the said stock, contrary to my good intent to the poor
before declared, by the space of one whole year (at any time) after my said
Legacy shall be paid unto them: Then my will and meaning is, that my said whole
Legacy of four thousand pounds, and every part and parcel thereof, shall
thenceforth be utterly void, and of none effect, as to, for and concerning the
said Mayor Aldermen and Burgesses of the Town of Newbury, and their successors
for ever. And that the said whole common stock, be by them the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Burgesses of Newbury, and their successors for the time being,
Returned over to Reading and employed to the use of the poor there.
forthwith paid over unto the Mayor and Burgesses of the Town of Reading in
the same County. To be by them and their successors for ever employed, bestowed
and used in like manner, as I have by this my Will devised and appointed
another stock common for the poor in the same Town of Reading: as by my said
devise and disposition (before herein more at large expressed) does and may
appear.

In the like manner also my will and meaning is, that in case of such
nonperformance of my will and intent, by the said Mayor, Aldermen and
Burgesses of the Town of Newbury, For non performance of the T^^tors will and
intent in the Town of Newbury
the house and Garden by them so to be purchased and built, as aforesaid:
Shall be by said Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses of the Town of Newbury, and
their successors; conveyed and made over by their deed sufficient in Law, unto
the Mayor and Burgesses of the said Town of Reading, and their successors for
ever; to be by them sold and converted into money, and the same money to be
used and employed in their common stock for the poor in the said Town of
Reading aforesaid, in such sort, as I have formerly hereby expressed.

And for the performance of the said trust and uses, by the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Burgesses of the Town of Newbury aforesaid, In what manner the
four thousand pounds is to be paid to the Town of Newbury
my will and meaning is: that the said sum of four thousand pounds so to
them bequeathed and devised as aforesaid; shall be paid unto them, or their
successors, in manner as follows; that is to say, One thousand pounds thereof
at the end of one year, next ensuing after the day of my decease: One other
thousand pounds thereof, at the end of two years from and after my said
decease. And the residue (being two thousand l.) shall be paid them, at the end
of three years next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Company of Drapers of the City of London (of
which Company I am free) the sum of two thousand and four hundred pounds,
Two thousand four hundred pounds given to the Company of Drapers London.
to purchase Lands and He^editaments, to the clear yearly value of one hundred
pounds for ever: over and above all charges and reprises. And with the same to
perform these good uses hereafter mentioned; that is to say:

The sum of twenty four pounds thereof yearly for ever, For the yearly
releasing of six poor Prisoners.
to be bestowed in the month of December, for the releasing of six poor
prisoners, out of these Prisons in London, to wit, the two Compters, Ludgate,
Newgate and the Fleet, by four pounds for each in Prisoner.

Or if such cannot be found in the said Prisons, For releasing Prisoners in
other Prisons, etc.
or some of them to be released for these sums: Then the same (or the residue
thereof) to be bestowed in like releasing of other Prisoners, out of some of
the Prisons near London, and out of the liberties thereof; as to the Wardens
of the said Company (for the time being) shall seem meet.

More, twenty pounds yearly for ever, To the Curate of the Parish Church of S.
Christophers.
to the Curate of the Parish of St. Christopher, wherein I now dwell: To read
divine Service in the said Parish Church at six a clock in the morning every
day of the week for ever. In like manner as is now used in the Chapel, at
the great North-gate of Saint Paul's Church in London.

More, To the Clerk and Sexton of S. Christopher.
to the Clerk and Sexton of the said Parish of Saint Christopher, to each of
them fifty shillings yearly for ever: to do their several attendance and
assistance at the time of Divine Service every morning.

More, To the poor of the Parish
to the Churchwardens of the same Parish of Saint Christopher: five pounds
yearly for ever, for the maintenance of lights in the Winter time.

More, three pounds yearly for ever, to the poor of the said Parish of Saint
Christopher.

More, To the Compters and Newgate.
to the poor Prisoners in London ten pounds yearly for ever: namely, to the
Prisoners of the Compters in the Poultry and Woodstreet, and in Newgate; to
each of these Prisons forty shillings yearly for ever.

To the poor Prisoners in Ludgate and in the Fleet; To Ludgate and the Fleet.
to each house thirty shillings for ever.

And to the poor Prisoners in Bethlem, To Bedlem.
or Bedlem; twenty shillings yearly.

More, To the Clerk of the Drapers.
to the Clerk of the Company of the Drapers, for the time being: for his
pains herein, forty shillings for ever.

More, To the Beadles of the Livery and Yeomanry.
to the Beadle of the said Company; thirty shillings for ever.

More, to the Beadle of the Yeomanry of the same Company; ten shillings yearly
for ever.

More, For poor Clothworkers and their widows.
five and twenty pounds yearly for ever to be distributed by the said Wardens,
among poor and religious men and women in the City of London; to some more and
to some less, as the said Wardens shall find their necessity and desert to be:
Wherein my desire is, that poor Clothworkers and their Widows shall be
first preferred; and next, the poor of the Drapers Company. The residue of the
said sum of one hundred pounds a year, being four pounds yearly for ever, A
remembrance to the four Wardens.
I entreat the four Wardens of the said Company, to accept for their pains,
to be equally divided between them by twenty shillings to each of them, for
the time being for ever.

And if the said Company of Drapers, do either of purpose or negligence, omit
and not perform the premises; but shall leave the same unperformed one whole
year, after they shall have received this my Legacy of two thousand and four
hundred pounds (which I will shall be paid them at the end of one year next
after my decease:) Then my will and mind is, If the Drapers omit performance
of this Legacy of two thousand and four hundred pounds.
that the Governors of Christ's Hospital in London, shall recover the whole
two thousand and four hundred pounds, before specified, or the Lands and the
Hereditaments, that the said Company shall have bought with the same money: And
keep twenty pounds yearly for ever of the same rent, for the maintenance of
the poor Children in the said Hospital, as if the same had been first given
to them. And the Drapers Company to have nothing to do with it, or the rest of
the said hundred pounds yearly for ever.

And that in this case, A restraint of the other Legacies given and bequeathed
to the Company.
the yearly payment of eight pounds unto the Clerk, Beadles and Wardens of
the said Company, as also twelve pounds, parcel of the said five and twenty l.
a year before devised, to be paid and distributed by the said Company, among
poor and religious men and women in the City of London, utterly and for ever
to cease.

But this twenty pounds a year, being so converted (as aforesaid) to the use
of the Hospital, the residue of the said yearly rent of one hundred pounds a
year, I will that the Governors of the said Hospital, Concerning the residue
of the yearly rent.
shall pay and distribute yearly for ever, in manner and form as the said
Company of Drapers should have done.

Item, I give and bequeath to the said Company of Drapers, one hundred pounds,
to be paid within a year after my decease; An hundred pounds to be bestowed in
Plate.
and by the Wardens of the said Company to be bestowed in Plate: such as they
shall think good, for the use of their common Hall in London, at their
meetings and dinners there.

Item, Five hundred pounds given to Christ's Hospital in London.
I give and bequeath to the poor of Christ's Hospital in London, five hundred
pounds, to be by the Governors thereof bestowed in Lands and Hereditaments,
for and toward the yearly maintenance of the Children of the said Hospital
for ever. This sum to be paid to the said Governors, or the Treasurer of
the said Hospital, so soon as they shall have found out a fit purchase to
bestow it, and a greed on the price of the same.

Item, I give and bequeath toward the curing of sick, Fifty pounds to S.
Bartholomews Hospital.
fore and diseased persons in Saint Bartholomews Hospital in London, the sum
of fifty pounds.

Item, I give and bequeath toward the curing of sick, To the poor of S.
Thomas Hospital.
sore and disea-sed persons in Saint Thomas Hospital in Southwarke near
London, the sum of fifty pounds.

Item, I give and bequeath toward the repayring of the Parish Church of Saint
Christopher, Repairing of S. Christophers Church.
where I now dwell, the sum of forty pounds: To be paid to the Churchwardens
of the same Parish, within one year after my decease.

Item, Repairing S. Paul's Church in London.
I give and bequeath toward the repayring of the Cathedral Church of Saint
Paul in London, the sum of one thousand pounds: to be paid to the
Chamberlain of London, at such time as that work of repayring the same
Church, shall be ready to proceed with effect; and to be disposed by the
direction and appointment of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the said City.

Item, I give and bequeath to be given at the marriages of poor Maids within
the City of London, To poor Maids marriages in London.
two hundred pounds: to be distributed by forty shillings a piece upon the
days of their marriage; to such as have served one Master or Mistress, by the
space of five years together.

Item, To poor Maids marriages in the Town of Reading.
I give and bequeath to be given and distributed to poor Maids in Town of
Reading, in the County of Berks, and at their several marriages, by forty
shillings a piece, at the discretion of the Mayor and Burgesses of that Town;
the sum of one hundred pounds. Provided, none enjoy the benefit thereof, but
such as have served Master, Mistress or Dame, by the space of seven years
together. This hundred pounds to be paid to the said Mayor and Burgess (for
the use aforesaid) within one year next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Mayor, To twenty five poor Maids marriages
in the Town of Newbury.
Aldermen and Burgesses of the Town of Newbury in Barkeshire, the sum of
fifty pounds: to be by them bestowed and distributed to twenty five Maids
marriages, on their several days of their weddings in the same Town. None to
enjoy this gift; but such as have well and honestly served with one Master,
Mistress of Dame, by the space of seven years at the least. And this fifty
pounds to be paid to the said Mayor Aldermen and Burgesses, within one year
next after my decease.

Item, For setting poor vagrant Boys on work in Bridewell.
I give and bequeath toward the setting on work of forty idle vagrant Boys,
such as go up and down the streets in the City of London, begging and
pilfering, the sum of two hundred pounds: to be paid to the Treasurer for the
time being, being of the house of correction, called Bridewell in London, in
manner and form following, that is to say, When any such Boy is taken up by my
Executor or his Assigns, in any place within the liberties of this City of
London, and by the Treasurer of the same House of Correction, and Governors
there for the time being, placed and bound Apprentice with a Master, for the
term of seven years at the least, with a Master or Art-masters, as Glovers,
Pinners, Shoomakers, or any other occupation of Art, which they shall be
thought most fit for, to learn in the said house; whereby (in time) they may
prove good members, and live like honest men in the Commonwealth. I say, with
every one of these Boys shall be paid to the Treasurer and Governors for the
time being; the sum of five pounds, until the said sum of two hundred
pounds be fully paid for that use.

Item, 50. pound for S. Mary's in Reading.
I give and bequeath toward the finishing of the Pinacles of the Steeple of
the Parish of Saint Mary's in Reading, in Berkshire, fifty pounds; to be paid
to the Churchwardens of the same Parish, within one month after the same
Pinacles shall be finished.

Item, Five hundred pounds to be lent to several parties in Reading.
I give and bequeath to the Mayor and Burgesses of the Town of Reading
aforesaid, the sum of five hundred pounds, to be first lent to these parties,
and in the sums hereafter named, for seven years, gratis: That is, to James
Winche, two hundred pounds: and to Walter Rye, Richard Stamp, and William
Blacknall, Clothiers, one hundred pounds apiece: each of them giving Bond with
two sufficient sureties, for repayment thereof to the said Mayor and Burgesses,
at the end of the said seven years. And afterward, the same five hundred
pounds shall be lent to ten several honest industrious poor Clothiers, free
men of the same Town, by fifty pounds apiece, gratis, for three years, upon
like good security: and no man to have the use of this money twice. But if
there shall not be Clothiers enough found in the said Town, For lack of
Clothiers, the same money lent to other Tradesmen of the same Town.
to enjoy this loan in manner aforesaid: That then the said money shall be
lent also unto other Tradesmen, free of the said Town, by the sums and terms
of years last before appointed; to such as set most poor people aworke,
according to the discretion of the said Mayor and Burgesses: And this said
sum of five hundred pounds shall be paid to the said Mayor and Burgesses, (to
the use aforesaid) at the end of one year next after my decease.

Item, Other five hundred pounds to Clothiers of Newbury lent freely
I give and bequeath to the Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses of the Town of
Newbury, in the County of Berks, the sum of five hundred pounds, to be lent
first for the term of seven years, gratis, unto these several Clothiers here
named; that is to say, To Thomas Newman, one hundred pounds: to Richard Avery,
one hundred pounds: to Martin Broaker, fifty pounds: to William Goodwin the
elder, fifty pounds: to Timothy Avery, fifty pounds: to Robert Bacon, fifty
pounds: and to Griffin Forster, fifty pounds. Every of the said several
parties entering into bond, with 2. sufficient sureties, for repayment of the
said sums to the said Mayor and Aldermen and Burgesses at the end of seven
years. And afterward, the same five hundred pounds shall be lent to ten
several honest industrious poor Clothiers, To ten other poor Clothiers the
same money lent afterward.
free of the said Town of Newburie, by fifty pounds apiece, gratis, for three
years: And after that in like manner, from three years to three years for
ever; and no man to have the same money twice. But if there shall not be
Clothiers enough found in the same Town of Newbury, to enjoy this loan in
manner as aforesaid; then the same money shall be lent also unto other
Tradesmen, free of the same Town, by the sums and terms of years last
before appointed, to such as set most poor people on work, according to the
discretion of the said Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses; to whom this said five
hundred pounds shall be paid, to the use aforesaid, at the end of one year
after my decease.

Item, Nine hundred pounds given to the Merchant Adventurers.
I give and bequeath to the Governor, Assistants, and fellowship of Merchant
Adventures of England, the sum of nine hundred pounds, to be lent by three
hundred pounds in a parcel, for three years, gratis, unto three honest,
industrious and frugall young men, free of that Company, none of them being
partners with each other; and every of them giving Bond with two sufficient
sureties, to be tried and allowed by ballotting, and not otherwise, for
repayment of the same money to the said Company. And so the same money to be
lent out by the said Company in this manner, from three years to three years,
for ever.

And my will and desire is, that these my five present servants, His servants
first preferred to the benefit of the loan.
shall be (upon security as aforesaid) first preferred to the enjoying of this
loan; to wit, William Powle, Thomas Newman, and Simon Gundy, the first three
years; and Andrew Kendricke and Christopher Pack, the next two parcels that
shall come in, and be received in, after they shall be freemen of that Company.
And for performance hereof, the said nine hundred pounds shall be paid unto the
Treasurer of the said Company in London, for the time being, at the end of one
year next after my decease.

Item, To his Brother William Kendrick and his children.
I give and bequeath to my brother William Kendrick of Reading in the County of
Berks, Clothier, and to his Children now borne and living, the sum of two
thousand pounds: whereof one third part for himself, and the other two parts
for his said Children. The same two third parts of the said sum of two
thousand pounds, to be equally divided to and amongst his said children, share
and share like.

And my will is, that the said two thousand pounds be paid to my said brother,
Payment of the two thousand pounds to his Brother and children, and how.
at the end of three years next after my decease: and that he shall pay his
said children their several shares thereof before limited; that is to say, to
his Son his share and part, when he comes to the age of twenty four
years: And to his Daughter, her share and part, when she comes to the age of
one and twenty years, or at the day of her marriage, which shall first happen.

And if it fortune either of my said brothers children to dye or decease,
before their respective Legacies aforesaid shall grow due, For mortality in
either of the children.
as above; that then the part of such child so deceasing, shall accrue and be
paid to the surviver of the said children, at the day and time before appointed.

Item, The gift of his gold Ring.
I give and bequeath to my said brother William Kendrick, my gold Ring which
was my Fathers; with the Letters T. K. therein engraven, and a knot between
the same Letters.

Item, I give and bequeath to my Sister Anne Newman of Reading in the Country
of Berks, A thousand Marks given to his sister.
the sum of one thousand Marks, to be paid unto her at the end of one year
next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the Children of my said Sister, Two thousand
Marks given to his Sisters children, and in what manner.
Anne Newman, the sum of two thousand Marks; to be equally divided amongst
them share and share like. And the shares of such as are already married (if
they be Daughters) or are four and twenty years of age, to be paid them at
the end of one year after my decease. And the shares of the rest, to be paid
to such as be Sons; when they shall be four and twenty years of age. And to
the Daughters, at their day of marriage; or when they shall come to one and
twenty years of age respectively, which of these shall happen to be first.

And if it shall happen any of the said Children of my said Sister to dye,
before the age and time so prefixed for payment, In case of mortality or death
happening among the children.
as aforesaid (I mean, those that be yet under that age, and unmarried) then
my will is: That the share and part of such as shall so dye, shall accrue and
be paid unto the rest of the same Children then surviving, share and share
like; and at the days and times of payment before appointed, for their own
several shares and parts.

But my will and meaning is, that Thomas Newman, son of my said Sister; shall
not have any part or share of this said Legacy of two thousand Marks: Thomas
Newman excepted from this Legacy.
because I give him a large Legacy apart by this my will. Therefore the said
two thousand Marks is to be divided and shared among the rest of the Children
of my said Sister, as aforesaid.

Item, I do hereby absolutely acquit and forgive my brother in law Thomas
Newman, A Bond forgiven to his Sisters husband.
of Reading aforesaid, husband to my Sister Anne Newman; the sum of one
hundred Marks, which he owes me by his bond, due the second day of November,
An. Dom. 1623. being all that he owes me at the date of this my will.

Item, I give and bequeath to my Sister Alice Vigures of Excester, Five hundred
pounds given to his Sister Alice Vigures.
in the County of Devon, the sum of five hundred pounds; to be paid her at
the end of two years next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the children of my said Sister Alice Vigures the
sum of one thousand pounds, A thousand pounds given to his said Sisters
Children, and in what manner.
to be equally divided among them share and share like. And if any of them
being Sons) be of the age of four and twenty years; or any of them (being
Daughters) be of the age of one and twenty years, or married, then the share
and parts of such respectively, shall be paid at the end of two years next
after my decease. And the shares and parts of the rest, shall be paid to such
as are Sons, at the age of four and twenty years: and to such as be
Daughters, at their age of one and twenty years, or at the days of their
marriage, which of them shall first happen to come respectively.

But my will and meaning is, that Simon Gandy, Son of my said Sister Alice
Vigures, Simon Gandy excluded from this thousand pounds and the intent of this
distribution.
shall not have any part or share of this Legacy of one thousand pounds:
because I give him a large Lecy apart by himself in this my Will. But my
meaning is, that this said Legacy of one thousand pounds, so given as
aforesaid, shall be equally divided among the rest of the Children of my said
Sister; excluding the said Simon Gandy from all part and share of the same: And
if it shall happen any of the said Children of my said Sister Alice Gandy, to
dye before the age and time of payment appointed as aforesaid (I mean, when
they be under that age, and unmarried:) then my will and meaning is, that the
share and part of such as shall so dye; shall be paid and accrue unto the rest
of the same Children so surviving, In case of mortality and death of the
Children.
to each of them equally, and share and share like: and at the days and times
of payment before appointed, for their own several shares and parts.

Item, I give and bequeath to my Brother James Winche of Parley in the County
of Berks, To his Brother James VVinche, and his Children.
and to his Children, the sum of one thousand pounds: whereof one third part
for himself, the other two third parts for his said Children. The same two
third parts to be divided equally amongst the said Children of my said
Brother, share and share like.

And my will is, that this said sum of one thousand pounds, The payment of
this thousand pounds to his Brother and Children.
shall be paid to my said Brother James Winche, at the end of one year next
after my decease, and that he shall pay forthwith unto such of this Children,
as (being sons, and of the age of four and twenty years, or married) their
several shares and proportions of the said two third parts of this sum of
one thousand pounds. The shares and parts of the rest of his Children, he
shall retain in his own hands, until his said Children (being Sons) shall
be of the age of four and twenty years: And being Daughters, shall be of the
age of one and twenty years, or be married; and then he shall pay every of
them their several shares and parts respectively.

And if it shall happen any of the said younger Children to dye, In case of
death and mortality of the younger Children.
before the time of payment so limited as aforesaid: Then my will and meaning
is, that the part and share of such as shall so decease shall accrue unto the
rest of the said Children of my said Brother, that shall then survive; to be
equally divided amongst them share and sharelike, and to be paid at the days
and times before appointed.

Item, I give and bequeath to thirty of my poorest Kindred in the Town of
Reading in Barkshire, Three hundred pounds to his poorest Kindred in Reading.
the sum of three hundred pounds, to be paid unto my Brother William
Kendrick, within three months after my decease. And by him to be distributed
by ten pounds in every parcel, as he in his discretion shall think good:
wherein I pray him to be very careful, to bestow the same where there is most
need and best desert.

Item, Fifty pounds to old Elizabeth Kendricke of Reading.
I give and bequeath to old Elizabeth Kendrick of Reading, Daughter to my
Fathers Brother William Kendrick (as I take it) the sum of fifty pounds; to
be paid her within three months after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to my Kinseman Thomas Newman, now residing at Delft
in Holland, the sum of one thousand pounds. To be paid him upon the five and
twenty day of October which shall be in the year of our Lord God, To Thomas
Newman of Delft in Holland.
1626. when his time of service expireth. Provided, that he remain with my
partner Mr. Laurence Halstead, and serve him his said full time.

Item, One thousand pounds to Simon Gandy.
I give and bequeath to my kinsman and late servant, Simon Gandy, the sum of
one thousand pounds, to be paid him within one year next after my decease.

Item, Five hundred pounds to Arthur Aynscombe.
I give and bequeath unto Arthur Aynscombe, Merchant, now residing at Antwerp;
who has a share with me in trade; the sum of five hundred pounds, to be paid
him within 2. years after my decease. Provided that he go forward in trade
with Mr. Laurence Halstead, (if he the said Master Halstead shall desire it)
unto the end of our Contract, which will be the five and twentieth day of
October, Anno Dom. 1626.

Item, Five hundred pounds to Barney Reymer.
I give and bequeath to Barney Reymer, Merchant, now residing at Delft, who
has also a share with me in trade; the sum of five hundred pounds, to be paid
him within two years next after my decease. Provided that he go forward in
trade with Mr. Laurence Halstead, (if he the said Mr. Halstead shall desire it)
unto the end of our contract, which will be the five and twentieth day of
October, Anno Dom. 1626. as is abovesaid.

Item, Five hundred pounds to his Master Io. Quarles, living in the house.
I give and bequeath to Master John Quarles, who was my Master, the sum of
five hundred pounds, to be paid him within a year next after my decease. And
my earnest request unto Mr. Laurence Halstead is, that unto the end of our
contract of Partnership, (which will be the five and twentieth day of October,
Anno Domini 1626.) the same Mr. Quarles may have his diet, lodging and washing,
in his the said Mr. Halsteads house, free, and without paying any thing
therefore, as he now has it with me. And my desire also is, that he may
continue to keep the books of our partable account, until the aforesaid
twenty fifth day of October, 1626. and be paid his wonted yearly allowance of
fifty pounds for the same. And I do hereby freely and absolutely forgive the
said Mr. John Quarles, the sum of three hundred pounds, which he owes me,
payable at pleasure, being lent him the last of March, Anno 1615. and being all
that he owes me at the date of this my Will.

Item, Three hundred pounds to Mr. George Low.
I give and bequeath to Master George Low, heretofore my partner, the sum of
three hundred pounds, to be paid him within one year next after my decease.
And I do hereby absolutely forgive him, all that is due unto me for his
lodging, diet, firing and washing, which he has had of me now six years
together.

Item, Two hundred li. to Thomas Bilingsley.
I give and bequeath to Thomas Billingsley, son of Sir Henry Bilingsley,
Knight, and Alderman of London, deceased, the sum of two hundred pounds, to be
paid him within one year next after my decease. And I do absolutely forgive
him the sum of two hundred pounds, which he owes me by his Bond, due the
twentieth of December, Anno, 1625. and lent him the twentieth of this present
Month, for a year.

Item, 300. li. to Thomas Iacksons Executors*
I give and bequeath to the Executors of Thomas Iackson, of London, Merchant,
deceased (whom I take to be Miles Iackson, the son of the said Thomas) the
sum of three hundred pounds, to be paid at the end of one year next after my
decease.

Item, 50. li. to Lucas van Peenen.
I give and bequeath to Lucas van Peenen of Middleburgh in Zealand, son of
Roger van Peenen of that Town, deceased; the sum of fifty pounds sterling, to
be paid over by Exchange, within two months after my decease: Payable at
Vsance to John Mount-Stephen, now residing in that Town, to be paid over to
the said Lucas van Peenen, forthwith after he has received it, in the full
Flemmish sum which the same shall produce.

Item, 20. pound 10 Ieremias Poets of Middle-burgh.
I give and bequeath to Iremias Poets, of the same Town of Middle-burgh in
Zealand, (if he be the Executor of his brother Hance Poets, deceased) the sum
of twenty pounds sterling: to be made over by Exchange within two months after
my decease. Payable at Vsance, to John Mount-Stephen aforenamed; and by him
forthwith (after his receipt thereof) to be paid over to the said Ieremias
Poets, in the full Flemmish sum which the same shall produce.

Item, I give and bequeath to William Powle my covenant Servant, Two hundred
pounds to his servant William Powle.
the sum of two hundred pounds: to be paid him within six months after my
decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to Andrew Kendricke my Apprentice, Three hundred
pounds to his Apprentice Andrew Kendricke.
the sum of three hundred pounds: to be paid him, when he shall have served
seven years, from the commencement of the term of his Indenture.

Item, I give and bequeath to the said Andrew Kendricke, One hundred pounds
more to the same person.
the sum of one hundred pounds more: in lieu of so much given me with him by
his Father John Kendricke; to be paid him within three months next after my
decease, upon acquittance to be given by his said Father therefore.

Item, To Christopher Pack his Apprentice one hundred pounds.
I give and bequeath to Christopher Pack mine Apprentice, the sum of one
hundred pounds: to be paid him within three months next after my decease.

Item, Twenty pounds to his Horse-keeper.
I give and bequeath to Thomas Mayle my Horse-keeper, the sum of twenty
pounds: to be paid him within two months next after my decease.

Item, Twenty pounds to his Maid Dorothy,
I give and bequeath to my Maid Dorothy, the sum of twenty pounds; to be
paid her within two months next after my decease.

Item, Twenty pounds to his Maid Margaret.
I give and bequeath to my Maid Margaret the sum of twenty pounds; to be
paid her within two months next after my decease.

Item, To his Drawer Hutwith fifty pounds.
I give and bequeath unto John Hutwith my Drawer, the sum of fifty pounds; to
be paid him within three months after my decease.

Item, To his Drawer Bird five and twenty pounds.
I give and bequeath to Walter Bird my Drawer, five and twenty pounds; to be
paid him within three months after my decease.

Item, Among the servants of Hutwith twenty five pound*
I give and bequeath to the present men servants of John Hutwith my Drawer, the
sum of twenty five pounds; whereoften pounds to Charles, and the other
fifteen pounds to be equally divided amongst the rest, as well Apprentices as
Journeymen; to be paid within two months next after my decease.

Item, To his twelve Clothworkers, 130. pounds.
I give and bequeath to my twelve Clothworkers, that usually row and sheere my
Clothes; the sum of one hundred and thirty pounds: whereof twenty pounds to
Owen Dobbins, and ten pounds a piece to the rest; to be paid within three
months next after my decease.

Item, To Big and Salisbury 25. pounds.
I give and bequeath to William Big and William Salisbury, that usually
press and fold my Clothes; the sum of twenty five pounds: whereof fifteen
pounds to William Big, and ten pounds to William Salisbury, to be paid them
within three months next after my decease.

Item, To his Porters twenty pounds.
I give and bequeath to my Porters at the waterside, ten pounds, to be equally
divided among them. And ten pounds to my Porters, that usually pack in my
house; to be paid within two months next after my decease.

Item, Ten pounds to his Water-bearer and Washer.
I give and bequeath to my Water-bearer three pounds: And to my Washer Anthony
five pounds, to be paid them forthwith after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to William Beadle of Reading Clothier, To William
Beadle of Reading 50. pounds.
the sum of fifty pounds, if he be yet living; and if he be dead; then to his
Executors: to to be paid within three months next after my decease. And I do
hereby also forgive the said William Beadle the ten pounds he now owes me.

Item, To Slye of Readings Executors 50. li.
I give and bequeath to the Executors of Mark Slye of Reading Clothier
deceased, the sum of fifty pounds; to be paid within three months next after
my decease.

Item, 100. li. to Newman of Newbury.
I give and bequeath to Thomas Newman of Newbury Clothier, the sum of one
hundred pounds, to be paid him within three months after my decease.

Item, 100. li. to John Skinner.
I give and bequeath to John Skinner, Secretary to the Merchants Adventurers;
the sum of one hundred pounds, to be paid within three months next after my
decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Widow Harison and her Daughter, dwelling in
the Alley next to my dwelling house, To Widow Harison and her daughter five
pounds.
five pounds, to be paid within one month next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to Master Richard Bennet, To Master Bennet 300. li.
who was heretofore my Partner, the sum of three hundred pounds, to be paid
at the end of one year next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to Master William Towerson Skinner, Ten pounds to
make two Rings.
Deputy of the Merchant Adventurers, five pounds to make him a Ring. And to
Master Thomas Smith Skinner, five pounds to make him a Ring; to be paid them
forthwith after my decease.

Item, To three men five pound a piece.
I give and bequeath unto Rafe Barnet, William Ellets and John Southern
Officers of the Merchant Adventurers, five pounds a piece; to be paid them
forthwith after my decease.

Item, For Service by six a clock every morning at Reading.
I give and bequeath to the Mayor and Burgesses of the Town of Reading, in the
County of Berks; the sum of two hundred and fifty pounds; to be paid them at
the end of one year next after my decease: Therewith to purchase Lands and
Hereditaments, to the clear yearly value of ten pounds for ever; to maintain
Divine Service to be said in the Parish Church of St. Mary in that Town, by
the Parson or his Curate every morning of the week, at six of the clock for
ever.

Item, For the like Divine Service every morning at Newbury.
I give and bequeath to the Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses of the Town of
Newbury, in the County of Berks, the sum of two hundred and fifty pounds, to
be paid them at the end of one year next after my decease: Therewith to
purchase Lands or Hereditaments, of the clear yearly value of ten pounds for
ever; to maintain Divine Service to be said in the Parish Church of that
Town by the Parson or his Curate, every morning of the week at six of the
clock, to continue for ever.

Item, To his Kinseman Bye 100. li.
I give and bequeath to my Kinseman William Bye, dwelling near the Alum Mines
in Yorkshire, the sum of one hundred pounds; to be paid him within three
months after my decease. And I do hereby forgive him the ten pounds, which
he owes me by his Bond, due long since.

Item, Forty pounds for his funeral dinner at Drapers Hall.
I give and bequeath to the Company of Drapers in London, the sum of forty
pounds, to be bestowed upon a dinner for the Livery of that Company, to be at
their Hall upon the day of my burial: This to be paid forthwith after my
decease.

And my will and meaning is, that in case any of the persons aforenamed, to
whom I have bequathed Legacies as aforesaid, Disposition of the Legacies, if
any study in the mean time.
and not especially disposed for case of their decease, shall happen to dye
before the same Legacies grow due unto them. Then the Legacy or Legacies so by
me given to them as aforesaid, shall be paid unto their Executors or
Administrators, at such time as I have before severally appointed unto them my
Legataries.

And I do make and ordain my loving Friend and Partner, Appointment of his
Executor.
Master Laurence Halstead, my sole Executor, of this my last Will and
Testament: Charging him, as he will answer it before Almighty GOD at the last
Day of Judgment, that he truly and punctually (in every particular) perform
this my said last Will and Testament; as I nothing doubt but he will be
careful to do it. The (...) of his estates to his Executor.
Hereby giving and bequeathing unto him my said Executor, all the residue and
remainder of my estate; my Legacies before bequeathed being first paid and
discharged.

In witness of the premises, I have unto this my last Will and Testament,
contained in eighteen several sheets of Paper, put my hand and Seal. That
is, my Seal once at the top, and my name under every several sheet, the day
and year first above written.

John Kendricke.
Sealed, pronounced and delivered by the said John Kendricke, as his last Will
and Testament, in the presence of us,

John Skinner. Andrew Kendricke. Thomas Singleton.




West from this Church have ye Scolding Alley, Scalding house of Scalding
wicke.
of old time called Scalding house, or Scalding wicke, because that ground (for
the most part) was then employed by Poulterers, that dwelled in the high
street, from the Stocks Market to the great Conduit. Their Poultrie which they
sold at their stalles, were scalded there: the street does yet bear the name
of the Poultrie, and the Powlterers are but lately departed from thence into
other streets, as into Grasse-street, and the ends of S. Nicholas flesh
shambles.

This Scalding wicke is the farthest part of Broadstreet Ward, and is (by the
water called Walbrooke) parted from Cheap Ward.

This Broadstreet Ward has an Alderman, with his Deputy, Common Counselors,
ten, Constables, ten; Scavengers, eight; Wardmote inquest, thirteen, and a
Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteen in London, at seven and twenty pounds, and
accounted in the Exchequer after twenty five pounds.

CORN HILL WARD.
THe next Ward toward the South, Cornehill Ward.
is Cornehill Ward: so called of a Cornmarket, time out of mind there holden,
and is a part of the principal high street, beginning at the West end of
Leaden Hall, stretching down West on both the sides, by the South end of
Finkes lane on the right hand, and by the North end of Birchovers lane, on the
left part; of which lanes, to wit, to the middle of them, is of this Ward, and
so down to the Stocks Market; and this is the bounds. The upper or East part
of this Ward, and also a part of Limestreet Ward, has been (as I said) a
Marketplace, especially for corn, and since for all kind of victuals, as is
partly showed in Lime-street Ward.

It appears of record, that in the year 1522. the Rippiers of Rye and other
places, sold their fresh Fish in Leaden Hall Market, upon Cornehill; but
foreign Butchers were not admitted there to sell flesh, till the year 1533.

And it was enacted, Flesh Market at Leaden hall, and alteration of prises in
short time.
that Butchers should sell their Biefe not above a half penny the pound; and
Mutton, half penny, half farthing: which act being devised for the great
commodity of the Realm, (as it was then thought) has since proved far
otherwise: For before that time, a fat Ox was sold at London, for 26. s. 8. d.
at the most: a fat Weather for 3. s. 4. d. a fat Calfe the same price; a fat
Lamb for 12. d. pieces of Biefe weighed two pounds and a half at the least;
yea, three pound or better, for a penny, on every Butchers stall in this City;
and of those pieces of Biefe, thirteen or foureteen for twelve pence: fat
Mutton for eight pence the quarter, and one hundred weight of Biefe for 4. s.
8. d. at the dearest.

What the price is now, I need not to set down: many men thought the same act
to rise in price, by reason that Grasiers knew or supposed what weight every
their beasts contained, and so raising their price thereafter, the Butcher
could be no gainer, but by likewise raising his price. The number of Butchers
then in the City and Suburbs, was accounted six score, of which every one
killed 6. Oxen a piece weekly: which is in 46. weeks, 33120. Oxen, or 720.
Oxen weekly.

The foreign Butchers (for a long time) stood in the high street of
Lime-street Ward, on the North side, twice every week; viz. Wednesday and
Saturday, and were some gain to the Tenants, before whose doors they stood,
and into whose houses they set their blocks and stalles: but that advantage
being espied, they were taken into Leaden Hall, there to pay for their standing
to the Chamber of London.

Thus much for the Market upon Cornehill.

The chief Ornaments in Cornehill Ward, Standard of Thames water by Leaden hall
are these: First, at the East end thereof, in the middle of the high street,
and at the parting of four ways, have ye a water-standard, placed in the
year 1582. in manner following: A certain German, named Peter Morris, having
made an artificial Forcier for that purpose, conveyed Thames water in pipes of
lead, over the steeple of Saint Magnus Church, at the North end of London
Bridge, and from thence into diverse men's houses in Thames street, new
Fish-street, and Grasse-street, up to the north-west corner of Leaden Hall, the
highest ground of all the City, The highest ground of the City of London.
where the waste of the maine pipe rising into this Standard, (provided at the
charges of the City) with four spouts, did at every tide run (according to
covenant) four ways, plentifully serving to the commodity of the inhabitants
near adjoining in their houses, and also cleansed the Channels of the street
toward Bishops-gate, Aldgate, the Bridge, and the Stocks Market; but now no
such matter, whose default I know not.

Then have ye a fair Conduit, of sweet water, castellated in the midst of that
Ward and street. This Conduit was first builded of stone, in the year 1282. by
Henry Wallis, The Tun upon Cornehill a prisonhouse for night-walkers.
Mayor of London, to be a prison for night-walkers, and other suspicious
persons, and was called the Tun upon Cornehill, because the same was builded
somewhat in fashion of a Tun, standing on the one end.

To this prison, Temporal men punish spiritual persons for incontinency.
the night Watches of this City committed not only night-walkers, The Bishop
complains.
but also other persons, as well spiritual as temporal, whom they suspected
of incontinencie, and punished them according to the customs of this City:
but complaint thereof being made, The King forbids the Laity for punishing the
Clergy men.
about the year of Christ, 1297. King Edward the first writes to his Citizens
thus:

Edward by the grace of God, etc. whereas Richard Gravesend, Bishop of London,
has showed unto us, that by the great Charter of England, the Church has a
privilege, that no Clerk should be imprisoned by a Layman, without our
commandment, and breach of peace; which notwithstanding, some Citizens of
London, upon mere spite, do enter in their Watches into Clerks chambers, and
then (like Felons) carry them to the Tun, which Henry le Wallis, sometime
Mayor, built for night-walkers. Wherefore we will that this our commandment
be proclaimed in a full Hoystings, and that no Watch hereafter enter into any
Clerks chamber, under the forfeit of 30. pound. Dated at Carlisle, the 18. of
March, the 25. of our Reign.

More, Citizens of London break up the Tun upon Cornhil
I read that about the year of Christ, 1299. the 27. of Edward the first,
certain principal Citizens of London; to wit, T. Roman, Richard Gloucester,
Nicholas Faringdon, Adam Helingbury, T. Saly, John Dunstable, Richard Ashwy,
John Wade, and William Stortford, brake up this prison called the Tun, and
took out certain prisoners, for the which they were sharply punished, by long
imprisonment, and great fines. It cost the Citizens (as some have written) more
than 20000. Tho Walsingham.
Marks, which they were amerced in, before William de March, Treasurer of the
Kings Exchequer, to purchase the Kings favor, and the confirmation of their
liberties.

Also, Citizens of London punished fornication and adultery in Priests and
other, without partiality.
that in the year 1383. the seventh of Richard the second, the Citizens of
London taking upon them the rights that belonged to their Bishops, first
imprisoned such women aswere taken in fornication or adultery, in the said
Tun; and after, bringing them forth to the sight of the World, they caused
their heads to be shaven, after the manner of Thieves, whom they named
Appellators, and so to be led about the City, in sight of all the inhabitants,
with Trumpets and Pipes sounding before them, that their persons might be the
more largely known: Neither did they spare such kind of men a whit the more,
but used them as hardly, saying; They abhorred not only the negligence of their
Prelates, but also detested their avarice, that studied for money, omitted the
punishment limited by Law, and permitted those that were found guilty, to live
favorably by their fines. Wherefore they would themselves, they said, purge
their City from such filthiness, lest through Gods venge^ance, either the
Pestilence or Sword should happen to them, or that the Earth should swallow
them. Last of all to be noted, I read in the charge of the Wardmote inquest in
every Ward in this City, Priests punished in the Tnn upon Cornhil forced to
forswear this City.
these words: If there be any Priest in service within the Ward, which
before-time has been set in the Tun in Cornehill for his dishonesty, and
has forsworn the City, all such shall be presented.

Thus much for the Tun in Cornhill have I read.

Now, for the punishment of Priests, in my youth, one note and no more. John
Atwod, Draper, dwelling in the Parish of Saint Michael upon Cornehill, directly
against the Church, having a proper woman to his wife, such an one as seemed
the holiest amongst a thousand, had also a lusty Chauntry Priest of the said
Parish Church, repairing to his house, with the which Priest, the said Atwod
would sometime after supper play a game at Tables for a pint of Ale. It chanced
on a time, having haste of work, and his game proving long, he left his wife
to play it out, and went down to his shop: but returning to fetch a
pressing-iron, he found such play (to his misliking) that he forced the Priest
to leap out at a window, over the Penthouse into the street, and so to run to
his lodging in the Churchyard. Atwod and his wife were soon reconciled, so
that he would not suffer her to be called in question; A Priest punished for
lechery.
but the Priest being apprehended and committed, I saw his punishment to be
thus: He was on three Market days conveyed through the high street and Markets
of the City, with a paper on his head, wherein was written his trespass. The
first day he rode in a Carry; the second, on a horse, his face to the horse
tail; the third, led betwixt twain, and every day rung with Basins, and
proclamations made of his fact at every turning of the streets, and also before
John Atwods Stall, and the Church door of his Service, where he lost his
Chauntry of twenty Nobles the year, and was banished the City for ever.

By the West side of the foresaid prison, A fair Well in Cornhill.
then called the Tun, was a fair Well of Spring water, curbed round with hard
stone: The Tun upon Cornhill made a Conduit of sweet water.
but in the year 1401. the said Prisonhouse called the Tun, was made a
Cesterne for sweet water, conveyed by pipes of Lead from Tyborne, and was from
thenceforth called the Conduit upon Cornehill. Cage, stocks and pillory in
Cornhill.
Then was the Well plancked over, and a strong prison made of Timber, called a
Cage, with a pair of Stocks therein, set upon it; Bakers, Millers, Bauds,
Scolds, and common Jurors for rewards, punished on the pillory.
and this was for night-walkers. On the top of which Cage was placed a
Pillorie, for the punishment of Bakers, offending in the assise of bread; for
Millers stealing of Corn at the Mill; for Bawds, Scolds, and other offenders.

As in the year 1468. the 7. of Ed. 4. diverse persons, being common Jurors,
such as at Assizes were forsworn for rewards, or favor of parties, were
judged to ride from Newgate to the Pillorie in Cornhill, with Miters of paper
on their heads, there to stand, and from thence again to Newgate, and this
Judgment was given by the Mayor of London.

In the year 1509. the first of Henry the 8. Darby, Smith, and Simson,
Ringleaders of false inquests in London, rode about the City with their faces
to the horses tails, and papers on their heads, and were set on the Pillorie
in Cornehill, and after brought again to Newgate, where they dyed for very
shame, Ringleaders of inquests will pr^ffer their service, and bend every way
for gain.
says Robert Fabian. A Ringleader of Inquests, as I take it, is he, that
making a gainefull occupation thereof, will appear upon Nisi prius's ere he
be warned, or procure himself to be warned to come on by a Tallis. Careful
choice of Jurors in to be had^ a man derected, and that had sworn foolishly
against his brother, is not to be admitted a common Iuror, neither Butcher not
Surgeon is to be admitted.
He will also procure himself to be Foreman, when he can, and take upon him
to overruled the rest to his opinion: such an one shall be labored by
plaintifes and defendants, not without promise of rewards; and therefore to be
suspected of a bad conscience. I would wish a more careful choice of Jurors to
be had: for I have known a man carted, rung with Basins, and banished out of
Bishopsgate Ward, and afterward, in Aldgate Ward admitted to be Constable, a
grand Iurie-man, and Foreman of their Wardmote inquest. What I know of the
like, or worse men, preferred to the like offices, I forbear to write, but
wish to be reformed.

The foresaid Conduit upon Cornehill was in the year 1475. enlarged by Robert
Drope, Conduit on Cornehill enlarged.
Draper, Mayor, that the^ dwelt in that Ward, he increased the Cestern of this
Conduit with an east end of stone, and castellated it in comely manner.

In the year 1546. Sir Martin Bows, Mayor, dwelling in Lumbard street, and
having his back gate opening into Cornhill, against the said Conduit, minded to
have enlarged the Cesterne thereof with a West end, like as Robert Drope before
had done toward the East. View and measure of the plot was taken for this
work: but the Pillory and Cage being removed, they found the ground planked,
and the Well aforesaid worn out of memory, which Well they renewed and restored
to use; it is since made a Pumpe: they set the Pillorie somewhat west from the
Well, and so this work ceased.

On the North side of this street, from the East unto the West, have ye diverse
fair houses for Merchants and others; amongst the which, one large house is
called the Wey house, The wey-house or Kings beam upon Cornhill.
where Merchandises brought from beyond the Seas, are to be weighed at the
Kings beam. This House has a Master, and under him four Master Porters, with
Porters under them; they have a strong Cart, and four great Horses, to draw
and carry the wares from the Merchants houses to the Beam, and back again.
Sir Tho. Lovell, Knight, builded this house, with a fair front of Tenements
toward the Street, all which he gave to the Grocers of London, himself being
free of the City, and a Brother of that Company.

Then have ye the said Finkes lane, the South end of which lane on both the
sides, is in Cornehill Ward.

Then next is the Royal Exchange, The Burse upon Cornhill, or the Royal
Exchange.
erected in the year 1566. after this order, viz. Certain houses upon
Cornehill, and the like upon the back thereof, in the Ward of Broadstreet,
with three Alleys; the first called Swan Alley, Swan Alley.
opening into Cornehill; New Alley.
the second, New Alley, passing through out of Cornehill into Broadstreet Ward,
over against S. Bartholomew lane; S. Christophers Alley.
the third, S. Christophers Alley, opening into Broadstreet Ward, and into
Saint Christophers Parish, containing in all 80. households; Householders
displaced for building of the Burse.
were first purchased by the Citizens of London, for more than 3532. pounds,
and were sold for 478. pounds, to such persons as should take them down, and
carry them thence; also the ground or plot was made plain at the charges of
the City, The City charged with buildings of the Burse.
and then possession thereof was by certain Aldermen (in name of the whole
Citizens) given to Sir Thomas Gresham, Knight, agent to the Queens Highness,
there-upon to build a Burse, or place for Merchants to assemble in, at his own
proper charges: and he, on the seventh of June, laying the first stone of the
foundation, being Brick, accompanied with some Aldermen, every of them laid a
piece of gold, which the workmen took up, and forthwith followed upon the
same such diligence, that by the month of November, in the year 1567. the
same was covered with slate, and shortly after fully finished.

In the year 1570. on the 23. of January, Queen Elizabeth came to the Burse.
the Queens Majesty, attended with her Nobility, came from her house at the
Strand, called Sommerset House, and entered the City by Temple-Barre, through
Fleet Street, Cheap, and so by the North side of the Burse, through
Three-needle street, to Sir Thomas Greshams house in Bishopsgate street, where
she dined. After dinner, her Majesty returning through Cornehill, entered the
Burse on the South side, and after she had viewed every part thereof above the
ground; especially the Pawn, which was richly furnished with all sorts of the
finest wares in the City: she caused the same Burse, The Burse called the
Royal Exchange.
by an Herald and a Trumpet, to be proclaimed the Royal Exchange, and so to
be called from thence-forth, and not otherwise.

Next adjoining to this Royal Exchange, remains one part of a large stone
house, and is now called the Castle, of such a sign at a Tavern door; there
is a passage through out of Cornehill into Three-needle street: the other part
of the said stone house was taken down, for enlarging the Royal Exchange.
This stone house was said of some to have bin a Church, whereof it had no
proportion. Of others, a Jews house, as though none but Jews had dwelt in
stone houses: but that opinion is without warrant.

For beside the strong building of stone houses, against invasion of thieves in
the night, when no watches were kept: In the first year of Richard the first,
(to prevent the casualties of fire, which often had happened in the City, when
the houses were builded of timber, and covered with Reed or straw, The cause of
stone houses builded in London.
Henry Fitz Alwine being Mayor) it was decreed, that from thenceforth, no man
should build within the City, but of stone, until a certain height, and to
cover the same building with slate, or burnt tile. This was the very cause of
such stone buildings, whereof many have remained till our time, that for
gaining of ground they have been taken down, and in place of some one of them,
being low (as but 2. stories above the ground) many houses of 4. or 5. stories
high are placed.

From this stone house down to the Stocks, are diverse large houses,
especially for height, for Merchants and Artificers.

On the South side of this high street, is the Parish Church of Saint Peter
upon Cornehill, Parish Church of S. Peter upon Cornhill.
which seems to be of an ancient building, but not so ancient as fame
reports; for it has been lately repaired, if not all new builded, except
the steeple, which is ancient.

The roof of this Church, and glasing, was finished in the reign of Edward
the fourth, as appears by Arms of Noblemen, and Aldermen of London then
living. There remains in this Church a Table, wherein it is written, I know
not by what authority, but of no late hand; that King Lucius founded the same
Church, to be an Archbishops Sea, Metropolitan and chief Church of his
Kingdom, and that it so endured the space of four hundred years, unto the
coming of Augustine the Monk.

Now, because many have urged it very earnestly to me, to let them be further
acquainted therewith: I have here inserted the same verbatim, as it is there
recorded in the Table.

A Copy taken out of the Table, fast chained in S. Peter's Church on Cornehill.
BE it known unto all men, that the years of our Lord God, C. lxxix. Lucius,
the first Christian King of this Land, then called Brytaine, founded the first
Church in London, that is to say, the Church of Saint Peter upon Cornhill. And
he founded there an Archbishops See, and made that Church the Metropolitan
and chief Church of this Kingdom: and so endured the space of CCCC. years,
unto the coming of S. Austin, the Apostle of England, the which was sent into
this Land by S. Gregory, the Doctor of the Church, in the time of King
Ethelbert. And then was the Archbishops See and Pall removed from the foresaid
Church of Saint Peter upon Cornehill, unto Dereberniam, that now is called
Canturbury, and there remains to this day. And Millet, Monk, the which came
into the Land with S. Austen, was made the first Bishop of London, and his See
was made in Paul's Church. And this Lucius King, was the first founder of Saint
Peter's Church upon Cornehill. And he reigned in this Land after Brute, a M. C
C. Xlv. years. and the years of our Lord God, a C. xxiiij. Lucius was crowned
King, and the years of his reign were Lxxvij. years. And he was (after some
Chronicle) buried at London: And (after some Chronicle) he was buried at
Glowcester, in that place where the Order of S. Francis stands now.

Ioceline of Furneis writes, that Thean or Theon, the first Archbishop of
London in the reign of Lucius, builded the said Church, by the aid of Ciran,
chief Butler to King Lucius; Library (...) S. (...) upon (...), now a Gram^^^
school.
and also that Elvanus, the second Archbishop, builded a Library to the same
adjoining, and coverted many of the Druides, learned men in the Pagan law, to
Christianity.

William Harrison, discoursing hereon more at large, Out of the description of
^^taine, written by William Harrison.
discoursing hereon more at large, has these very words:

There is a Controversy (faith he) moved among our Historiographers, whether
the Church that Lucius builded at London, stood at Westminster, or in
Cornehill. For, there is some cause, why the Metropolitan Church should be
thought to stand where Saint Peter's now does, by the space of four hundred and
odd years, before it was removed to Canturbury by Austin the Monk, if a man
would lean to one side, without any conference of the asseverations of the
other. But herein (as I take it) there lurketh some scruple: for, beside that
S. Peter's Church stood in the East end of the City, and that of Apollo in the
west, the word Cornehill, a denomination given of late (to speak of) to one
street, may easily be mistaken for Thorney.

For, as the word Thorney proceeds from the Saxons, who called the West end
of the Citied by that name, where Westminster now stands, because of the
wilderness and bushinesse of the soil: so do I not read of any street in
London called Cornehill, No street in London called Cornhill, before the
Normans Conquest.
before the Conquest of the Normans. Wherefore, I hold with them, which make
Westminster to be the place, where Lucius builded his Church, upon the ruins
of that There were three Archflamines, 1. at London, the 2. at York, the 3. at
Caerlbeon upon the River Vske, builded by Belinus, and called Glamorgantia, now
Chester, all destroyed by Lucius, because they were erected to Apollo, Mars and
Minerva: he builded 3. other Churches in their stead.
Flamine, 264. years (as Malmesbury says) before the coming of the Saxons,
and 411. before the arrival of Augustine. Read also his Appendix in lib. 4.
Pontif. where he notes the time of the Saxons in the 444. of Grace, and of
Augustine in 596. of Christ, which is a manifest account, though some Copies
have 499. for the one, but not without manifest corruption and error.

And now to return where we left: True it is, that a Library there was
pertaining to this Parish Church, of old time builded of stone, and of late
repaired with Brick, by the Executors of Sir John Crosby, Alderman, as his
Arms on the South end do witness.

This Library has bin (of late time) to wit, within these 70. years, well
furnished of Books, John Leyland viewed and commended them; but now those
Books are gone, Io. Leyland.
and the place is occupied by a Schoolmaster, and his Usher, for a number of
Scholars learning their Grammar rules, etc. Notwithstanding, before that time,
a Grammar School had been kept in this Parish, as appears in the year,
1425.

I read, Grammar Schools commanded by Parliament.
that John Whitby was Rector, and John Steward Schoolmaster there: and in the
25. of Henry the sixth it was enacted by Parliament, that 4. Grammar Schools
in London, should be maintained, viz. In the Parishes of Alhallowes in Thames
street: Saint Andrew in Oldborne: Saint Peter's upon Cornehill; and Saint Thomas
of Acres.

Monuments of the dead in this Church defaced.

I read that Hugh Waltham,

Nicholas Pricot, Mercer, Alderman,

Richard Manhall; 1503.

William Kingstone, Fishmonger, gave his Tenements called the Horsemill in
Grasse-street, to this Church, and was there buried, about the year, 1298.

John Vnisbrugh, Poulter, 1410.

John Law.

Also, Peter Mason Tailor, gave to this Church seven pound starling yearly for
ever, out of his Tenements in Colechurch Parish, and deceased about the year,
1416.

John Foxton founded a Chauntry there.

A Brotherhood of Saint Peter was in this Church established by Henry the
fourth, the fourth of his reign.

William Brampton, and William Askham, Fishmongers and Aldermen, were chief
procurers thereof, for the Fishmongers of late buried there Sir William Bowyer,
Mayor, 1543.

Sir Henry Huberthorne, Mayor, 1546.

Sir Christopher Morice, Master Gunner of England to King Henry the eight.

Edward Elrington, Esquire, chief Butler to Edward the sixth.

Thomas Gardener, Grocer.
Justice Smith, and other beside. A falte ancient Tomb for Sir William Bowyer
in the south I Will of the Quire.

In the year of Jesus
Christ's Incarnation,
One thousand, five hundred,
forty and four,
The 22. day of April,
by just computation;
In this place was buried
with great honor,
Which proved a man
Meet to be a Governor,
For the Commonwealth
of this high and famous City:
Called Sir William Bowyer,
Lord of the Maioralty,
Which departed not with
finding great calamity:
And pray we to GOD,
to grant his Soul mercy.
O London, if thou look
to the Lacedemonies,
There to find Lycurgus
that noble and kind King;
Or if thou seek for Ciceroes
men most of prize,
Or if thou apply thee to have
all the whole desiring
Of Amphyon, Orpheus,
or of Mecaenas demeaning a
Seek no further to find,
for here he is buried,
Which had all their properties
for Londons good ordering.
Be we then of his honorable
degree well conceiving,
For his acts for ever
be registered in Londons meaning.
Here lies Sir Henry Huberthorne, A fair Marble stone under the Communion
Table, plated about.
sometime Lord Mayor and Merchant-taylor of this City of London, and Dame
Elizabeth his Wife. He departed this life, etc. And the said Dame Elizabeth
left this transitory life in Anno Domini, 1551. Hereunder lies buried
William Mess of this City, A fair plated stone, near to the other.

Whilst he lived, free
of the Grocers Company,
And Julian his wife,
to whom 24. years married was he,
By whom God sent him
five sons and daughters three,
And to Gods will
his heart was always bent,
So did his death
show a life well spent.
Here this is written,
that other may remember,
His godly departure
from this world the 26. of September.
In the same Vault with Sir William Bowyers body, is Mr. Alderman VValthals
also laid, but no Monument as yet made for him, beside his Funeral Banners.

The Charities of the Parish of Saint Peter upon Cornehill.

Lancelot Tompson of London, Draper, was buried in this Parish Church, and
gave 20. l. for the yearly preaching of five Sermons, until the money should
be fully run out. Which Sermons were all preached by Doctor Ashbold, Parson
there. Also he gave 100. l. to the Drapers Company, and they to allow 5. l.
yearly for ever, for Bread and Coals for the poor of the said parish.

Boniface Tatam of London, Vintner, buried in the said Parish the third of
February, 1606. gave 40. s. yearly to the Parson, for preaching four Sermons
every year, so long as the Lease of the Marmaid in Cornehill, (a Tavern so
called) shall endure. He gave also to the poor of the Parish thirteen penny
loaves every Sunday, during the foresaid Leaf.

Mr. William Walthal, late of London, Alderman, buried in the said Parish
Church the second of September, 1606. gave twenty pound to the stock of the
Parish. Next, he gave forty Marks, for forty Sermons to be preached in the
said Church. Also he gave two hundred pounds, to be employed as follows:
Ten young men, trading and dwelling in the Parish, with two sufficient
sureties, each man, from four years to four years, to enjoy the benefit
thereof. And every one of them, for the time being, having the usage of the
said money, is to pay yearly to the good of the poor of the said Parish, for
bread and coals, the sum of thirteen shillings four pence, which amounts
in the whole, to the sum of six pounds, thirteen shillings, four pence. He
has also allowed to the Churchwardens and Overseers for the poor, five
shillings yearly among them, to see his good meaning effectually performed.

Robert Warden, of London, Poulter, buried in the same Church the 18. of
November, 1609. has given out of one Message or Tenement, lying and being in
Bishopsgate street, in the said Parish, the sum of three pounds twelve
shillings, yearly for ever, viz. 52. shillings in wheaten bread every Sunday,
for the poor of the Parish, 10. s. a year for two Sermons, to be preached to
the Company of Poulters, 4. s. for the Clerks attendance at the said Sermons,
and 2. s. a year for the Sexton, allowed by the said Company.

Mr. John Malin, Physician, buried in the said Church the 25. of May, 1613.
gave to the poor of this Parish the sum of 40. l. to be weekly bestowed on
them, on Friday mornings for ever.

Then have ye the Parish Church of S. Michael the Archangell: The Parish Church
of S. Michael on Cornhill.
for the Antiquity thereof, I find that Alnothus the Priest gave it to the
Abbot and Covent of Covesham; Reynold Abbot, and the Covent there, did grant
the same to Sparling the Priest, in all measures, as he and his Predecessors
before had held it: to the which Sparling also, they granted all their Lands
which they there had, except certain Lands which Orgar le Proud held of them,
and paid two shillings yearly. For the which grant, the said Sparling should
yearly pay one Mark of rent to the said Abbot of Covesham, and find him his
lodging, salt, water, and fire, when he came to London; this was granted 1133.
about the 34. of Henry the first. Thus much for antiquity.

Of later time I find, that Elizabeth Peake, Widow, gave the Patronage or
gift of this Benefice to the Drapers in London: she lies buried in the
Belfrey, 1518. her Monument yet remains. This has been a fair and
beautiful Church, but of late years, since the surrender of their lands to
Edward the sixth, greatly blemished by the building of four Tenements on the
North side thereof, toward the high street, in place of a green Churchyard,
whereby the Church is darkened and other ways annoyed. The fair new Steeple
or Bell-Tower of this Church, was begun to be builded in the year, 1421.
which being finished, This was accounted the best Ring of 6. Bells to be rung by
6. men that was in England for harmony, sweetness of sound and tune.
and a fair ring of five Bells therein placed; a sixth Bell was added, and
given by John VVhitwel, Isabel his wife, and William Rus, or Rous Alderman and
Goldsmith, about the year, 1430. which Bell named Rus, (nightly at eight of
the clock, and otherwise for Knels, and in Peales, rung by one man, by the
space of 160. years) of late over-haled by four or five at once, has been
thrice broken, and new cast, within the space of ten years, to the charges of
that Parish, more than 100. Marks.

And here note of this Steeple, as I have often heard my Father report. Lightning
and thunder, with ugly shaps seen in S. Michaels Steeple.
Upon Saint James night, certain men in the Loft next under the Bells, ringing
of a Peale, a Tempest of Lightning and Thunder did arise, and an ugly shapen
sight appeared to them, coming in at the South window, and lighted on the
North, for fear whereof, they all fell down, and lay as dead for the time,
letting the Bells ring and cease of their own accord. When the Ringers came to
themselves, The print of claws to be seen in hard stone.
they found certain stones of the North window to be razed and scrat, as if
they had been so much Butter printed with a Lions clawe: the same stones were
fastened there again, and so remain till this day. I have seen them often, and
have put a feather or small stick into the holes, where the claws had entered
3. or 4. inches deep.

At the same time, certain maine timber posts at Queen Hith, Pulpit-Crosse in
Paul's Churchyard overturned.
were scrat and cleft from the top to the bottom, and the Pulpit Cross in
Paul's Churchyard was likewise scrat, cleft, and overturned. One of the Ringers
lived in my youth, whom I have often heard to verify the same to be true; but to
return.

William Rus was a special Benefactor to this Church, his Arms yet remain in
the Windows.

William Comerton, Simon Smith, Walter Belengham were buried there, and
founded Chaunteries there.

John Grace, 1439.

Robert Drope, Mayor, buried on the North side the Quire, under a fair Tomb
of Gray Marble, 1485. he gave to poor Maids marriages of that Parish twenty
pound, to the poor of that Ward ten pound; Shirts and smockes three hundred,
and gowns of broad-cloth, one hundred, etc.

Jane his wife, matching with Edward Gray, Vicount Lisle, was buried by her
first husband 1500. She gave 90. pound in money to the beautifying of that
Church, and her great Message with the appurtenance, which was by her
Executors, W. Caple and other, 1517. the ninth of Henry the eighth assured to
John Wardroper, Parson, T. Clerk, W. Dixson, and John Murdon, Wardens of the
said Church, and their successors for ever, they to keep yearly for her an
Obit, or Anniversary; to be spent on the poor, and otherwise, in all three
pounds, the rest of the profits to be employed in reparation of the Church.

In the 34. year of Henry the eighth, Edward Stephan, Parson, T. Spencer, P.
Guntar, and E. Grouch, Churchwardens, granted to T. Lodge, a Leaf for
threescore years of the said great Message, with the appurtenances, which
were called the Lady Lisles Lands, for the rent of eight pound, thirteen
shillings, four pence the year. The Parishioners since gave it up as Chauntry
land, and wronged themselves; also the said Robert Drope and Lady Lisle
(notwithstanding their liberality to that Church and Parish) their Tomb is
pulled down no Monument remains of them. Peter Houghton, late Alderman, is
laid in their Vault, 1569.

Robert Fabian Alderman, that wrote and published a Chronicle of England, and
of France, was buried there, 1511. with this Epitaph.

Like as the day his course does consume,
And the new morrow springs again as fast,
So man and woman by natures custom,
This life to pass, at last in earth are cast,
Enjoy, and sorrow, which heretheirtime do wast
Never in one state, but in course Transitory,
So full of change, is of this world the glory.
His Monument is gone: Richard Garnam, 1527. buried there.

Edmond Trindle, and Robert Smith.

William Dickson, and Margret his wife, buried in the Cloister under a fair
Tomb now defaced.

Thomas Stow my Grandfather, about the year, 1526. and Thomas Stow my Father,
1559.

John Tolus, Alderman, 1548. he gave to John Willoby, John Tolus his gift to
the church not performed but concealed.
Parson of that Church, to Thomas Lodge, G. Hind, P. Bold, Churchwardens, and
to their successors (toward the reparation of that Church, and relief of the
poor for ever) his Tenement, with the appurtenances in the Parish of Saint
Michael, which he had lately purchased of Alvery Randalph, of Badlesmeere in
Kent: but the Parish never had the gift, nor heard thereof, by the space of 40.
years after: such was the conscience of G. Barn, and other the Executors to
conceal it to themselves, and such is the negligence of the Parishioners, that
(being informed thereof) make no claim thereunto.

Philip Gunter, that was Alderman for a time, and gave 400. pound to be
discharged thereof, was buried in the Cloister, about the year 1582. and Anne
his wife, etc.

Thomas Haughton father to the said Peter Haughton.

Francis Beneson, and William Towerson.

Philip Gunter, A hansome Monument in the wall of the Chancell, the south side.
Skinner, sometime Alderman of this City, departed this life the 15. day of
February, 1582. and lies buried in the Cloister of this Church: who married
Anne, Daughter of Henry Barley, of Albery, in the County of Hereford, Esquire;
and had issue by her 11. Sons, and four daughters. He left good maintenance
for two Sermons yearly for ever in this Church: the one on the 15. day of
March, the other the 25. of December.

Here lies buried the body of Peter Houghton, A very fair Monument richly
gu^ded, in the Chancell wall on the Nor^^ side.
of London Alderman: he was free of the Grocers Company, a Merchant of the
Staple in England, and a Merchant Adventurer. He was one of the Sheriffs of
this City, in An. 1593. and dyed the last day of December, 1596. He gave to
the four Hospitals (that is to say) Saint Bartholomewes, Christ Church, St.
Thomas and Bridewell, 600. pound, equally to be divided between them. He
gave also to the Grocers Company 400. pound to be lent to eight young men of
the same Company (gratis) from two years, to two years, for ever. Which 1000.
pound was paid by John Vernon, Merchant-Taylor, accordingly. He had to wife
Mary Houghton, who sithence married with Sir Thomas Vavasor, Knight Marshall.
He had children by her, two Sons, named Hatton, and Peter, who dyed young;
and two Daughters, Mary and Elizabeth. Mary was married to Sir James Scudamore,
Knight, and Elizabeth to Sir Henry Bedingfield, Knight.

Here lies buried (by a desired promise made to Alderman Houghton while he
lived) the body of John Vernon, His Picture stands alo^^ on the other
Monument.
Merchant-Taylor: who was Master of the said Company, in An. 1609. And he was
also a Merchant of the Staple in England. He dyed the day of An. Dom.

Nemo ante obitum felix.
Here in the Vault lies buried the bodies of of John Tailor, In the South I Will
of the Quire a hansome Momuments in the wa^.
Citizen and Draper of London, and Constance his wife, one of the Daughters and
Coheires of Reginald Wooddeson, of Alresford in Hampshire, Gent. They had issue
between them three Sons, John, who dyed young, Robert and John. He departed
this life the 4. day of April, 1597. being about the age of 63. years: and
she, being the age of 67. the 29. of October, 1614. Votum S. Pauli. Phil. 1.
Adepti.

In March; 1588.
was buried in this place, In the same wall lower, a hansome small Monument.

Alexander Every, Merchant
but 40. years of age,
Whose godly gifts, by will,
are warrants of Gods grace
In him. By whom,
think on thy self, and on the stage
Thou stand'st, and measure it,
and other worldly things:
As streams that swiftly slide
down from their springs.
An. Dom. 1570. primo Feb.
Here lies Francis Benneson,
a Citizen was he, A plated stone in the same I Will on the ground.

A Merchant Adventurer also,
and of the Mystery
Of Haberdashers Company.
A man of honest name,
Who here on earth to fear of God,
his vit^ll days did frame.
Two wives he had, the first of them
in Antwerpe borne she was;
The other he a Widow left,
so God brought it to pass.
His Soul (no doubt) does now remain
with God among the rest
Of other worthy Christians,
who evermore are blessed.
Hereunder lies buried the body of the worshipful, A fair small Monument on
a Pillar right against the Pulpit.
John Harby, Citizen and Skinner of London, and free of the Merchant
Adventurers Company, for Muscovia, Spain, and the East Iudiaes: who had two
wives, Anne Mording, Widow, by whom he had issue four Sons, and one
Daughter, viz. Thomas, Francis, John, William, and Emme. And lastly he married
with Anne Saltonstal, Daughter to Sir Richard Saltonstall, Knight, sometime
Lord Mayor of this City: by whom he had two Sons, Richard and Daniel; which
John Harby after 74. years, departed this life the 15. day of April, 1610.
Expecting a joyful resurrection by Jesus Christ.

Hic dormivit in Christo Joannes Cowper, Armiger; A fair Tomb in the Cloister
South.
Vxorem habuit Elizabeth Ironside ante se mortuam. Obiit 3. Iunii. An. Dom.
1609.

There is a comely Monument, In the wall on the North side of the Chancell.
although of no great cost or charge, there placed for Master Laurence
Caldwell, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, and Mary his wife. Great pity it
is, that it is no better kept and looked unto, for shortly the inscriptions
engraven thereon, will not any way possibly be read, etc.

This Parish Church has on the south side thereof a proper Cloister,
Pulpit-Crosse in S. Michael Churchyard.
and a fair Churchyard, with a Pulpit-crosse, not much unlike to that in
Paul's Church yard. Sir John Rudstone Mayor, caused the same Pulpit-Crosse, in
his life time to be builded, the Churchyard to be enlarged, by ground
purchased of the next Parish, and also proper houses to be raised, for lodging
of Quire men, such as at that time were assistants to Divine Service, then
daily sung by Note, in that Church.

The said Io. Rudstone deceased, 1531. and was buried in a Vault under the
Pulpit-Crosse: he appointed Sermons to be preached there, not now performed.
His Tomb before the Pulpit-Crosse is taken thence, with the Tomb of Richard
Yaxley, Doctor of physic to King Henry the eighth and other.

The Quire of that Church being dissolved, the lodgings of the Quire men were
(by the grave Fathers of that time) charitably appointed for receipt of ancient
decayed parishioners; namely, widows, such as were not able to bear the
charge of greater rents abroad, which blessed work of harboring the
harbourlesse, Mat. 2. 5.
is promised to be rewarded in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Then have ye Birchover lane, Birchovers lane.
so called of Birchover, the first builder and owner thereof, now corruptly
called Birchin lane, the North half whereof is of the said Cornehill Ward, the
other part is of Langborne Ward.

This lane and the high street near adjoining, has been inhabited (for the
most part) with wealthy Drapers, from Birchovers lane on that side the street,
down to the Stocks. In the reign of Henry the sixth, Vpholders sellers of
old stuff in Cornhill.
had ye (for the most part) dwelling there, Frippers or Vpholders, that sold
apparel and old household stuff.

I have read of a Country man, that then having lost his hood in Westminster
Hall, found the same in Cornhill, hanged out to be sold, which he challenged,
but was forced to buy, or go without it: for their stall (they said) was their
market. Popes head Tavern on Cornhil.
At that time also, the VVinedrawer of the Pope's Head Tavern, (standing
without the door in the high street) took the same man by the sleeve, and
said, Sir, will you drink a Pint of Wine? Wine one pint for a penny, and
bread given free.
Whereunto he answered, A penny spend I may: and so drank his Pint: for bread
nothing did he pay, for that was then allowed free.

This Pope's Head Tavern, with other houses adjoining, strongly builded of
stone, has of old time been all in one, pertaining to some great Estate, The
Kings house in Cornhill.
or rather to the King of this Realm, as may be supposed, both by largeness
thereof, and by the Arms; to wit, 3. Leopards passant gardant, which was the
whole Arms of England, before the reign of Edward the third, that quartered
them with the Arms of France, three Flower de Luces.

These Arms of England, Arms of England supported by Angels
supported then between two Angels, are fair and largely graven in stone on
the forefront toward the high street, over the door or stall of one great
house, lately (for many years) possessed by Mr. Philip Gunter. The Pope's Head
Tavern is on the back part thereof, toward the South, as also one other
house, called the stone house in Lombard street. Some say this was King John's
house; which might so be: for I find in a written copy of Matthew Paris his
History, that in the year 1232. Henry the third sent Hubert de Burgho, Hubert
de Burgho, Earl of Kent, sent into Cornhill.
Earl of Kent, to Cornhill in London, there to answer all matters objected
against him: where he wisely acquitted himself. The Pope's Head Tavern has a
foot-way through, from Cornehill into Lombard street. And down lower on the
high street of Cornhill, is there one other way through by the Cardinals Hat
Tavern, The Cardinals Hat Tavern.
into Lombard street. And so let this suffice for Cornehill Ward. In which be
Governors, an Alderman, his Deputy, Common-Counsellours, four, or six;
Constables, four; Scavengers, four; VVardmote inquest, 16. and a Beadle: it
is charged to the Fifteen at 16. pounds.

LANGBOVRNE WARD, And Fenny about.
LAngbourne Ward, so called, Langbourne Ward, and Fenny about
of a long Boorn of sweet water, which (of old time) breaking out into
Fenne-Church-street, ran down the same street, and Lombard street, to the
West end of S. Mary Woolnoths Church, where turning South, and breaking into
small shares, rils or streams, Shareborne or South borne lane.
it left the name of Shareborne lane, or Southborne lane, (as I have read)
because it ran South to the River of Thames. This Ward begins at the West
end of Ealdgate Ward, in Fen-Church street, by the Ironmongers Hall, which is
on the North side of that street, Culver Alley.
at a place called Culver Alley, where sometime was a lane, through the which
men went into Limestreet; but that being long since stopped up, Lane stopped up.
for suspicion of Thieves that lurked there by night, as is showed in
Limestreet Ward; there is now in this said Alley a Tennis Court, etc.

Fenne-Church street took that name of a Fenny or Moorish ground, Fen-church
street.
so made by means of this Boorne, which passed through it; and therefore
(until this day) in the Guild Hall of this City, that Ward is called by the
name of Langborne, and Fenny about, and not otherwise: yet others be of
opinion, that it took that name of Foenum, that is, Hay, sold there, as
Grasse-street-tooke the name of Grass or Herbs there sold.

In the midst of this street stands a small Parish Church, Parish Church of
S. Mary and S. Gabriel.
called S. Gabriel Fenne-Church, corruptly, Fan-Church.

Helming Legget, Esquire, by license of Edward the third, in the 49. of his
reign, gave one Tenement, with a curtelarge thereto belonging, and a garden
with an entry thereto leading, unto Sir John Hariot, Parson of Fen-Church, and
to his successors for ever; the house to be a Parsonage house; the Garden to be
a Churchyard, or burying place for the Parish.

Then have ye Lombard street, Lombard street so called before Ed. 2.
so called of the Longobards, and other Merchants, strangers of diverse Nations,
assembling there twice every day, of what original, or continuance, I have not
read of record, more than that Edward the second, in the twelfth of his reign,
confirmed a Message sometime belonging to Robert Turk, abutting on Lombard
street toward the South, and toward Cornehill on the North, for the Merchants
of Florence: which proves that street to have had the name of Lombard street
before the reign of Edward the second. The meeting of which Merchants and
others there, continued until the 22. of December, in the year 1568. on the
which day, the said Merchants began to make their meetings at the Burse, a
place then new builded for that purpose, in the ward of Cornehill, and was
since by Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth, named the Royal Exchange.

On the North side of this Ward, is Limestreet, Limestreet.
one half whereof (on both sides) is of this Langborne Ward, and therein on
the west side, is the Pewterers Hall, Pewterers Hall.
which Company were admitted to be a Brotherhood, in the 13. of Edward the
fourth.

At the South-west corner of Limestreet, stands a fair Parish Church of S.
Dionis called Backe-Church, lately new builded in the reign of Henry the
sixth. John Bugge, Esquire, was a great Benefactor to that work, as appears
by his Arms, three water-Budgets, and his Crest, a Morions head, graven in the
stone-worke of the Quire, at the upper end, on the North side, where he was
buried.

Also John Darby, Alderman, added thereunto a fair I Will or Chapel on the
South side, and was there buried, about the year 1466. He gave (besides sundry
ornaments) his dwelling house and others unto the said Church.

The Lady which, widow to Hugh Which, sometimes Mayor of London, was there
buried, and gave Lands for Sermons, etc.

John Master, Gent. was by his children buried there, 1444.

Thomas Britain. Henry Travers of Maidstone in Kent, Merchant, 1501.

John Bond, about 1504.

Robert Paget, Merchant-Taylor, one of the Sheriffs 1536.

Sir Tho. Curteis, Pewterer, then Fishmonger, Mayor 1557.

Sir James Harvie, Ironmonger, Mayor, 1581.

William Peterson, Esquire. William Sherington. Sir Edward Osborne,
Cloth-worker, Mayor, etc.

Thomas Curticius
sub Marmore conditus iste, An ancient Marble Tomb in the North I Will of the
Quire, upper-most Eastward.

Quem mundo eripuit
Parca severa senem:
Quemque suum Cives
voluere augere Senatum,
Iustitia and gravitas
hunc meruere gradum.
Purpuriens sic
Praeturam gessit in urbe,
Ferret ut hoc multum
laudis ab officio.
Animus huic Consul
Sceptroque insignis and ense,
Londinium vexit
dexteritate bona.
Thomam progenuit
solumque moestis humanis,
Vita adeo fragili
sort fugax^ue datur.
Vnica neptis avo,
est Anna haeres, filia Thomae,
Dignaque neptus avo,
dignaque nata patre.
Stuclea haec nupsit
Generoso stemmata certo,
Fraeclaroque domi
Militiaeque viro.
Fumus and umbra sumus,
quicquid mortale peribat,
Sola manet pietas,
quae sine fine viret.
Near unto it is a very goodly Monument, belonging to Sir James Harvey, but
without any inscription or Epitaph.

D. D. M. S.
Emanuel de Meteren, Mercatori Antwerpiensi, A small Monument in the wall on the
same side.
atque inter ordinis ejusdem Belgas Londini, quondam Cos. Des. viro pio, viro
docto. Qui rerum in Belgia gest. Historiam opus ^luculentum and fidei plenum
posteris reliquit.

Esther de Corput. conjux conjugi liberique ix. parenti optimo P. P. Obiit die
8. Aprilis, Anni CIC. ICC. XII. Cum vixisset An. lxxvj. Men's. 3.

Animae super Aethera vivunt.
Iacobo Colio G. F. Belgol. On a pillar in the midst of the Chancell.
Regis Henrici 8. munere Angl. indignae Mercatori probo. Qui obiit Ann. Chri.
CIC. IC. XCI. suo Lxxiix. Et Elizab. Orteliae, Qui obiit Anno Christi, CIC. IC.
XC III. Connubio nuper nunc Tumulo junctis Iac. Colins parentibus pientiss.

M. H. F. C.
Christo duce, and ossa resurgent.
This Tomb of Sir Edward Osborne, Knight, A goodly Monument in the South I Will
of the Quire.
sometime Lord Mayor of this Noble City, who was buried An. Dom. 1591. And of
Dame Margaret his second wife, who married after with M. Baron Clarke, (by whom
this Tomb was erected) and was buried, An. Dom. 1602.

Mistress Katharine VVoodward, In the west end of the Church, but on the south
side.
widow, having (in her life time) been a godly, religious, and virtuous
Matrone, charitable to the poor, and not sparing of her purse to pious uses:
Two worthy Gentlemen (her Executors) have there raised a comely remembrance of
her to all posterity.

This Monument was erected for the Worshipful M. John Hewet, Gent. Citizen and
Merchant of London, and free of the Clothworkers Company: who in his life time
was loving to all, and pitiful to the poor: witness the yearly pension he
has given for ever, of five pounds to the poor of this Parish. He changed
this mortal habitation the third day of July, Anno Domini, 1602.

This Charity, and 12. d. beside, given every Sunday in bread to the poor, is
all that there I understand of.

Then by the four corners (so called of Fen-church street in the East, The
four corners, a place so called, of 4. ways meeting.
Bridge-street on the South, Grasse-street on the North, and Lombard street on
the west) in Lombard street is one fair Parish Church, Parish Church of
Alhallowes in Lambard street. Lib. Trin.
called Alhallowes Grasse-church in Lambard street. I do so read it in
Evidences of Record, for that the Grasse-Market went down that way, when that
street was far broader than now it is, being straightned by incrochments.

This Church was lately new builded. John Warner, Armorer, and then Grocer,
Sheriff, 1494. builded the South I Will; his son Robert Warner, Esquire,
finished it, in the year 1516. The Pewterers were Benefactors toward the
North I Will, etc. The Sleeple or Bel-tower thereof was finished in the year
1544. about the thirty and sixth of Henry the eighth. The fair stone Porch of
this Church, was brought from the late dissolved Priory of S. John of Jerusalem
by Smithfield, so was the frame of their Bells; but the Bells being bought, were
never brought thither, by reason that one old Warner Draper of that Parish
deceasing, his son Mark Warner would not perform what his Father had begun
and appointed; so that fair Steeple has but one Bell, as Friars were wont to
use.

The Monuments of this Church be these: A fair Monument in the wall, at the
East end of the North I Will of the Quire.
the said Warners, and John Walden, Draper.

Memoriae Sacrum.
Spe certa in Christo resurgendi, hic requiescit Christopherus Tolderney,
Armiger, vir prudens, and optimis studiis innutritus: Atque Susanna Vxor, Filia
Joannis Alnwici, Generos. Qui cum plures annos fide and amore conjugali
concordissime vixissent; Obiit illa nono die Ianuarii, An. Domini, M. D. CXII.
Ille Martii sequentis die 20. Quatuor liberis superstitibus, Christophero and
Joanne, Iana, (Roberto Darello de Calehill, Militi enupta) and Elizabetha.

Here under this stone rests (in assured hope of a joyful resurrection) the
body of Rebecca Crispe, A very goodly stone plated, on the ground in the same
I Will.
Daughter to John Pake of Bromefield in Essex, Gent. and late wife to Nicholas
Crispe of Land. Merchant. She departed this life the 27. day of April, An. Dom.
1616. and in the 37. of her age: Giving to the world (both in her life and
death) undoubted testimony of her faith in Christ Jesus: Having had issue 3.
sons, and 8. daughters.

Here lies buried the body of Simo^ Horsepoole, In the Chancell a fair stone
plated, against his Pew door.
free of the Drapers Company: also free of the ancient Wooll-staple; free of
the Merchants Adventurers of the old Haunce and Moscovia. He was chosen
sheriff of London, in An. 1591. He married Elizabeth Smith, daughter to John
Smith of Cosham, in the County of Wiltshire, Gent. and sister to Thomas Smith,
Customer of London. And by her he had issue 3. sons and 3. daughters, William,
Simon and Thomas, Elizabeth married with Alexander King, one of the Queens
Majesty's Auditors. Hawys married with Francis Dorington, Merchant of Tripolie.
And Joan, married with John Whitbrooke, Gent.

He dwelt in Grasse-Church street in this Parish, 35. years, and he appointed
to this Parish of All Saints, four pounds and four shillings every year for
ever: and also four pounds and four shillings to the Parish of Saint
Christopher by Cornehill, where he was borne, and where his Father John
Horsepoole (also free of the Drapers Company, and borne in Leicestershire)
dwelt, and lies buried: That every Sunday after Morning Service, there be
given to twelve poor people of this Parish, to every one of them one penny
loaf of wheaten bread; and also every Sunday to twelve poor people of Saint
Christophers Parish, to every one of them one penny loaf of wheaten bread; and
every year upon Saint Thomas the Apostles day, to every one of the said 24.
poor people, twelve pence in money: and every year upon the said Saint Thomas
his day, to the two Paris-Clerkes of the said Parises, to every of them for
their pains, 13. s. 4. d. and to the two Sextons of the said Parishes, to
every of them for their pains, 6. s. 8. d.

In performance whereof, Yet living, and of whom I received these instructions.
William Horsepoole, son of the said Simon Horsepoole, has granted two
several annuities and Rents, charge of four pounds and four sillings apiece,
out of an house in Corbets Alley in Grasse-Church street, in the Parish of
Saint Peter, to certain parishioners of the said Parishes respectively, and
their heirs in trust, to the foresaid uses for ever.

He dyed the 14. day of January, 1601. Aged 75. years.

Virtue is not dead. A fair plated stone lying by the other.


The soul in Heaven,
the body here of Izan lies,
By her John Edwards good,
and by her parents both:
She dear to her all three,
that living, still she cries,
Lay me by them.
for other Grave I loath.
O God! that heard'st
the cry of this thy creature,
Make Izans many,
in virtue, grace, and feature.
As love (in life)
eonjoyn'd us once,
And God (by death)
disjoined us twain:
So love (by death)
rejoined our bones,
And God (in joy)
joined us again.
Stand here firm (God permitting) ever, a pattern, A fair Monument erected
in the South I Will of the Quire for the same person.
a spur to sacred virtue: In memory of a blessed Matrone here buried: Rich
in true piety, virtue, and reverend modesly, from her Cradle to her Cossin: an
ornament (of her sex) for true constancy in both fortunes: the only mother
and beauty of her race, in her time, named Izan Wright by her Father, Edwards
by her first husband, both of this Parish, and also here buried. Her shining to
the vain world (to whom Adversity is Vice, and Prosperity is Virtue) was
eclipsed by a second marriage, wherein she deceased the fifth day of March, An.
Dom. 1613. Aged about 66. years.

Here under this place lies buried the body of Thomas Walker, A come^y samll
Monumeat in the South (...) of the Quire, East.
Citizen and Vintner of London, who deceased the 25. day of January, 1599.
Which said Thomas Walker had two wives, Joane and Mary. By Joane he had issue
eight children, four sons, and four daughters. Joane his wife lies
hereunder buried, who deceased the 29. day of August, 1592. Aetatis suae, 69.

Man's life, betimes tryit who shall,
Shall find no time in it to trust:
Sometime to climb, sometime to fall,
Till life of man be brought to dust.
Next is a common Osterie for travellours, called the George, of such a Sign,
This is said to have pertained to the Earl Ferrers, and was his London lodging
in Lombard street: And that to the year 1175. a brother of the said Earl,
being there privily slain in the night, was there thrown down into the dirty
street, as I have before showed in the Chapter of Night-watches.

Next is the Parish Church of S. Edmond the King and Martyr, Parish Church of
S. (...)
in Lombard street, by the South corner of Birchover lane.

This Church is also called. S. Edmond Grasse-Church, because the said
Grassemarket came down so low.

The Monuments in this Church, are these:

Sir John Milborne, Draper, Mayor, deceased, 1535. buried there by Dame Joan
and Dame Margaret his wives, under a Tomb of Touch.

Humfrey Heyford, Goldsmith, Mayor, 1477.

Sir William Chester, Draper, Mayor, 1560. with his wives, amongst his
predecessors.

Sir George Barn, Mayor, 1586.

D. Ioanni Milburno, vitrico,

D. Ioanni Chestero, patri.

D. Roberto Tempesto, genero.

Gulielmus Chesterus, ^osuit.

(...)

by Birchovers lane, (the one half of which Lane is of this Ward) and so
down, be diverse fair houses; namely, one with a fair forefront toward the
street, builded by Sir Martin Bows, Goldsmith, since Mayor of London: And then
one other, sometime belonging to William de la Pole, Nobleme^ of this Realm,
of old time, as also of late years, have dealt in Merchandises.
Knight Baronet, and yet the Kings Merchant, in the 14. of Edward the third;
and after him, to Michael de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk, in the 24. of Richard
the second, and was his Merchants house, and so down toward the Stocks
Market, lacking but some three houses thereof.

The South side of this Ward begins in the East, at the chain to be
drawn thwart Mart lane, up into Fen-Church street, and so west, by the North
end of Mincheon lane, to Saint Margaret Pattens street, or Rood lane, and down
that street, to the midway toward S. Margarets Church: Philpot lane.
Then by Philpot lane, (so called of Sir John Philpot that dwelled there, and
was owner thereof) and down that Lane, some six or eight houses on each side,
is all of this Ward.

Then by Grasse-Church corner, into Lombard Street, S Clements lane.
to S. Clements lane, and down the same to S. Clements Church: then down
Saint Nicholas lane, and down the same to S. Nicholas Church, and the same
Church is of this Ward.

Then to Abchurch lane, and down some small portion thereof: then down
Sherborne lane, a part thereof, and a part of Beare-binder lane, be of this
Ward: and then down Lombard street to the sign of the Angel, almost to the
corner over against the Stocks Market.

On the South side of this Ward, somewhat within Mart lane, have ye the
Parish Church of Alhallowes, Parish Church of Alhallowes Stane Church.
commonly called Stane-Church, (as may be supposed) for a difference from other
Churches of that name in this City, which (of old time) were builded of
timber, and since were builded of stone. In this Church have been diverse fair
Monuments of the dead; namely,

John Costin, Of late it is fixed there in better manner than ever it was
before.
Girdler, a great benefactor: he deceased 1244. his name remains painted in
the Church roof: if it had been set in brass, it would have been fetched
down. He gave out of certain Tenements to the poor of that Parish, an
hundred quarters of Charcoales yearly for ever.

Sir John Test, Knight of the holy Sepulcher, and Dame Joan his wife, about
1486.

Robert Stone.

Sir John Stiward, and Dame Alice his wife.

John Bostocke, Esquire.

Christopher Holt.

Sir Richard Tate, Knight, Ambassador to King Henry the eighth, buried there,
1554. His Monument remains yet; the rest being all pulled down, and swept
out of the Church, the Churchwardens were forced to make a large account,
twelve shillings that year for Broomes, beside the carriage away of stone and
brass, at their own charge.

And here I am to note, that being informed of the Writhsleys to be buried
there, I have since found them and other, to be buried at Saint Giles without
Creplegate, where I mind to leave them.

Our Holt (alas) has stint his hold, A fair Marble Tomb is the South wall of
the Quire.

by Death called hence in haste,
Whose Christen name being Christopher
with Christ is better placed.
In Sawton borne of gentle race,
in London spent his days,
A Clerk that served in Customehouse,
in credit many ways.
So that we leese the loss
of this so dear a Friend,
Whose life well while he was here,
has gained a better end.
John Mun, A small Monu^^^ in the (...) wall.
Citizen and Mercer of London, who deceased the third day of June, 1615. gave
toward the repairing of this Church, 100. l.

Mary Benam, lying here buried, Beneath in the lower part of the Church, (...)
fair plated stone.
gave 10. l. 4. s. for ever yearly to this Parish, and the Parish of Saint
Olaves in Hartstreet, which is in money truly performed every Sunday, 2. s. in
each place to the poor.

By this Church sometime passed a lane called Craddockes lane, Craddocks lane.
from Mart lane, winding by the North side of the said Church into Fenne-church
street: the which Lane being straightned by encroachments, is now called
Church-Alley.

Then is the parish Church of Saint Nicholas Acon, Parish Church of S. Nicholas
Hacon.
or Hacon (for so have I read it in Records) in Lombard street. Sir John
Bridges Draper, Mayor, 1520. newly repaired this Church, and imbattled it, and
was there buried.

Francis Bowyer, Grocer, one of the Sheriffs, was buried there, 1580. with
other of the Bowyers.

So was Julian, wife to John Lambard, Alderman.

Here rests in hope of a joyful resurrection the body of Francis Bowyer,
late Alderman of London, who was borne in Chichester, the Son of Robert
Bowyer of Chichester, and Margaret his wife. He had Brethren, Robert eldest,
William, Henry, and Peter: which Sons together with their Mother Margaret,
do rest in this Church. He married Elizabeth, daughter to William Tillesworth:
with whom he lived most lovingly and faithfully, the space of 27. years: And
by her had seven Sons and four Daughters, of whom remained living at his
death four Sons, William, Robert, Francis, and John: And three Daughters,
Joane, Margaret, and Elizabeth. Obiit 14. Iunii. An. Dom. 1581. Then is there
(in the high street) a proper Parish Church of Saint Mary Wolnoth, Parish
Church of S. Mary VVolnoth.
of the Nativity, the reason of which name I have not yet learned. This Church
is lately new builded. Sir Hugh Brice, Goldsmith, Mayor in the first year of
Henry the seventh, Keeper of the Kings Exchange at London, and one of the
Governors of the Kings Mint in the Tower of London, under William Lord
Hastings, the fifth of Edward the fourth deceased, 1496. He builded in this
Church a Chapel, called the Charnel, as also part of the body of the Church
and of the Steeple, and gave money toward the finishing thereof, besides the
stone that he had prepared; he was buried in the body of the Church, and Guy
Brice or Boys, was also buried there.

Dame Ioane, Wife to Sir William Peach.

Thomas Nocket, Draper, 1396: he founded a Chauntry there.

Simon Air, 1459. he gave the Tavern, called the Cardinals Hat in Lombard
street, with a Tenement annexed on the East part of the Tavern, and a mansion
behind the East Tenement, together with an Alley from Lombard street to
Cornehill with the appurtenances, all which were by him new builded toward a
Brotherhood of our Lady in Saint Mary Wolnoths Church.

John Mo^ger, Pewterer, and Emme his wife in S. John's Chapel.

Sir John Percivall, Merchant-Taylor, Mayor, about 1504.

Thomas Roch, and Andrew Michael, Vintners, and Ioane the Wife of them both.

William Hilton, Merchant-Taylor, and Tailor to King Henry the eighth, was
buried there, 1519. under the Chapel of Saint George, which Chapel was
builded by George Lufken, sometime Tailor to the Prince.

Robert Amades, Goldsmith, Master of the Kings Jewels.

Sir Martin Bows, Langborne Ward discharged of Fifteenes.
Mayor, buried about 1569. he gave Lands for the discharge of that Langborne
Ward, of all Fifteenes to be granted to the King by Parliament.

George Hasken.

Sir Thomas Ramsey, late Mayor, etc.

Sir John Percivall, A fair Tomb in the Chancell.
Knight, sometime Lord Mayor of this City, and Dame Thomasine his Wife, worthy
Benefactors to this parish, lie both here buried, etc.

The several wills made by them both in ancient writing, are (to the parishes
great commendation) very carefully kept and preserved in this Church, in a
goodly enclosure made for the purpose and to be turned open like folding
Tables: I have not seen the like in any other Church.

Moreover I read (concerning this man) that he was one of the Mayor of Londons
Officers, An observation out of Richard Grafton.
and was the Carver at the Majors Table. And when the Mayor (as the custom of
London is) does elect one of the Sheriffs of London for the year ensuing, by
taking and drinking a cup of Wine to such a man as he pleases to name: The
Mayor at that time (whose name was Sir Henry Collet, Knight, and free of the
Mercers) took the cup of Wine and drank to the aforesaid John Percival, John
Percivall, Carver to the Lord Mayor or chosen Sheriff of London.
his Carver, standing bare-headed waiting before him, and called him Sheriff
of Land. for the year ensuing: forthwith the said Mayor caused the same
Percivall to sit down at his own Table, and to cover his head. And the same
Percivall took upon him the office of Sherivalty, and afterward was Lord Mayor
of London, and made knight. Register of Majors.

Here lies buried the body of Sir Martin Bows, A goodly Marble close Tomb
under the Communion Table.
Knight, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, and also free of the Goldsmiths
Company: with Cicilie, Dame Anne and Dame Elizabeth, his wives. The which Sir
Martin Bows deceased the 4. day of August, An. Dom. 1566.

His will also is there kept in a fair Table.

Here lies interred the body of Sir Thomas Ramsey, A very goodly Monument in
the East end of the Chancell.
Knight, a most worthy Citizen, and lately Lord Mayor of London, being free of
the Grovers Company, with whom (by will) he has left a perpetual relief for
poor young men, Retaylours of the said Company, which he saw performed in his
lifetime. He was a most careful Magistrate, walked in the fear of God, and
loved peace. He lived 79. years, and dyed (without issue) in the faith of
Jesus Christ, the 19. day of May, Anno Dom. 1590. Whose godly end was a true
testimony of his virtuous life.

Here lies buried also Dame Alice, the first wife of the said Sir Thomas
Ramsey, she being eldest daughter to Bevis Lea of Enfield in the County of
Stafford, Gent. Unto whom he was married 37. years: and having lived 85.
years, she departed this life the 18. day of January, An. Dom. 1577.

Dame Mary, the second wife to the said Sir Thomas Ramsey, was eldest daughter
to William Dale of Bristoll, Merchant, unto whom he was married 12. years. In
regard therefore of so worthy a Knight, and his two virtuous Ladies: This
Monument is here placed, by the Executors to the said Sir Thomas Ramsey, the
18. day of November, Anno Dom. 1596.

Thus have ye seven Parish Churches in this Ward; one Hall of a Company;
diverse fair houses for Merchants; and other Monuments none. It has an
Alderman, his Deputy; Common-Counsellors, 8. Constables, 15. Scavengers, 9. Men
of the Wardmote inquest, 17. and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteen, in the
Exchequer, at 20. l. 9. s. 8. d.

BELINSGATE WARD.
BElinsgate Ward begins at the West end of Tower-street Ward in Thames
street, Belinsgate Ward.
about Smarts Key, and runs down along that street, on the South side, to
Saint Magnus Church at the Bridge foot, and on the North side of the said
Thames street, from over against Smarts Key, till over against the North-west
corner of Saint Magnus Church aforesaid.

On this North side of Thames street is S. Mary Hill lane, up to Saint
Margarets Church, and then part of S. Margaret Pattens street, at the end of
Saint Mary Hill Lane. Next out of Thames street is Lucas lane, and then
Buttolph lane, and at the North end thereof Philpot lane: Then is there Rother
lane, of old time so called, and thwart the same lane is Little Eastcheape: And
these be the bounds of Belinsgate Ward.

Touching the principal Ornaments within this Ward: On the South side of
Thames street, beginning at the East end thereof, Smarts Key
there is first the said Smarts Key, so called, of one Smart, sometime owner
thereof.

The next is Belinsgate, Belinsgate.
whereof the whole Ward takes name, the which (leaving out of the fable
thereof, faining it to be builded by King Belinus, a Britain, long before the
incarnation of Christ) is at this present a large Watergate, Port or Harborough
for Ships and Boats, commonly arriving there with Fish, both fresh and salt,
Shell-fishes, Salt, Oranges, Onions, and other Fruits and Roots; Wheat, Rye,
and Grain of diverse sorts for service of the City, and the parts of this
Realm adjoining.

This Gate is now more frequented than of old time, when the Queens Hith was
used, as being appointed by the Kings of this Realm, to be the special or
only Port for taking up of all such kind of Merchandises, brought to this
City by strangers and Forrainers; because the Drawbridge of timber at London
Bridge, was then to be raised, and drawn up for passage of Ships with tops
thither.

Touching the ancient customs of Belinsgate; Customs of Belinsgate.
in the Reign of Edward the third, every great Ship landing there, paid for
standage, two pence; every little Ship with Orelockes, a penny; the lesser
Boat, called a Battle, a halfe-penny. Of two quarters of Corn measured, the
King was to have one farthing; of a Comb of Corn, a penny; of every weight
going out of the City, a halfe-penny; of two quarters of Sea-coales measured,
a farthing; and of every Tun of Ale going out of England beyond the Seas, by
the Merchants stranger, 4. pence; of every thousand Herring, a farthing, except
the Franchises, etc.

Next to this is Summers Key, Summer Key,
which likewise took that name of one Summer dwelling there, Lion Key.
as did Lion Key of one Lion, owner thereof, and since of the sign of the Lion.

Then is there a fair Wharfe or Key, Buttolph VVharfe.
called Buttolphs-gate, by that name so called in the time of William the
Conqueror, and of Edward the Confessor, as I have showed already in the
description of the Gates.

Next is the Parish Church of Saint Buttolph, Parish Church of S. Buttolph.
a proper Church, and has had many fair Monuments therein, now defaced and
gone: notwithstanding, I find by testimonies abroad, that these were buried
there, to wit:

Roger Cogger, 1348.

Andrew Pikeman, and Ioane his wife, 1391.

Nicholas James, Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffs, 1423.

William Rainwell, Fishmonger, and John Rainwell his son, Fishmonger, Mayor,
1426. and deceasing, 1445. buried there, with this Epitaph:

Citizens of London, John Rainwell His Epitaph.

call you to remembrance
The famous John Rainwell,
sometime your Mayor,
Of the Staple of Callis,
so was his chance.
Here lies now his corpse,
his soul bright and fair,
Is taken to heavens bliss,
thereof is no despair.
His acts bear witness,
by matters of accord,
How charitable he was,
and of what record:
No man has been
so beneficial as he,
Unto the City
in giving liberally, etc.
He gave a stone house to be a Revestry to that Church for ever: Belinsgate
Ward, Downegate Word, and Ealdgate Ward discharged of all Fifteens.
More, he gave Lands and Tenements to the use of the Communalty, that the
Mayor and Chamberlain should satisfy, unto the discharge of all persons,
inhabiting within the Wards of Belinsgate, Downegate, and Ealdgate, as often as
it shall happen any Fifteen, by Parliament of the King to be granted. Also to
the Exchequer, in discharge of the Sheriffs, ten pounds yearly, which the
Sheriffs used to pay for the Farm of Southwarke, so that all men of the
Realm, coming or passing with carriage, should be free quitted and discharged
of all Toll and other payments, aforetime claimed by the Sheriffs.

Further, that the Mayor and Chamberlain shall pay yearly to the Sheriffs
eight pounds, so that the Sheriffs take no manner Toll or money of any person
of this Realm, for their Goods, Merchandises, Victuals and Carriages, for
their passages at the great Gate of the Bridge of the City, nor at the Gate
called the Drawbridge, etc.

The overplus of money coming of the said Lands and Tenements, divided into
even portions, the one part to be employed to instore the Grainaries of the
City with Wheat, for the relief of the poor Communalty; and the other moity
to clear and cleanse the shelves, and other stoppages of the River of Thames,
etc.

Stephen Forster, Fishmonger, Mayor in the year 1454. and Dame Agnes his wife,
lie buried there.

William Bacon, Haberdasher, one of the Sheriffs, 1480. was there buried;
besides many other persons of good worship, whose Monuments are all destroyed
by badde and greedy men of spoil.

This Parish of S. Buttolph is no great thing; The number of stranger lately to
created in this (...).
notwithstanding diverse Strangers are there harbored, as may appear by a
presentment, not many years since made, of Strangers inhabitants in the Ward of
Belinsgate, in these words:

In Belinsgate Ward were one and fifty households of Strangers; whereof thirty
of these House-holders inhabited in the Parish of Saint Buttolph, in the chief
and principal houses, where they give 20 pounds a year for an house lately
letten for four Marks. The nearer they dwell to the water side, the more they
give for houses, and within thirty years before, there was not in the whole
Ward above three Netherlanders, at which time, there was within the said Parish
levied for the help of the poor, seven and twenty pounds by the year; but
since they came so plentifully thither, there cannot be gathered above eleven
pounds: for the Stranger will not contribute to such charges as other Citizens
do.

Thus much for that South side of this Ward.

On the North side is Bosse Alley, Bosse Alley and the Bosse of Belinsgate.
so called of a Bosse of Spring water continually running, which stands by
Belinsgate, against this Alley, and was sometimes made by the Executors of
Richard Whittington.

Then is S. Mary Hill lane, S. Mary Hill lane.
which runs up North from Belinsgate, to the end of S. Margaret Pattens,
commonly called Rood lane, and the greatest half of that lane is also of
Belinsgate Ward. In this S. Mary Hill lane, is the fair Parish Church of S.
Mary, called, on the Hill, because of the ascent from Belinsgate.

This Church has been lately builded, as may appear by this that follows.

Richard Hackney, one of the Sheriffs in the year 1322. and Alice his wife,
were there buried; as Robert Fabian writes, saying thus:

In the year 1497. in the month of April, Alice Hackney found uncorrupted,
more than 150. years after she was buried.
as laborers dug for the foundation of a wall, within the Church of Saint
Mary Hill, near unto Belinsgate, they found a Coffin of rotten timber, and
therein the Corpse of a woman, whole of skin, and of bones undissevered, and
the joints of her arms pliable, without breaking of the skin, upon whose
Sepulcher this was engraven:

Here lie the bodies of Richard Hackney, Fishmonger; and Alice his wife: The
which Richard was Sheriff in the 15. of Edward the second.

Her body was kept above ground 3. or four days, without noyance; but then it
waxed unsavourie, and was again buried.

John Mordant, Stock-fishmonger, was buried there, 1387.

Nicholas Exton, Fishmonger, Mayor, 1387.

William Cambridge, Mayor, 1420.

Richard Goslin, Sheriff, 1422.

William Philip, Sergeant at Arms, 1473.

Robert Revell, one of the Sheriffs, 1490. gave liberally toward the new
building of this Church and steeple, and was there buried.

William Remington, Mayor, 1500.

Sir Thomas Blanke, Mayor, 1582.

William Holstocke, Esquire, Controller of the Kings Ships.

Sir Cuthbert Buckle, Mayor, 1594.

Here lies a Knight in London borne, A fair Tomb in the east end of the
Chancell.

Sir Thomas Blanke by name,
Of honest birth, of Merchants trade,
A man of worthy fame.
Religious was his life to God,
To men his dealing just:
The poor and Hospitals can tell
That wealth was not his trust.
With gentle heart, and spirit mild,
And nature full of pity,
Both Sheriff, Lord Mayor and Alderman;
He ruled in this City.
The Good Knight was his common name,
So called of many men:
He lived long, and dyed of years,
Twice seven, and six times ten.
Obiit 28. October. An. Dom. 1588. An Epitaph upon the death of Dame Margaret
Blancke, who departed this life the second of February, An. Dom. 1596.
DEath was deceived, On the other side of the Tomb, southward*

which thought these two to part:
For though this Knight
first left this mortal life,
Yet till she dyed,
he still lived in her heart.
What happier husband,
or more kinder wife?
Whom four and forty
changes of the Spring,
In sacred wedlock,
mutual love had linkt:
The dear remembrance
of so dear a thing,
Was not by death
in her chaste breast extinct.
Building this Tomb
not long before she died,
Her latest duty
to his Funeral Rite,
Crowned with her virtues,
like an honest Bride,
Here lies at rest
by her beloved Knight.
Though worthy Blancke
her name it still endures,
Yet, Traves, boast,
her birth was only yours.
Beati qui moriuntur in Domino.
Here lie intombed the bodies of Sir Robert Hampson, A very fair Monument in
the South wall of the Quire.
Knight, and Alderman of London; who deceased the 2. day of May, 1607. in the
50. year of his age: And of Dame Katharine his wife, at whose charge this
Monument is erected. They had issue, nine children, whereof four are living.
The said Dame Katharine deceased, etc.

This Lane on both sides is furnished with many fair houses for Merchants, and
has at the North end thereof one other Lane, S. Margaret Pattens lane.
called S. Margaret Pattens, because of old time Pattens were usually there
made and sold: but of latter time this is called Roode lane, of a Rood there
placed, in the Churchyard of S. Margaret, Parish Church of S. Margaret Pattens.
whilst the old Church was taken down, and again new builded; during which
time, the oblations made to this Rood, were employed toward building of the
Church. But in the year 1538. about the 23. of May in the morning, the said
Roode was found to have been in the night preceding (by people unknown)
broken all to pieces, together with the Tabernacle, wherein it had been placed.

Also on the 27. of the same month, in the same Parish, amongst the
Basket-makers, Fire in Reod lane.
a great and sudden fire happned in the night season, which within the space of
three hours, consumed more than a dozen houses, and nine persons were brent to
death there. And thus ceased that work of this Church, being at that time nigh
finished to the steeple.

The Monuments that I find in this Parish Church, are these following:

Here lies buried Mr. Reginald West, In the midst of the Chancell, under the
Communion Table a fair plated stone.
Bachelor in divinity, and late Parson of this Parish, who deceased the second
day of October, Anno Domini, 1563. for whose sincere, pure and godly Doctrine,
as also his virtuous end, the Lord be praised for evermore.

Here-under lies buried Thomas Gelson, The like stone, and near to the other.
Citizen and Grocer of London, who deceased the 16. day of September, Anno Dom.
1563. And in the same Church also lies buried Jane his wife: for whose
virtuous lives and godly departing, God be praised for ever.

Here lies buried the body of Richard Glover, A very fair stone well plated
by the other twain.
Citizen and Pewterer of London, who was twice Master of his Company, and one
of the Common Council of this City: Having two wives, Elizabeth, and Mary;
and had issue by his first wife, three sons; and by his second, he had eight
sons and four daughters. He deceased the 16. day of August, An. Dom. 1615.
being aged 59. years.

The Lane, on both sides beyond the same Church, to the midway toward
Fen-church street, is of Belinsgate Ward.

Then again, out of Thames street, by the West end of S. Mary Hill Church,
runs up one other Lane, of old time called Rope Lane, Rope lane Lucas.
since called Lucas lane, of one Lucas, owner of some part thereof, and now
corruptly called Love lane; it runs up by the East end of Saint Andrew
Hubbert, Parish Church (...) S. Andrew Hubbert.
or S. Andrew in Eastcheape. This Church, and all the whole Lane called Lucas
Lane, is of this Belinsgate Ward.

Then have ye one other Lane out of Thames street, called Buttolph lane,
because it rises over against the Parish Church of S. Buttolph, and runs up
North by the East end of Saint Georges Church, to the West end of S. Andrews
Church, and to the South end of Philpot lane.

This Parish Church of S. George in Buttolph lane, Parish Church S. George
Buttolph lane.
is small, but the Monuments (for two hundred years past) are well preserved
from spoil.

Whereof one is of Adam Bamme, Mayor, 1397.

Richard Bamme, Esquire his son, of Gillingham in Kent, 1452.

John Walton, Gentleman, 1401.

Marpor, a Gentleman, 1400.

John Saint-Iohn, Merchant of Levant, and Agnes his wife, 1400.

Hugh Spencer, Esquire, 1424.

William Combs, Stocke-fishmonger, one of the Sheriffs, 1452. who gave forty
pounds toward the Works of that Church.

John Stocker, Draper, one of the Sheriffs, 1477.

Richard Dryland, Esquire, and Katharine his wife, daughter to Morris Brune,
Knight of Southukenton in Essex, Steward of the household to Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester, 1487.

Nicholas Partrich, one of the Sheriffs 1519. in the Churchyard.

William Forman, Mayor, 1538.

James Mountford, Esquire, Surgeon to King Henry the eighth, buried, 1544.

Thomas Gayle, Haberdasher, 1340.

Nicholas Wilford, Merchant-Taylor, and Elizabeth his wife, about the year
1551.

Edward Heyward, 1573. etc.

Roger Delakere, founded a Chauntrie there.

Then have ye one other Lane, Rother lane, or Red-Rose lane.
called Rother lane, or Red Rose lane, of such a sign there; now commonly
called Pudding lane, because the Butchers of East- Cheap have their
Scalding-house for Hogs there, and their Puddings, with other filth of Beasts,
are voided down that way to their dung-boats on the Thames.

This Lane stretches from Thames street to little East-cheape, chiefly
inhabited by Basket-makers, Turners, and Butchers, and is all of Belinsgate
Ward.

The Garland in Little East-cheape, sometime a Brewhouse, with a Garden on the
backe-side, adjoining to the Garden of Sir John Philpot, was the chief House
in this East-cheape: It is now divided into sundry small Tenements, etc.

This Ward has an Alderman and his Deputy; Common Counselors, 7. Constables,
eleven; Scavengers, six; for the Ward-more Inquest, foureteen, and a Beadle,
it is taxed to the Fifteen in London, at two and thirty pounds; and in the
Exchequer, at one and thirty pounds, ten shillings.

BRIDGE WARD Within.
BRidge Ward within, Bridge Ward within.
so called of London Bridge; which Bridge is a principal part of that Ward,
and begins at the stu^ps on the south end by Southwarke, runs along the
Bridge, and North up Bridge-street, commonly called (of the Fish-market) New
Fish-street: from Fish street hill, up Grasse-street, to the North corner of
Grasse-church. All the Bridge is replenished on both the sides, with large,
fair and beautiful buildings, inhabitants for the most part rich Merchants,
and other wealthy Citizens, Mercers and Haberdashers.

In New Fish-street be Fishmongers and fair Tavernes: on Fish-street Hill and
Grasse-street, men of diverse Trades, Grocers and Haberdashers.

In Grasse-street have ye one fair Conduit of sweet water, Water Conduit in
Grasse-street.
castellated with crest and vent, made by the appointment of Thomas Hill,
Mayor, 1484. who gave by his Testament a hundred marks toward the conveyance
of water to this place. It was begun by his Executors, in the year 1491. and
finished of his goods whatsoever it cost.

On the East side of this Bridge ward, have ye the fair Parish Church of S.
Magnus, Parish Church of S. Magnus.
in the which Church have bin buried many men of good Worship, whose Monuments
are now for the most part defaced. I find,

John Blund, Mayor, 1307.

Henry Yeuele, Free Mason to Edward the third, Richard the second, and Henry
the fourth, who deceased 1400. his Monument yet remains.

William Brampton.

John Michell, Mayor, 1436.

John French, Baker, Yeoman of the Crown to Henry the seventh, 1510.

Robert Clarke, Fishmonger, 1521.

Richard Turk, one of the Sheriffs, 1546.

William Steed, Alderman.

Richard Morgan, Knight, chief Justice of the Common P^eas, 1556.

Mauricius Griffith, Bishop of Rochechester, 1559.

Robert Blanch, Girdler, 1567.

Robert Belgrave Girdler.

William Brame.

John Cooper, Fishmonger, Alderman, who was put by his turn of Maioralty, 1584.

Sir William Garrard, This Monument (...) lately reedified, (...) new fenced
by Sir John (...), his son, and L. Mayor 1602.
Haberdasher, Mayor 1555. a grave, sober, wise and discreet Citizen, equal
with the best, and inferior to none of our time, deceased 1571. in the Parish
of Saint Christopher, but was buried in this Church of Saint Magnus, as in the
Parish where he was borne. A fair Monument is here raised on him.

Robert Harding, Salter, one of the Sheriffs, 1568.

Simon Low, Merchant-Taylor, Equire, etc.

Then is the Parish Church of Saint Margarets on Fish-street Hill, a proper
Church; but Monuments it has none; only one of no^e, and well worth the
observation, being unknown, and nor ^ound till very lately; whereof Master
VVood (the reverend Parson of the Church, made me acquainted by his Clerk, to
have me come see it; which I did very thankfully. Finding it to be the figure
of a man of good respect, lying upon his Tomb, according to the manner of
persons of Antiquity. And this inscription he delivered me, written with his
own hand:

Joannes de Coggeshall, Civis and Cordarius de Parochiae S. Margaretae de
Bridgestreet, London. Anno 1384.

An. Reg. Richardi Secundi, Octavo.

Testamentum irrotulat. in Hustingo London, die Lunae in Festo S. Leonai di
Abbatis. An. Reg. Richardi Secundi, 9.

He lies buried in the said Church wall, under the Marble stone in the Window,
next to S. Peter's Altar on the North side of the Church.

A foot-way passes by the South side of this Church, from Fish-street hill
into Rother-lane.

Up higher on this Hill, is the Parish Church of Saint Leonard Milke-Church,
Parish Church of S. Leonards Milke-Church
so termed of one William Melker, an especial builder thereof, but commonly
called Saint Leonards East-cheape, because it stands at East-cheape corner.

Monuments there be of the Doggets, namely;

Walter Dogget, Vintner, one of the Sheriffs, 1380.

John Dogget, Vintner, and Alice his wife, about 1456.

This John Dogget gave Lands to that Church.

William Dogget, etc. And none else of note.

This Church, and from thence into Little East-cheape, to the East end of the
said Church, is of the Bridge Ward.

Then higher in Grasse-street, Grasse-Church of S. Bennet Grasse-church.
is the Parish Church of Saint Bennet, called Grasse-Church, of the Herb
Market there kept: this Church also is of the Bridge Ward, and the farthest
North end thereof. Some Monuments remain there undefaced:

As of John Harding, Salter, 1576.

John Sturgeon, Haberdasher, Chamberlain of London.

Philip Cushen, or Corsine, a Florentine, and a famous Merchant, 1600.

The Customs of Grasse-church Market, in the reign of Edward the third, as I
have read in a Book of Customs, Customs of Grasse-street Market.
were these: Every foreign Cart, laden with Corn, or Malt, coming thither
to be sold, was to pay one halfepenny. Every foreign Cart bringing Cheese,
two pence. Every Cart of Corn and Cheese together (if the Cheese be more worth
than the Corn) two pence; and if the Corn be more worth than the Cheese, it
was to pay a halfe-penny. Of two horses laden with Corn or Malt, the Bailiffe
had one farthing: the Cart of the Franchise of the Temple, and of S. Mary le
Grand, paid a farthing: the Cart of the Hospital of S. John of Jerusalem, paid
nothing of their proper goods: and if the corn were brought by Merchants to
sell again, the load paid a halfe-penny, etc.

On the West side of this Ward, at the North end of London Bridge, Thames
street.
is a part of Thames street, which is also of this Ward; to wit, so much as of
old time was called Stock-fishmonger Row, Stockfishmongers Row.
of the Stock-fish-mongers dwelling there, down West to a Water gate, of old
time called Ebgate, Ebgate lane
since Ebgate lane, and now the Old Swan, which is a common staire on the
Thames, but the passage is very narrow, by means of encrochments.

On the South side of Thames street, about the midway betwixt the Bridge foot
and Ebgate lane, Fishmongers Hall.
stands the Fishmongers Hall, and diverse other fair houses for Merchants.

These Fishmongers were sometimes of two several Companies, to wit
Stockfishmongers, Antiquities of the Fishmongers, 1290
and Salt-fishmongers, of whose antiquity I read, that by the name of
Fishmongers of London, they were for forestalling, etc. contrary to the Laws
and constitutions of the City, fined to the King at 500. Marks, the 18. of
King Edward the first. More, that the said Fishmongers, A triumphant show made
by the Fishmongers for the victory of the King*
hearing of the great victory obtained by the same King against the Scots, in
the 26. of his reign, made a triumphant and solemn show through the City,
with diverse Pageants, and more than 1000. horsemen, etc. as in the Chapter of
Sports and Pastimes. These two Companies of Stocke-fishmongers and
Salt-fishmongers, of old time had their several Halls, to wit, in Thames
street twain, in New Fish-street twain, and in Old Fish-street twain:
Fishmongers had 6. Hals in London.
in each place one for either Company; in all six several Hals, the Company
was so great, as I have read, and can prove by Records.

These Fishmongers have been jolly Citizens, Fishmongers, 6. of them Majors in
24. years.
and six Majors of their Company in 24. years; to wit, Walter Turk, 1350.
John Lofkin, 1359. John Wroth, 1361. John Pechie, 1362. Simon Morden, 1369. and
William Walworth, 1374. It followed, that in the year 1382. through the
counsel of Ioh. Northhampton, Draper, then being Mayor, William Issex, John
More, Mercer, and Richard Northbury, Fishmongers for their greetings envied of
the other companies.
the said Fishmongers were greatly troubled, hindered of their liberties, and
almost destroyed, by congregations made against them: So that in a Parliament
at London, the controversy depending between the Mayor and Aldermen of
London, and the Fishmongers there, Nicholas Exton for the Fishmongers craved
the Kings protection.
Nic. Exton, Speaker for the Fishmongers, prays the King to receive him and
his Company into his protection, for fear of corporal hurt. Whereupon it was
commanded, either part to keep the peace, upon pain of losing all they had.
Hereupon a Fishmonger starting up, replied, that the complaint brought against
them by the moovers, etc. was but matter of malice; for that the Fishmongers,
in the reign of Edward the third, being chief Officers of the City,
Fishmongers by Parliament restored to their liberties.
had for their misdemeanors then done, committed the chief exhibitors of those
petitions to prison. In this Parliament, the Fishmongers (by the Kings Charter
patents) were restored to their Liberties. Notwithstanding, in the year next
following, to wit, 1383. John Cavendish, Fishmonger, craveth the peace against
the Chancellor of England, John Cavendish craved the peace againg the
Chancellor, challenged him of taking a bribe.
which was granted, and he put in sureties, the Earls of Stafford and
Salisbury. Cavendish challenges the Chancellor for taking a bribe of 10. l.
for favor of his Case: which the Chancellor by oath upon the Sacrament
avoideth. In further trial, it was found, that the Chancellours man (without
his Masters privitie) had taken it. Whereupon Cavendish was adjudged to prison,
and to pay the Chancellor 1000. Marks for slandering him.

After this, many of the Nobles assembled at Reding, to suppress the seditious
stirs of the said John Northampton, or Combarton, late Mayor, that had
attempted great and heinous enterprises, of the which he was convict; and when
he stood mute, nor would utter one word, it was decreed, that he should be
committed to perpetual prison, his goods confiscate to the Kings use, and that
he should not come within 100. miles of London during his life. He was therefore
sent to the Castle of Tintegall, Principal adversaries to the Fishemongers
condemnted to perpetual prison.
in the confines of Cornwall, and in the mean space the Kings servants
spoiled his goods. John More, Richard Northbury, and other, were likewise there
convict, and condemned to perpetual prison, and their goods confiscate, for
certain congregations by them made against the Fishmongers in the City of
London, Paten^
as is aforesaid; but they obtained and had the Kings pardon, in the 14. of his
reign, as appears of Record: and thus were all these troubles quieted.

Those Stock-fishmongers and Saltfishmongers were united in the year 1536. the
28. of Henry the 8. their Hall to be but one, Stock-fishmongers and
Salt-fishmongers united.
in the house given unto them by Sir John Cornwall, Lord Fanhope, and of
Ampthull, Sir Ioh. Cornwall created Baron (...) the 6. of Edw. 6.
in the Parish of Saint Michael in Crooked-lane, in the reign of Henry the
sixth.

Thus much have I thought good to note of the Fishmongers, men ignorant of
their Antiquities, and not able to show a reason why, or when they were joined
in amity with the Goldsmithes, Fishmongers joined in amity with the Goldsmiths.
do give part of their Arms, etc. Neither to say ought of Sir William
Walworth (the glory of their Company) more than that he slew Jack Straw, which
is a mere fable: VV. VValworth slandred by a fable of Jack Straw, T. VVal^^^ H.
Knight^ Lib. Eb^^.
for the said Straw was after the overthrow of the Rebels, taken, and by
judgment of the Mayor beheaded; whose confession at the Gallows is extant in
my Annals, where also is set down the most valiant and praiseworthy act of
Sir William Walworth, against the principal Rebel, Wat Tylar: as in reproof
of VValworth Monument in S. Michaels Church, I have declared, and wished to be
reformed there, as in other places.

On that South side of Thames street, Drink water VVharfe.
have ye Drinke-water VVharfe, and Fish Wharfe, Fish wharfe
in the Parish of S. Magnus. On the North side of Thames street is S. Martins
lane, a part of which lane is also of this Ward; to wit, on the one side to a
Well of water, and on the other side, as far up as against the said Well.
Then is S. Michaels Lane, part whereof is also of this Ward, up to a Well
there, etc.

Then at the upper end of New-Fish-street, Crooked lane.
is a Lane turning toward Saint Michaels Lane, and is called Crooked-lane, of
the crooked windings thereof. Above this Lanes end, upon Fish-street Hill, is
one great house, for the most part builded of stone, which pertained sometime
to Edward the black Prince, son to Edward the third, Edward the black
Prince.
who was in his life time lodged there.

It is now altered to a common Hosterie, having the Black Bell for a sign.
Above this house, at the top of Fish-street Hill, is a turning into Great
East-cheape, and so to the corner of Lombard street, over against the
North-west corner of Grasse-Church. And these be the whole bounds of this
Bridge Ward within: The which has an Alderman and his Deputy; for the
Common-Counsell, 16. Constable, 15. Scavengers, 6. for the Ward-more Inquest,
sixteen, and a Beadle. It is is taxed to the Fifteen in London, at forty
seven pounds.

CANDLEWICKE STREET WARD.
CAndlewicke street, Candlewick street, or Candle-wrightstreet Ward.
or Candlewright street Ward, begins at the East end of Great East-Cheape,
it passes West through East-Cheape to Candlewright street, and through the same
down to the North end of Suffolk lane, on the South side, and down that
Lane, by the west end of S. Laurence Churchyard, which is the farthese West
part of that Ward. The street of Great East-Cheape, Great East-cheape.
is so called of the Market there kept in the East part of the City, as
West-Cheap is a Market so called, being in the West.

This East-Cheape is now a flesh-Market of Butchers, East-cheape a Cooks row.
there dwelling on both sides of the street; it had sometime also Cooks mixed
amongst the Butchers, and such other as sold victuals ready dressed of all
sorts. For of old time, when friends did meet, and were disposed to be merry,
they went not to dine and sup in Taverns, but to the Cooks, where they called
for meat what them liked, which they always found ready dressed, and at a
reasonable rate, as I have before showed.

In the year 1410. the 11. of Henry the fourth, The kings sons beaten in East
Cheap.
upon the Even of Saint John Baptist, the Kings sons, Thomas and John, There
was no Tavern then in East-cheape*
being in East-Cheape at Supper, (or rather at breakefast; for it was after the
Watch was broken up, betwixt two and three of the clock after midnight) a
great debate happened between their men, and other of the Court, which lasted
one hour, till the Mayor and Sheriffs with other Citizens appeased the same:
for the which afterward, the said Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs, were called
to answer before the King; his sons and diverse Lords being highly moved
against the City. At which time, William Gascoigne, Chief Justice, required
the Mayor and Aldermen, for the Citizens, to put them in the Kings grace:
whereunto they answered, that they had not offended, but (according to the Law)
had done their best in stinting debate, and maintaining of the peace: upon
which answer the King remitted all his ire, and dismissed them.

And to prove this East-Cheape to be a place replenished with Cooks, it may
appear by a Song, called London lickepenny, made by Lidgate a Monk of Bury, in
the reign of Henry the fifth, in the person of a Countryman coming to
London, and traveling through the same. In West-Cheap linen cloth sold, but no
silks spoken (...)
In West-Cheape (says the Song) he was called on to buy fine Lawne, Paris
thread, Cotton Vmble, and other linen clothes, and such like: (he speaks of
no silks) In Cornehill, to buy old apparel, and household-stuffe, where he
was forced to buy his own Hood, Fripparia Vpholders upon Conhill, sellers of
old apprrell and household stuff.
which he had lost in Westminster Hall: In Candlewright street, Drapers
proffered him cheap Cloth: In East-Cheape, the Cooks cried hot Ribs of Beef
roasted, Pies well baked, and other victuals: There was clattering of Pewter
pots, East-cheape.
Harp, Pipe and Sawtrie; yea by cock, nay by cock, for greater oaths were
spared: some sang of Ienkin and Julian, etc. all which melody liked well the
passenger, but he wanted money to abide by it, and therefore gat him into
Gravesend Barge, and home into Kent.

Candlewright (so called in old Records of the Guild Hall of Saint Mary
Overies, Candle-wright or Candlewick street is a working place.
and other) or Candlewicke street; took that name (as may be supposed) either
of Chandlers, or makers of Candles, both of Wax and Tallow: for Candlewright is
a maker of Candles; or of week, which is the Cotton or Yarne thereof: or
otherwise Wike, which is the place where they used to work them; as
Scalding-wike by the Stocks Market, was called of the Poulters dressing and
scalding their Poultrie there. And in diverse Countries, Dayrie-houses, or
Cottages wherein they make Butter and Cheese, are usually called Wickes. There
dwelled also of old time, diverse Weavers of woollen Clothes, Weavers in
Candlewick street.
brought in by Edward the third. For I read that in the 44. of his reign, the
Weavers brought out of Flanders, Weavers brought out of Flanders and Brabant.
were appointed their meetings to be in the Churchyard of S. Laurence Poultney,
and the Weavers or Brabant in the Churchyard of S. Mary Sommerset. There were
then in this City, Weavers of diverse sorts, to wit, of Drapery or Tapery, and
Napery. These Weavers of Candlewicke street, being in short time worn out,
their place is now possessed by rich Drapers, sellers of woollen cloth, etc.

On the North side of this Ward, at the West end of East-cheape, have ye S.
Clements lane, S. Clements lane.
a part whereof (on both sides, is of Candlewicke street Ward; to wit, somewhat
North, beyond the Parish Church of S. Clement in East-cheap. Parish Church of
S. Clement in East-cheape.
This is a small Church, void of Monuments, other than of,

Francis Barnam, Alderman, who deceased 1575. and of Benedict Barnam his son,
Alderman also 1598.

William Chartney and William Overie founded a Chauntery there.

Francisci Barneham, A fair Tomb on the North side of the Quire, made into
the wall.
Civis, Senatoris, Vicecomitis Londinensis: Aliciaeque Vxoris suae, e
Bradbrigeorum Familia aeternae memoriae.

Vixit Annos L X. Obiit X. Maii, 1576.

Filios genuit Martinum. Stephanum. Antonium. Benedictum.


Deo and Posteris.
Benedictus Barneham, filius junior Francisci Barneham, Another beautiful
Tomb on the South side of the Quire.
Senatoris, and quondam Vicecomitis London, cum iisdem honoribus, quibus Pater
summa cum laud in hac Vrbe functus fuisset. Et ex Dorothea Vxorae charissima,
filia Ambrosii Smith, unius e filiis Ioannis Smith, de Wocock, in Com.
Leicestriae, Armigeri; Quinque filias, Elizabetham, Aliciam, Dorotheam,
Bridgettam and Benedictam superstites and haeredes reliquisset: Quarii minor
natu Benedicta, paulo post hunc erectum Tumulum diem obiit. Ipse quod a terra
accepit, hic terra commendavit. Quod vero e Coelo, laetus lubensque Christo
reddidit, summumque sui desiderium omnibus bonis ob eximiam prudentiam,
doctrinam, eloquentiam, and praeclara in hanc Vrbem merita reliquit.

Vixit Annos 39. Obiit Aprilis die tertio, Anno Dom. 1598.
Next is Saint Nicholas Lane, for the most part on both sides of this Ward,
almost to S. Nicholas Church.

Then is Abchurch lane, Abchurch lane.
which is on both sides, almost wholly of this ward: The Parish Church of S.
Mary Abchurch.
the Parish Church there (called of S. Mary Abchurch, Apechurch, or Vpchurch,
as I have read it) stands somewhat near unto the South end thereof, on a
rising ground: It is a fair Church: Simon de Winchcombe founded a Chaunterie
there, the 19. of Richard the second. John Littleton founded another, and
Thomas Hondon another: and has the Monuments of,

I. Long, Esquire, of Bedfordshire, 1442.

William Wilkenson, Alderman, 1519.

William Iawdrell, Tailor, 1440.

Sir James Hawes, Mayor, 1574.

Sir John Branch, Mayor, 1580.

John Minors.

William Kettle, etc.

Joanni Branche, A comely Monument in the South wall of the Quire.
Equiti, hujus Vrbis olim Praetori, viro bono, and prudenti, 24. Iulii, Anno
Dom. 1588. Aetatis suae 73. vita functo in Sepulchro Wilkinsoni Avi Materni
humato: Daniel Dun, Legum Doctor, ipsius ex Sorore Nepos posuit.

In felicem Memoriam, A fair Tomb in the wall at the East end of the Church.
piae, pulchrae and pudicae feminae, Dominae Helenae Branch, filiae venerabilis
Gulielmi Nicolson, olim Civis and Pennarii London:

Quondam (per quadraginta annos and eo amplius) uxoris viri dignissimi, Ioannis
Minors, Civis, acetiam Pannarii London: Cui peperit filium unum Rogerum, and
filias tres, Iosnnam, Ripinam, and Margaretam, omnes sine prole defunctos;
nuper (ad annum usque vigessimum) uxoris venerabilissimi viri Ioannis Branch,
militis Aurnati, Qnondam praeclarissimae Civitatis London H^rnoratissimi
Majoris.

Robertus Nicolson Generosus, exfratre Nepos, utriusque here is, and dictae
Dominae solus Executor, suis sumptibus spontaneis hoc Monumentum posuit.

Quam ter felicem, pietas, opulentia, forma Fecere in terris, modo suffragante
popello, Suff^agante Deo fidei, Constantia vivae, Aeternum in coelis, te nunc
jubet esse beata^.

Nonagenaria obiit 10. Aprilis, Anno Salutis, 1594.

This Dame Helen Branch, Widow to Sir John Branch, Knight, Lord Mayor of
London, An. 1580. gave fifty pounds to be lent to two young men of the Company
of Drapers, from four years to four years for ever, 50. l. Which Lady, gave
also to poor Maids marriages 10. l. And to the poor of Abchurch 10. l. To the
poor Prisoners in and about London, 20. l. Besides, 26. Gowns to poor men
and women, 26. l. And many other worthy Legacies to the Universities, etc.

On the South side of this Ward, S. Michaels lane.
beginning again at the East, is S. Michaels lane, which lane is almost wholly
of this Ward, on both sides down toward Thames street, to a Well or Pump
there. On the East side of this lane is Crooked lane aforesaid, Crooked lane.
by St. Michaels Church, toward New-Fishstreet. One the most ancient house in
this lane, Leaden Porch in Crooked lane.
is called the Leaden Porch, and belonged sometime to Sir John Merston, Knight,
the first of Edward the fourth: It is now called the Swanne in Crooked lane,
possessed of strangers, and selling of Rhenish Wine. The Parish Church of this
S. Michaels, Parish Church of S. Michael in Crooked lane.
was sometime but a small and homely thing, standing upon part of that ground,
wherein now stands the Parsonage house: and the ground thereabout was a
filthy plot, by reason of the Butchers in East-cheap, who made the same their
Laystall.

W. de Burgo gave two Messuages to that Church in Candlewick street, 1317. John
Loveken Stock-fishmonger, four times Mayor, builded (in the same ground) this
fair Church of S. Michael, and was there buried in the Quire, under a fair
Tomb, with the Images of him and his wife in Alabaster: the said Church has
been since increased with a new Quire, and side Chapels by Sir W. Walworth,
Stock-fishmonger, Mayor, sometime servant to the said John Loveken. Also the
Tomb of Loveken was removed, and a flat stone of gray Marble, garnished with
plates of Copper laid on him, as it yet remains in the body of the Church.

This William Walworth is reported to have slain Jack Straw: Fable of VV
Walworth and Jack Straw^ reproved.
but Jack Straw being afterward taken, was first adjudged by the said Mayor,
and then executed by the loss of his head in Smithfield. True it is, Praise of
VV. VValworth for his manhood in arresting of VVat Tylar.
that this William Walworth, being a man wise, learned, and of an incomparable
manhood arrested VVat Tylar, a presumptuous Rebel, upon whom no man durst lay
hand, whereby he delivered the King and Kingdom from most wicked tyranny of
Traitors. The Mayor arrested him on the head with a sound blow: whereupon Wat
Tylar furiously struck the Mayor with his Dagger, The Mayor was well armed,
and had on his head a Basenet.
but hurt him not, by reason he was well armed. The Mayor having received his
stroke, drew his Basiliard, and grievously wounded VVat in the neck, and
withal, gave him a great blow on the head: T. Wal^^^g, H. Knight^^ Li. S. Ma^y
Aborum.
in the which conflict, an Esquire of the Kings house, called John Cavendish,
drew his sword, and wounded VVat twice or thrice, even to the death: and VVat
spurring his horse, cried to the Commons to revenge him: the horse bare him
about 80. foot from the place, and there he fell down half dead: and by and
by, they which attended on the King, environed him about, so as he was not seen
of his Company: many of them thrust him in, in diverse places of his body, and
drew him into the Hospital of Saint Bartholemew, from whence again the Mayor
caused him to be drawn into Smithfield, and there to be beheaded. In reward of
this service (the people being dispersed) the King commanded the Mayor to put a
Basenet on his head: Mayor made Knight, and otherwise rewarded.
and the Mayor requesting why he should so do, the King answered, he being
much bound unto him, would make him Knight. The Mayor answered, that he was
neither worthy, nor able to take such an estate upon him; for he was but a
Merchant, and had to live by his Merchandise only. Notwithstanding, the King
made him to put on his Basenet, Order of making a Knight for service in the
field.
and then with a sword in both his hands, he strongly struck him on the neck,
as the manner was then. And the same day he made 3. other Citizens Knights (for
his sake) in the same place, to wit, John Philpot, Aldermen Knighted.
Nicholas Brember, and Robert Launde, Aldermen. The King gave to the Mayor 100.
pound land by year, and to each of the other 40. pound land yearly, to them
and their heirs for ever.

After this, S. Michaels Crooked lane.
in the same year, the said Sir William Walworth founded in the said Parish
Church of Saint Michael, a College, of a Master and nine Priests or Chaplens,
and deceasing 1385. was there buried in the North Chapel by the Quire:
Monument of Sir VV. VValworth defaced and since falsified, and so remains.
but his Monument being (amongst other by bad people) defaced in the reign of
Edward the sixth, and again since renewed by the Fishmongers, for lack of
knowledge, whatsoever before had been written in this Epitaph, they followed a
fabulous Book, and wrote Jack Straw, in stead of Wat Tylar: a great error,
meet to be reformed there, and elsewhere; and therefore have I the more at
large discoursed of this matter.

It has also been, and is now grown to a common opinion, that in reward of
this service done by the said William VValworth against the Rebel; that King
Richard added to the Arms of this City (which was Argent, a plain Cross
Gules) a Sword, Dunthorne.
or Dagger, (for so they term it) whereof I have read no such Record, but to
the contrary. I find, that in the fourth year of Richard the second, in a
full assembly made in the upper Chamber of the Guildhall, summoned by this
William Walworth, then Mayor, as well of Aldermen, as of the Common Council in
every Ward, for certain affairs concerning the King; it was there by common
consent agreed and ordained, that the old Seal of the Office of the Maioraltie
of the City, Old Seal of the Maioralty broken, and a new Seal made.
being very small, old, unapt, and uncomely for the honor of the City, should
be broken, and one other new should be had, Which the said Mayor commanded to
be made artificially, and honorable for the exercise of the said Office
thereafter in place of the other. In which new Seal, The Arms of this City were
not altered, but remain before: to wit, Argent, a plain Cross Gules, a Sword
of S. Paul in the first quarter, and no Dagger of VV. VValworth, as is fabuled.
besides the Images of Peter and Paul, which of old were rudely engraven, there
should be under the feet of the said Images, a Shield of the Arms of the said
City perfectly graven with two Lions supporting the same, and two Sergeants of
Arms, in the other part, one, and two Tabernacles, in which, above, should
stand two Angels between whom (above the said Images of Peter and Paul) should
be set the glorious Virgin. This being done, the old Seal of the Office was
delivered to Richard Odiham Chamberlain, who brake it, and in place thereof,
was delivered the new Seal to the said Mayor, to use in his Office of
Maioralty, as occasion should require. This new Seal seems to be made before
William VValworth was Knighted, for he is not there entitled Sir, as
afterward he was: and certain it is, that the same new Seal then made, is
now in use, and none other in that Office of the Maioralty. Which may suffice
to answer the former Fable, without showing of any evidence sealed with the old
Seal which was the Cross, and Sword of Saint Paul, and not the Dagger of
William VValworth.

Now, of other Monuments in that Church, Simon Mordon, Mayor, 1368. was buried
there.

John Olney, Mayor, 1446.

Robert March, Stocke-fishmonger, gave two pieces of ground to be a
Churchyard.

John Radwell, Stock-fishmonger, buried, 1415.

George Gowre, Esquire, son to Edward Gowre Stock-fishmonger, Esquire, 1470.

Alexander Purpoynt, Stock-fishmonger, 1373.

Andrew Burel, Gentleman of Grayes Inn, 1487.

John Shrow, Stock-fishmonger, 1487. with this Epitaph.

Farewell, my friends,
the tide abides no man,
I am departed hence,
and so shall ye.
But in this passage,
the best song that I can,
Is Requiem aeternam,
now Jesus grant it me:
When I have ended
all mine adversity,
Grant me in Paradise
to have a mansion,
That shedst thy blood
for my redemption.
John Finkell, one of the Sheriffs, 1487. was Knighted, and gave 40. pound to
this Church, the one half for his Monument.

John Pattesley, Mayor, 1441.

Thomas Ewen, Grocer, bare half the charges in building of the Steeple, and
was buried, 1501.

William Combs, Gent. of Stoke by Gilford in Surrey, 1502.

Sir John Brudge, Mayor, 1530. gave 50. pound for a house, Colledgehouse in
Crookedlane.
called the College in Crooked lane: he lies buried in S. Nicholas Hacon.

Walter Faireford, Robert Bar, Alexander Heyban, John Motte, John Gramstone,
John Brampton.

John Wood, Stock-fishmonger, 1531.

Sir Henry Amcots, Mayor, 1548. etc.

Hic jacet Richardus Gurneyus, Civitatis London Aldermanus: A comely small
Monument in the East end of the South I Will.
Qui tam summis quam infimis viris gratus, charusque semper fuit, tum ob
integritatem vitae ac humanitatem, tum propter curam Reipublicae singularem:
vixit cum dulcissima uxore sua Anna Annos Suscepitque ex ea duodecim liberos,
quorum septem superstites reliquit, cum summo omnium dolor excessit e vita
quinto die Martii, Anno Domini 1596. Aetatis suae LXXII.

Hic etiam uxor ejus Anna jacet, quae post viri obitum Annos tres, menses and
septimanas totidem vidua vivens, tandem just Aetatis morito, viro Nobili
nupsit, qui etiamsi ab illa magna commoda, emolumenta, immo honores accepit,
multa tamen illi contra spem, and merita amore juxta conjungali benevolentia
defecit, hoc nomine sibi accelerato senio. Cum jam Annos duodecim, menses duos,
and dies quinque illocum conjunxit, prae dolor ac angore, tricesmo primo
Augusti, 1612. Annum agens septuagesimum, secundam vitam clausit.

Relictis ex priore marito Richardo Gourneyo liberis quinque, justa e^ solennia
(a marito superstite denegata per filium unicum suum) Thoma Gourney pie
peragebantur, sumptibus ejus propriis, and in vita ipsi eo nomine mandatis,
vicesimo secundo September. Anno Salutis humanae, Millesimo sexcentesimo
duodecimo.

Here-under lies the bodies of Sir Henry Amcores, A goodly ancient Tomb
within the Southgrated Chapel.
Knight, Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, and Dame Ioane his wife. Which Sir
Henry Amcotes deceased the 5. day of September, Anno 1554, And the said Dame
Ioane deceased the 4. day of September, Anno Dom. 1573.

Hard by this Saint Michaels Church, Houses in Crookedlane. blown up with
Gunpowder.
on the South side thereof, in the year 1560. on the fifth of July, through
the shooting of a Gunne, which brake into the house of one Adrian Arten, a
Dutch man, and set fire on a Firkin and Barrel of Gunne-powder, four houses
were blown up, and diverse other sore shattered, eleven men and women were
slain, and sixteen so hurt and bruised, that they hardly escaped with life.

West from this Saint Michaels Lane, S. Martins Orgar lane and Parish Church.
is Saint Martins Orgar lane, by Candlewicke street, which Lane is on both
sides down to a Well, replenished with fair and large houses for Merchants,
and it is of this Ward: one of which houses was sometime called Beauchamps
Inn, as pertaining unto them of that family. Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of
Canturbury, commonly for his time was lodged there.

The Parish Church of Saint Martin Orgar is a small thing William Crowmer
Mayor, Parish Church of S. Martin Orgar.
builded a proper Chapel on the South side thereof, and was buried there in
an ancient Tomb, 1533.

John Matthew, Mayor, 1490.

Sir William Huit Mayor, 1559. with his Lady and daughter, wife to Sir Edward
Osburne.

Relph Tabinham, Alderman.

Alice, wife to Thomas Winslow.

Thorndon, Benedicke Reading, Thomas Harding, James Smith.

Richard Gainsford, Esquire.

John Bold, etc.

An ancient Tomb in the East end of the North I Will, of Robert Cosyn, Esquire;
Elizabeth his wife, and Robert his son, Gent. All there buried.

Tumulus VValburgis Gretsiin, Georgii Stecher, P. M. viduae. Obiit An. 1597.
19. Iulii. Filiaeabque; moerentes P. P.

A Memorial of John Frank, A fair Monument in the wall of the Chancell, East.
Esquire, and Cecilie his wife, who had issue 4. sons; viz. John. a Soldier;
Peter, Gentleman-usher, and daily wayter to Queen Anne; Robert, Gentleman
Usher, and Quarter-wayter to the said Queen: and Edward, a Soldier. And four
Daughters, viz. Elizabeth, Dorothie, Hester, and Jane.

For remembrance of whom, the said Peter Franck, who lies interred near unto
this place, bestowed the charge of this Monument. And the said Robert (being
his Executor) caused the same to be erected. And the which Peter dyed the 24.
day of October, 1612.

Then is there one other Lane, called S. Laurence, of the Parish Church there.
This Lane, down to the South side of the Churchyard, is of Candlewicke-street
Ward.

The Parish Church of Saint Laurence was increased with a Chapel of Jesus, by
Thomas Cole, for a Master and Chaplain: the which Chapel and Parish Church
was made a College of Jesus, and of Corpus Christi, Parish Church of S.
Laurence Poultney, made a College.
for a Master and seven Chaplains, by John Poultney, Mayor, and was confirmed
by Edward the third, the twentieth of his reign. Of him was this Church called
S. Laurence Poultney in Candlewick street, which College was valued at 79. l.
17. s. 11. d. and was surrendered in the reign of Edward the sixth.

Robert Radcliffe, Earl of Sussex, and Henry Radcliffe, Earl of Sussex, were
buried there.

Alderman Beswicke was buried there.

John Oliffe, Alderman.

Robert Brown, and others.

Here-under lies the body of William Beswyke, An anci^ Monument in the North
I Will, Eastward.
of Beswyke, Citizen, while he lived, and Draper, and sometime Alderman of
London, who deceased the 5. day of May, An. Dom. 1567.

John Olyffe, Alderman, lying under this stone, dyed the 26. day of June, 1577.
A fair stone on the ground in the same I Will.
Aged 65. years: He was married forty years to Ioane his wife: He had seven
children; Anne, John, Ioane, John, Thomas, Matthew, and Edward, who dyed all
without issue, save only Ioane, who married John Leigh, Esquire, and heir of
Addington in Surrey, and had issue Olyffe Leigh, now living.

EVery Christian heart
seeks to extol
The glory of the Lord, A very fair stone and fairly plated, in the South I Will
and body of the Church.

Our only Redeemer:
Wherefore Dame Fame
must needs inroll
Paul VVithypoll his child,
by love and Nature,
Elizabeth, the wife
of Emanuel Lucar,
In whom was declared
the goodness of the Lord,
With many high virtues,
which truly I will record.
She wrought all Needle-workes
(...) men exercise,
With Pen; Frame, or Stool,
all Pictures artificial,
Curious Knots or ^railes,
what fancy would devise,
Beasts, Birds, or Flowers,
even as things natural:
Three manner hands could she
write, them fair all.
To speak of Algorisme,
or accounts, in every fashion,
Of women, (...) like
( I think) in all this Nation.
Dame Cunning her gave
a gift right excellent,
The goodly practice
of her Science Musical,
In diverse tongues to sing,
and play with Instrument,
Both Vial and Lute,
and also Virginal;
Not only upon one,
but excellent in all.
For all other virtues
belonging to Nature,
God her appointed
a very perfect creature.
Latin and Spanish,
and also Italian,
She spoke, writ, and read,
with perfect utterance;
And for the English,
she the Garland wan,
In Dame Prudence School,
by Graces purveyance,
which clothed her with Virtues,
from naked Ignorance:
Reading the Scriptures,
to judge light from dark,
Directing her faith to Christ,
the only Mark.
The said Elizabeth deceased the 29. day of October, An. Dom. 1537. Of years
not fully 27. This Stone, and all hereon contained, made at the cost of the
said Emanuel, Merchant-Taylor.

Thus much for this Ward, and the Antiquities thereof. It has an Alderman and
his Deputy; common. Counselors, eight; Constables, eight, Scavengers, six;
Ward-mote Inquest men, twelve, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteen at
sixteen pounds.

WALBROOKE WARD.
WAlbrooke Ward begins at the west end of Candlewicke street Ward.
VValbrooke Ward.
It runs down Candlewicke street, West toward Budge row. It has on the
North side thereof S. Swithens Lane, so called of S. Swithens, a Parish Church
by London-stone. This Lane is replenished (on both the sides) with fair
builded houses, and is wholly of Walbrooke Ward. Parish Church of S. Swithen.
The said Parish Church of S. Swithen stands at the South-west corner of this
lane. License was procured, to new build and increase the said Church and
Steeple, in the year 1420. Sir John Hend, Draper, Mayor, was an especial
Benefactor thereunto, as appears by his Arms in the Glasse-windowes, even in
the tops of them; which is in a Field Argent, a chief Azure, a Lion passant
Argent, a Cheveron Azure, three Escalops Argent. He lies buried in the body of
this Church, with a fair stone laid on him, but the Plates and inscriptions
are defaced.

Roger Depham, Alderman.

Thomas Aylesbourgh, William Neve, and Matilde Caxton, founded Chauntries, and
were buried there.

John Butler, Draper, one of the Sheriffs, 1420.

Ralph Iocoline, Mayor, a Benefactor, buried in a fair Tomb.

William White, Draper, one of the Sheriffs, 1482. and others.

Stephanus Slanie, A fair Tomb in the East end of the North I Will.
Miles, Senator, Vicecocomes et Praetor clementissimae istius Vrbis; Cum summa
fide, nec minore prudentia iis Honoribus functus fuisset, Et ex Margareta
Conjuge, Filia Gaspari Phesant, Armig. quinque filios and sex filias
suscepisset: Tandem satur annis, Aetatis 84. Salutis, 1608. Decembris 27.
Animam Coelo, corpus humo reddidit.

Stephanus, filior, natu maximus, superstite Anna unica filia ex Catharina,
filia Walteri Aston, Militis. Obiit Gasparus and Thomas Coelibes, Richardus
Biennis, Timotheus Bimestris obierunt. Maria primogenita superstes, nupta
primum Richard Broadgate, Mercatori, deinde Humphrey Weld, Militi, Maiori
istius Civitatis: Alicia moritur, Elizabetha superstes nupta Samueli Lennard,
Militi. Alicia obiit: Anna nupta Thomae Culpepper, Armig. cui cum tres liberos
superstites peperisset, e vita migravit. Martha Coelebs expiravit.

In Obitum viri vere Venerabilis, Domini Ioannis Heart, Equitis, olim hujus
Civitatis Praetoris, and hujus Ecclesiae Patroni, Carmen Funebre.
QVis lauds memorare
tuas? A goodly Tomb, East, in the upper end of the South I Will,
Quis facta valebit
Nuper ad Aethereos
Heart reverse polos?
Quis genium ingenium
magnaeque capacia Curae
Pectora, Londino
pectora grata tuo?
Aspice qui dubitas,
surgentia culmina Musis,
Illa sub arctois
qua jacet ora plagis,
Nunc obiit. Cohibe
lachrymas, nec credito Lector
Vitam, quae fuerat
non nisi sancta, brevem.
Near this place lies the body of the worshipful, A fair Monument in the
South wall of the Church.
Randall Manning, Esquire, Merchant-Adventurer, Citizen and Skinner of London:
who had to wife, Katharine, daughter of Nicholas Dewren, Citizen and Goldsmith
of London: And had by her sundry children, whereof eight married, and six of
them were living at his death. He departed this life at the age of 78. years,
on the nineteenth day of January, Anno Domini, 1611.

Master Bartholomew Barnes, A small Memory on a pillar in the middle I Will
Citizen, Mercer, and Merchant-Adventurer, a worshipful and wise Gentleman,
and a worthy friend and favourer of Religion. He had fined both for Sheriff
and Alderman, and at last, being 61. years old, sickned, died, and was buried
at Bathe, October the first, 1606. and left behind him Margaret his wife; by
whom he had issue, Bartholomew, Margaret and Mary.

Bartholomaeus adest
tumulo Barnesius isti
Nomen adest, non cum
nomine corpus inest.
Sexaginta nimis,
quem sex donasse ministros
Constat, erat tantus
Religionis amor.
Attigerat sums
quos abnuit urbis honores,
Subcomitis fasces,
patriciamque togam.
Iamque sui luctum
desideriumque reliquit
Nato and natabus
cum genetrice tribus.
In the middle I Will lies the body of Walter Plummer, In the middle I Will upon a
pillar.
of this City and Parish, Merchant-taylor, who departed this life in March,
1607. Also of Elizabeth his Wife, daughter of Robert Delacre, who dyed in Anno
1595. And had together five sons, and one daughter, and left living three
sons, John, Edward and Thomas. John Plummer of London, Esquire, one of those
sons, dyed in September, 1603. and lies here buried: who had two sons, and
one daughter, whereof John and Elizabeth were living at his death, and his wife
with child of a third son.

Discesserunt e vita Anno Aetatum suarum 78. and 58.

No living creature lives so long, A fair plated stone in the middle I Will.

but once must needs give place,
When doleful Death, that Champion strong,
arrests them with his Mace.
Example take by me,
which did my life enjoy
The space of sixty years, lack three,
which Death did then destroy.
Like thee I was sometime,
but now am turned to dust,
As thou at length (O earth and slime)
return to ashes must.
Of the Company of Clothworkers
a brother I became,
A long time in the Livery,
I lived of the same.
Then Death that deadly stroke did give,
which now my joys does frame,
In Christ I dyed, by Christ to live,
John Rogers was my name.
My loving wife and children two,
my place behind supply,
God grant them living so to do,
that they in him may dye.
He departed the 5. day of August, An. Dom. 1576. And she then living, did
also decease the, etc.

Triste puer Carmen
Patris posui Monumente,
Hic lapis ut possit
Carmina scripta loqui.
This sorrowful Verse, I silly son
my Fathers Grave did give,
That it might speak now he is dead,
as though he still did live.
On the North side of this Church and Churchyard, is one fair and large
builded house, Prior of Tortington his Inn.
sometime pertaining to the Prior of Tortington in Sussex, since to the Earls
of Oxford, lately to Sir John Heart, Oxford Place by Londonsi^nt.
Alderman, and now to Master Humphrey Smith, Alderman of this City: which
house has a fair Garden belonging thereunto, lying on the West side thereof.
On the backeside of two other houses in Walbrooke, in the reign of King Henry
the seventh, Sir Richard Empson, Empson and Dudley.
Knight, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, dwelled in one of them, and
Edmond Dudley, Esquire, in the other: either of them had a door of intercourse
into this Garden, wherein they met, and consulted on matters at their pleasures.
In this Oxford Place Sir Ambrose Nicholas kept his Maioraltie: since him, the
said Sir John Heart; and now the said Master Humphrey Smith dwells in it.

On the South side of this high street, London stone.
near unto the channel, is pitched upright a great stone, called
London-stone, fixed in the ground very deep, fastened with bars of Iron, and
otherwise so strongly set, that if Carts do run against it through
negligence, the wheels be broken, and the stone it self unshaken.

The cause why this stone was there set, the time when, or other memory thereof
is none; but that the same has long continued there, is manifest, namely,
since (or rather before) the Conquest. For in the end of a fair written
Gospel book, Lib. Trint.
given to Christ's Church in Canturbury, Antiquity of London stone.
by Ethelstane, King of the West Saxons, I find noted of Lands or Rents in
London belonging to the said Church, whereof one parcel is described to lie
near unto London-stone. Of later time we read, that in the year of Christ,
1135. the first of King Stephen, a fire, which began in the house of one
Aliward, near unto London-stone, consumed all East to Ealdgate, in which fire
the Priory of the holy Trinity was burnt, and West to S. Erkenwalds shrine in
Paul's Church: and these be the eldest notes that I read thereof.

Some have said, Read Mr. John Speed, what he says thereof, and of the like
stones.
this stone to be set there, as a mark in the middle of the City within the
wall: but in truth it stands far nearer to the River of Thames, than to the
wall of the City.

Some others have said, the same to be set, for the tendering and making of
payment by debtors to their creditors, at their appointed days and times, till
of later time, payments were more usually made at the Font in Ponts Church, and
now most commonly at the Royal Exchange. Some again have imagined, the same
to be set up by one John or Thomas London-stone, dwelling there against it; but
more likely it is, that such men have taken name of the Stone, than the Stone
of them; as did John at Noke, Thomas at Style, William at Wall, or at Well, etc.

Down west from this Parish Church, and from London-stone, VValbrooke street.
have ye VValbrooke corner: from whence runs up a street, North to the
Stocks, called Walbrooke, because it stands on the East side of the same
Brook, by the Bank thereof, and the whole Ward takes name of that street. On
the East side of this street, and at the North corner thereof, is the Stocks
Market, which had this beginning:

About the year of Christ, Stocks Market.
1282. Henry Wallis, Mayor, caused diverse houses in this City to be builded
toward the maintenance of London Bridge; namely, in one void place, near unto
the Parish Church, called Wooll-church, on the North side thereof, where
sometime (the way being very large and broad) had stood a pair of stocks, for
punishment of offenders. This building took name of those stocks, and was
appointed (by him) to be a Marketplace for fish and flesh in the midst of the
City. The midst of the City.
Other houses be builded in other places, as by Patent of Edward the first it
does appear, dated the tenth of his reign.

After this, in the year 1322. the 17. of Edw. 2. a decree was made by Hamond
Chickwell, Mayor, that none should sell fish or flesh out of the markets
appointed, to wit, Bridge-street, East-cheap, Old fish-street, S. Nicholas
shambles, and the said Stocks, on pain to forfeit such fish or flesh as were
there sold, for the first time, and the second time to lose their freedom:
which Act was made by commandment of the King, under his Letters Patents,
dated at the Tower the 17. of his reign: and then was this Stocks let to farm
for 46. l. 13. s. 4. d. by year. To. Fabian.
This Stocks Market was again begun to be builded, in the year 1410. in the
11. of Henry the 4. and was finished in the year next following. In the year
1507. the same was rented 56. l. 19. s. 10. d. And in the year 1543. John
Cotes being Mayor, there was in this Stocks Market for Fishmongers, 25. boords
or stalles, rented yearly to thirty four pounds, thirteen shillings, four
pence: there was for Butchers 18. boords or stalles, rented at one and forty
pounds, sixteen shillings, four pence; and there were also Chambers above,
sixteen, rented at five pounds thirteen shillings four pence, in all, 82. l.
3. s.

Next unto this Stocks is the Parish Church of S. Mary Wooll-Church, Parish
Church of S. Mary Wool Church.
so called of a Beam placed in the Churchyard, which was thereof called
Wooll-Church Haw, of the Tronage or weighing of Wool there used. Tronage or
weighing of wool, caused the Church to be called VVooll-Church Haw.
And to verify this, I find amongst the Customs of London, written in
French, in the reign of Edward the second, a Chapter entitled, Les Customs de
VVooll-Church Haw, wherein is set down, what was there to be paid for every
parcel of Wool weighed. This Tronage, or weighing of Wool, till the sixth of
Richard the second, was there continued: John Churchman then builded the
Custom House upon Wool Key, to serve for the said Tronage, as is before
showed in Tower-street Ward.

This Church is reasonable fair and large, and was lately new builded, by
License granted in the 20. of Henry the sixth, with condition to be builded 15.
foot from the Stocks Market, for sparing of light to the said Stocks. The
Parson of this Church is to have 4. marks the year, for tithe of the said
Stocks, paid him by the Masters of the Bridge-house, by a special decree made
the second of Henry the seventh.

John VVingar, Grocer, Mayor 1504. was a great helper to the building of this
Church, and was there buried, 1505. He gave unto it by his Testament, two
large Basins of Silver, and 20. pounds in money.

Also Richard Shore, Draper, one of the Sheriffs, 1505. was a great Benefactor
in his life, and by his Testament, gave twenty pounds, to make a Porch at the
West end thereof, and was there buried.

Richard Hatfield of Steplemorden in Cambridge-shire, lies entombed there,
1467.

Edward Deoly, Esquire, 1467.

John Hanford, Grocer, made the Font of that Church, very curiously wrought,
painted and gilded, and was there buried.

John Archer, Fishmonger, 487.

Anne Cawood founded a Chauntrie there, etc.

In Sevenoke, A fair stone at the Chancell door within.
into
the world my Mother brought me,
Hawlden House in Kent,
with Arms ever honored me;
Westminster Hall
(thirty six years after) knew me.
Then Seeking Heaven,
Heaven from the world took me.
VVhilome alive,
Thomas Scot men called me:
Now laid in Grave,
Oblivion covers me.
From the Stocks Market, and this Parish Church, East up into Lombard street,
some four or five houses on a side, and also on the South side of Wool-Church,
Beare-binder lane.
have ye Beare-binder lane, a part whereof is of this VValbrooke Ward.

Then down lower in the street called VValbrooke, Parish Church of S. Stephen
by VValbrooke.
is one other fair Church of S. Stephen, lately builded on the East side
thereof: for the old Church stood on the West side, in place where now stands
the Parsonage House, and therefore so much nearer to the Brook, even on the
bank.

Robert Chichly, Mayor in the year 1428. the sixth of Henry the sixth, gave to
this Parish of S. Stephen one plot of ground, containing 208. foot and a half
in length, and 66. foot in breadth, thereupon to build their new Church, and
for their Churchyard. And in the seventh of Henry the sixth, the said Robert
(one of the Founders) said the first stone for himself, the second for
William Stondon, Mayor, with whose goods the ground that the Church stands
on, and the housing, with the ground of the Churchyard, was bought by the said
Chichley for two hundred marks from the Grocers, which had been letten before
for 26. marks the year. Robert Whittingham, Draper, laid the third stone.
Henry Barton then Mayor, etc.

The said Chichler gave more 100. l. to the said Work, and bare the charges of
all the Timber-worke on the Procession way, and laid the Lead upon it of his
own cost. He also gave all the timber for the roofing of the two side Isles,
and paid for the carriage thereof.

This Church was finished in the year 1439. The breadth thereof is 67. foot,
and length 125. foot; the Churchyard 90. foot in length, and 37. in breadth,
and more. Robert Whittingham (made Knight of the Bath) in the year 1432.
purchased the patronage of this Church from John, Duke of Bedford, Uncle to
Henry the sixth, and Edward the fourth, in the second of his reign, and gave
it to Richard Lee, then Mayor.

There be Monuments in this Church of Thomas Southwell, first Parson of this
new Church, who lies buried in the Quire.

John Dunstable, Master of Astronomy and Music, in the year 1453.

Sir Richard Lee, Mayor twice, who gave the said Parsonage to the Grocers.

Rowland Hill, Mayor, 1549.

Sir Thomas Pope, first Treasurer of the Augmentations, with his Wife Dame
Margaret.

Sir John Cootes, Mayor, 1542.

Sir John York, Knight, Merchant-Taylor, 1549.

Edward Iackman, Sheriff, 1564.

Richard Acheley, Grocer.

Doctor Owen, Physician to King Henry the 8.

John Kirkbie, Grocer, 1578. and others.

A friend to Virtue, In the South I Will on the ground, a fair stone

a lover of Learning,
A foe to Vice,
and vehement Corrector,
A prudent person,
all Truth supporting,
A Citizen sage,
and worthy Counselor,
A lover of Wisdom,
of Justice a furtherer:
Lo, here his corpse lies,
Sir Rowland Hill by name,
of London late Lord Mayor,
and Alderman of fame.
Venerabili viro Rogero Fenton, Under the Communion Table.
Lancastriensi, Aulae Penbrochianae in Academia Cantabrigiensi olim socio,
Sacrae Theologiae Doctori, viro insigniter docto, pio, dilecto, sed immatura
nimis morte obrepto: Sancti Stephani sua (dum viveret) Parochia, ex justo sensu
and sui and co^munis damni; hoc pii doloris testimonium cordibus prius
impressum viventium, jamque lapide tantum expressum Monumentum, ut sacrum
amoris sui memoriale,

Cum perpetuae memoriae voto posuit. Qui obiit 16. Jan. An. Dom. 1615. Aetatis
suae, 50.

Clauditur hoc tumulo, Two fair plated stones in the Chancell, each by other.

qui Coelum pectore clausit
Dunstaple 1. juris,
Astrorum conscius illo
Iudice novit hiramis
abscondita pandere coeli.
Hic vir erat tua laus,
tua lux, tua musica princeps,
Quique tuas dulces
per mundum sperseratonus,
Anno Mil. Equater,
semel L. trius jungito Christi.
Pridie natale sidus
transmigrat ad astra,
Suscipiant proprium
civem coeli sibi cives.
Musarum doctus
pietatis fidus alumnus, Another fair stone close by it.

Edwardus Monecroft
corpus inane jacet:
Spiritus Aetherea superest
tamen arce receptis,
Quo sibi dum vixit
januit ante viam.
Men's pia, larga manus
parsim dispersit egenis,
Divitias Coeli
Divitiasque Soli.
Within this Grave entombed lies, In the Chancell aside.

a man of honest fame,
A Grocer of this Noble Town,
John Kirkbie was his name.
He lived forty years and nine,
in credit with the best:
He dyed such time as here you see,
his soul in heaven does rest.
Obiit 17. die Iulii, An. Dom. 1578. Hic jacet Thomas Pope, An ancient Tomb in
the North I Will of the Quire.
primus Thesaurarius Augmentationum: Et domina Margareta uxor ejus: Quae quidem
Margareta obiit 16. die Ianuarii, An. Dom. 1538.

This life has on earth
no certain while,
Example by John, Mary, A fair Gravestone in the North Cloister.

and Oliver Style,
Who under this stone
lie buried in the dust,
And puts you in memory
that dye all must.
John Style borne in An. 1582.
the 22. of May,
Dyed in An. 1583.
of June the 25. day.
Also the 5. of October, 1583.
Mary Style borne was,
The 5. of August, 1585.
out of this life did pass.
Oliver Style the 25. of February, 1584.
this mortal life begun,
And ended the same the 9. of August, 1585.
his course then being run.
Thus may you see,
that as you are, so were we,
And as we now be,
even so shall ye.
Yet none can tell
the hour, nor when,
That gift was never
given to man:
Therefore while you
have time and space,
Pray unto God
for mercy and grace.
Lower down from this Parish Church, be diverse fair houses, namely one,
wherein of late Sir Richard Baker, a Knight of Kent, was lodged, and wherein
also dwelled Mr. Thomas Gore, a Merchant famous for Hospitality.

On the West side of this Walbrooke street, over against the Stocks Market, is
a part of the high street, called the Poultry, on the South Side west, till
over against S. Mildreds Church, and the Scalding wike, is of this Ward.

Then down again Walbrooke street, Buckles Bury.
some small distance, is Buckles Bury, a street so called of Buckle, that
sometime was owner thereof; part of which street on both sides, three or four
houses, to the course of the Brook, is of this ward, and so down Walbrooke
street, to the South corner: from whence, West, down Budge Row, some small
distance, to an Alley, and through that Alley, South, S. John upon VValbrooke
by the West end of Saint John's Church upon Walbrooke, by the South side and
East end of the same, again to Walbrooke corner. This Parish Church is called
S. John upon Walbrooke, because the West end thereof is on the very bank of
Walbrooke, Horshooe Bridge in Horshooe Bridge street.
by Horshooe Bridge, in Horshooe-Bridge street.

This Church was also lately new builded: for about the year 1412. license was
granted by the Mayor and Communalty, to the Parson and Parish, for the
enlarging thereof, with a piece of ground on the North part of the Quire, one
and twenty foot in length, seventeene foot in breadth, and three inches; and on
the South side of the Quire, one foot of the common soil.

There be no Monuments in this Church of any account, only these:

William Combarton, Skinner, who gave Lands to that Church, was there buried
1410.

John Stone, Tailor, one of the Sheriffs, 1464. was likewise buried there.

On the South side of Walbrook Ward, from Candlewicke street, in the midway
betwixt London-stone and Walbrooke corner, is a little Lane, with a turnepike
in the midst thereof, and in the same a proper Parish Church, Parish Church
of S. Mary Bothaw.
called S. Mary Bothaw, or Boat-haw, by the Erbar. This Church being near unto
Downegate, on the River of Thames, has the addition of Bothaw, or Boat-haw, of
near adjoining to an Haw, or Yard, wherein (of old time) Boats were made, and
landed from Downegate, to be mended, as may be supposed: for other reason I
find none, why it should be so called.

Within this Church and the small Cloystrie adjoining, diverse Noblemen and
persons of Worship have been buried, as appears by Arms in the windows, the
defaced Tombs, and print of plates, torn up and carried away: There remain
only of John West, Esquire, buried in the year 1408.

Thomas Huytley, Esquire, 1539. but his Monumeut is defaced since.

Lancelot Bathurst, etc.

Here lies the body of Lancelot Bathurst, Citizen, Grocer, and chosen Alderman
of this Honorable City: who deceased the 27. day of September, 1594. etc.

But the most memorable Monument of all other there, was that of Sir Henry
Fitz-Alwine, The first Lord Mayor of London, Sir Henry Fitz-Alwine, buried
there.
Draper, the first Lord Mayor of London that ever was, and continued (by
several elections) in the Maioraltie above 24. years. His dwelling house
remains yet in the Parish, divided now into two or three houses. His Monument
can be proved to be in that Church, as his Arms in the glass windows and
Grave-stones do sufficiently show. Besides, those houses were his gift to the
Drapers, and they pay a quit-rent in his name yearly for ever. All which are
sufficient to testify that he was not buried in the Priorie of the holy
Trinity within Ealdgate, (now called the Dukes Place) as formerly has been
avowched by Mr. Stowe; but that there his body rests, in undoubted hope of a
joyful resurrection. Such as make any doubt hereof, may be further satisfied
in the Drapers Hall.

The Erbar is an ancient place so called, but not of Walbrooke Ward, and
therefore out of that Lane, to Walbrooke corner, and then down, till over
against the South corner of Saint John's Church upon Walbrooke.

And this is all that I can say of VValbrooke Ward. It has an Alderman, and
his Deputy; Common-Counsellours, 11. Constables, 9. Scavengers, 6. for the
Wardmote Inquest, 13. and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteen in London, at
33. pounds, 5. shillings.

DOWNEGATE WARD.
DOwnegate Ward begin that the south end of VValbrooke Ward, Downegate Ward.
over against the East corner of Saint John's Church upon Walbrooke, and
descends on both the sides to Downegate, on the Thames, and is so called, of
that downe-going or descending thereunto: and of this Downgate the Ward takes
name. This Ward turns into Thames street VVestward, some ten houses on a
side, to the course of Walbrooke, but East in Thames street (on both sides) to
Ebgate lane, or Old Swanne, the land-side whereof has many Lanes turning up,
as shall be showed when I come to them.

But first to begin with the highstreet called Dowgate: Conduit upon Downegate.
at the upper end thereof is a fair Conduit of Thames water, castellated, and
made in the year 1568. at charges of the Citizens, and is called the Conduit
upon Downegate. The descent of this street is such, that in the year 1574. on
the fourth of September in the afternoon, there fell a storm of rain,
where-through the channels suddenly arose, and ran with such a swift course
toward the common shores, that a Lad of eighteen years old, A Lad of 18.
years old drowned in the Channel.
minding to have leapt over the channel, near unto the said Conduit, was
taken with the stream, and carried from thence toward the Thames with such a
violence, that no man, with staves, or otherwise, could stay him, till he came
against a Cart-wheele, that stood in the said Watergate, before which time he
was drowned, and stark dead.

On the West side of this street, is the Tallow-Chandlers Hal, Tallow-Chandlers
Hall.
a proper house, which Company was incorporated in the second year of Edward
the fourth.

Somewhat lower stands the Skinners Hall, Copped Hall, now Skinners Hall.
a fair house, which was sometime called Copped Hall, by Downegate, in the
Parish of S. John upon Walbrooke. In the 19, year of Edward the second, Ralph
Cobham possessed it, with five shoppes, etc.

This Company of Skinners in London, was incorporate by Edward the 3. in the
first of his reign: they had two Brotherhoods of Corpus Christi, viz. one at
St. Mary Spittle, the other at St. Mary Bethlem, without Bishopsgate. Richard
the second, in the eighteenth of his reign, granted them to make their two
Brotherhoods one, by the name of the Fraternity of Corpus Christi of Skinners.
Diverse royal persons were named to be Founders, and Brethren of this
Fraternity, Six Kings Brethren with the Skinners Company in (...).
to wit; Kings six, Dukes nine, Earls two, Lords one. Kings, Edward the
third, Richard the second, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth, and Edward the
fourth.

This Fraternity had also once every year, Their pompous Procession.
on Corpus Christi day, after noone a Procession, which passed through the
principal streets of the City, wherein was borne more than one hundred Torches
of Wax (costly garnised) burning light, and above two hundred Clerks and
Priests in Surpleffes and Coapes, singing. After the which, were the Sheriffs
servants, the Clerks of the Compters, Chaplains for the Sheriffs, the Majors
Sergeants, the Council of the City, the Mayor and Aldermen in Scarlet, and
then the Skinners in their best Liveries. Thus much to stop the tongues of
unthankful men, such as use to ask, Why have ye not noted this, or that,
and give no thanks for what is done?

Then lower down was a College of Priests, called Jesus Commons, a house well
furnished with Brass, Pewter, Napery, Plate, etc. besides a fair Library well
stored with Books, all which of old time were given to a number of Priests,
that should keep Commons there, and as one left his place (by death or
otherwise) another should be admitted into this room; but this order within
this thirty years being discontinued, the said house was dissolved and turned
to Tenements.

Down lower have ye Elbow-lane, and at the corner thereof was one great stone
house, Elbow-lane.
called Old-hall: it is now taken down, and diverse fair houses of Timber
placed there. This was sometime pertaining to William de pont le Arch, William
de pont le Arch his house.
and by him given to the Priory of S. Mary Overy in Southwarke, in the reign
of Henry the first. In this Elbow-lane is the Inholders hall, Inholders Hall.
and other fair houses: this lane runs West, and suddenly turns South
into Thames street, and therefore (of that bending) is called Elbow-lane. On
the East side of this Downegate street, is the great old house before spoken
of, called the Erbar, near to the Church of Saint Mary Bothaw; The Erbar S.
Mary Bothaw.
Geffrey Scroope held it by the gift of Edward the third in the foureteenth of
his reign. It belonged since to John Nevell, Lord of Raby, then to Richard
Nevell, Earl of Warwick; Nevell, Earl of Salisbury was lodged there, 1457.
Then it came to George Duke of Clarence, and his heirs males, by the gift of
Edward the fourth in the fourteen year of his reign. It was lately builded
by Sir Thomas Pullison Mayor, and was afterward inhabited by Sir Francis Drake,
that famous Navigator. Next to this great house, is a lane turning to Bushlane,
(of old time called Carter-lane, of Carts, and Carmen having Stables there) and
now called Chequer-lane, or Chequer-Alley, of an Inn called the Chequer.

In Thames street, Greenwitch lane, or Friar lane.
on the Thames side West from Downgate, is Greenwitch-lane, of old time so
called, and now Friar lane, of such a sign there set up. Ioyners Hall.
In this lane is the Joiners Hall, and other fair houses.

Then is Granthams lane, Granthams lane.
so called of John Grantham, sometime Mayor and owner thereof, whose house was
very large and strong, builded of stone, as appears by gates arched yet
remaining. Ralph Dodmer, first a Brewer, then a Mercer, Mayor, 1529. dwelled
there, and kept his Maioraltie in that house: it is now a Brewhouse, as it was
before.

Then is Downgate, whereof is spoken in another place. Cousin lane.
East from this Downgate, is Cousin lane, named of one William Cousin, that
dwelled there, in the fourth of Richard the second, as diverse his predecessors,
Father, Grandfather, etc. had done before him. William Cousin was one of the
Sheriffs in the year 1306. That house stands at the South end of the lane,
having an old and artificial conveyance of Thames water into it, and is now a
Dye-house, called Lambards Message. Adjoining to that house, A Ginne to convey
Thames water to Downegate Conduit.
there was lately erected an engine, to convey Thames water unto Downegate
Conduit aforesaid.

Next to this lane, on the East, is the Steleyard (as they term it) a place
for Merchants of Almaine, Steleyard for Merchants of Almaine.
that used to bring hither, as well Wheat, Rye, and other grain, as Cables,
Ropes, Masts, Pitch, Tar, Flax, Hemp, Linen Cloth, Wainscots, Wax,
Steel, and other profitable Merchandises. Unto these Merchants, in the year,
1259. Henry the third, at the request of his Brother Richard, Earl of
Cornwall, King of Almaine, granted, that all and singular the Merchants, having
a house in the City of London, commonly called Guilda Aula Theutonicorum,
Guilda Aula Theutonicorum.
should be maintained and upholden through the whole Realm, by all such
freedoms, and free usages or liberties, as by the King and his Noble
Progenitors time they had and enjoyed, etc. Edward the first renewed and
confirmed that Charter of Liberties, granted by his Father. And in the tenth
year of the same Edward, Henry Wallis being Mayor, a great controversy did
arise between the said Mayor, and the Merchants of the Haunce of Almaine, about
the reparations of Bishopsgate, then likely to fall, for that the said
Merchants enjoyed diverse privileges, in respect of maintaining the said Gate,
which they now denied to repair: for the appeasing of which controversy, the
King sent his Writ to the Treasurer, and Barons of his Exchequer commanding,
that they should make inquisition thereof: Before whom the Merchants being
called, when they were not able to discharge themselves, since they enjoyed the
liberties to them granted for the same; a Precept was sent to the Mayor and
Sheriffs, to distraine the said Merchants to make reparations, namely, Gerard
Marbod, Alderman of the Haunce; Ralph de Cussarde, a Citizen of Colen, Ludero
de Denevar, a Burgess of Trivar; John of Aras, a Burgess of Trivon; Bartram
of Hamburgh; Godestalke of Hundondale, a Burgess of Trivon; John de Dele, a
Burgess of Munstar, then remaining in the said City of London, for themselves,
and all other Merchants of the Haunce: and so they granted 210. Marks sterling
to the Mayor and Citizens, and undertook, that they and their successors
should (from time to time) repair the said Gate, and bear the third part of
the charges in money, and men to defend it, when need were.

And for this agreement, the said Mayor and Citizens granted to the said
Merchants their liberties, Merchants of the Haunce, of Almaine, licenced to lay
up their corn in Garners, but to sell it within 40. days after.
which till of late they have enjoyed, as namely, amongst other, that they
might lay up their Grain, which they brought into this Realm, in Innes, and
sell it in their Garners, by the space of forty days after they had laid it
up; except by the Mayor and Citizens they were expressly forbidden, because of
dearth, or other reasonable occasions. Also, they might have their Aldermen, as
they had been accustomed, foreseen always, that he were of the City, and
presented to the Mayor and Aldermen of the City, so often as any should be
chosen, and should take an oath before them, to maintain Justice in their
Courts, and to behave themselves in their Office according to Law, and as it
stood with the Customs of the City.

Thus much for their Privileges: Whereby it appears, that they were great
Merchants of Corn, brought out of the East parts hither, insomuch, that the
occupiers of husbandry in this Land were enforced to complain of them, for
bringing in such abundance, when the Corn of this Realm was at an easy
price. Act of Parliament forbidding Corn to be brought from beyond Se^.
Whereupon it was ordained by Parliament, That no person should bring into any
part of this Realm, by way of Merchandise, Wheat, Rye, or Barley, growing out
of the said Realm, when the quarter of Wheat exceeded not the price of 6. s.
8. d. Rye 4. s. the Quarter, and Barley 3. shillings the Quarter, upon
forfeiture the one half to the King, the other half to the seisor thereof.
These Merchants of the Haunce had their Guild hall in Thames street, in place
aforesaid, by the said Cousin lane. Their Hall is large, builded of Stone, with
three arched Gates toward the street, the middlemost whereof is far bigger
than the other, and is seldom opened, the other two be mured up: the same is
now called the Old Hall.

Of later time, to wit, in the sixth of Richard the second, they hired one
house next adjoining to their old Hall, which sometime belonged to Richard
Lions, a famous Lapidarie, one of the Sheriffs of Land. in the 49. of Edward
the third, and in the fourth of Richard the second, by the Rebels of Kent drawn
out of that house, and beheaded in West Cheap. This also was a great house,
with a large Wharfe on the Thames: and the way thereunto was called Windgoose,
or Wildgoose lane, Windgoose lane.
which is now called Windgoose Alley, for that the same Alley is (for the most
part) builded on by the Stilyard Merchants.

The Abbot of S. Albans had a Message here, with a Key given to him, in the
34. of Henry the sixth.

Then is one other great house, which sometime pertained to John Rainwell,
Stock-fishmonger, Mayor, and it was by him given to the Mayor and Communalty,
to the end, that the profits thereof should be disposed in deeds of piety:
which house in the 15. of Edward the fourth, was confirmed unto the said
Merchants in manner following, viz.

It is ordained by our Sovereign Lord and his Parliament, Patent.
that the said Merchants of Almaine, being of the Company called the Guildhall
Theutonicorum, (or the Flemish Geld) that now be, or hereafter shall be, shall
have, hold, and enjoy to them and their successors for ever, the said place,
called the Steele-house, yielding to the Mayor and Communalty an annual rent
of threescore and ten pounds, three shillings, four pence, etc.

In the year 1551. the fifth of Edward the sixth, Steelyard put down.
through complaint of the English Merchants, the liberty of the Steelyard
Merchants was seized into the Kings hands, and so it rests.

Then is Church lane, Church lane.
at the West end of Alhallowes Church, called Alhallowes the more in Thames
street, Parish Church of Alhallowes the more.
for a difference from Alhallowes the less, in the same street. It is also
called Alhallowes ad foenum in the Roperie, because Hay was sold near
thereunto, at Hay Wharfe, and Ropes of old time made and sold in the high
street. This is a fair Church, with a large Cloister on the South side
thereof, about their Churchyard, but foulely defaced and ruinated.

The Church also has had many fair Monuments, but now defaced: There remain
in the Quire some Plates on Grave-stones, namely of William Lichfield, Doctor
of Divinity, who deceased the year 1447. He was a great Student, and compiled
many Books, both Moral and Divine, in Prose and Verse; namely one, entitled,
The complaint of God unto sinful man. He made in his time 3083. Sermons, as
appeared by his own handwriting, and were found when he was dead.

One other Plate there is of John Brickles, Draper, who deceased in the year
1451. He was a great Benefactor to that Church, and gave by his Testament
certain Tenements, to the relief of the poor.

Nicholas Loven, and William Peston, founded Chauntries there.

Willielmus dudum
Lichfield quem mors fora pressit, A fair plated stone under the Communion
Table.

Ista post ludum
mundi sub rupe quiescit.
In domum rure
cultor, sator ac operosus,
Dum preciat ture,
pastor vigil, and studiosus.
Hanc aedem rexit,
ornavit and amplificavit,
Pignora provexit,
ac sacro dogmate pavit.
Pauperibus carus,
inopes in mente gerebat,
Consilio gnarus
dubitantibus esse solebat.
Christ pugil forcis
ejus dissolve reatus,
Vt vivat mortis
post morsum glorificatus.
Luce bis X. quat' I.
migrat Octobris sine panno,
Equat' X. quat' V.
semel I. ter. I. M. Karus.
Staprecor interne, Another fair stone lying by it*

qui transis aspice, cerne,
Non nitidis pannis,
sed olentibus oss'a Johannis
Brickles, ista mei
specus includit requiei,
Taliter indutus
tumulabere tu resolutus.
Dormit in hac cella
mea conjuge ac Isabella,
Appollinaris quam
vixit lux nece stratratus.
Aequater X. ter V.
semel I. bis and M. sociatis.
At the East end of this Church goes down a Lane, Hay-wharfe Lane.
called Hay-Wharfe lane, now lately a great Brew House, builded there by one
Pot; Henry Campion, Esquire, a Beere-brewer, used it, and Abraham his son
since possessed it.

Then was there one other Lane, VVoolseys Lane.
sometime called Woolseys gate, now out of use: for the lower part thereof,
upon the bank of Thames, is builded by the late Earl of Shrewsbury, and the
other end is builded on and stopped up by the Chamberlain of London. John
Butler, Draper, one of the Sheriffs, in the year 1420. dwelled there: He
appointed his house to be sold, and the price thereof to be given to the poor:
it was of Alhallowes Parish the less.

Then is there the said Parish Church of Alhallowes, Parish Church of
Alhallowes the less.
called the less; and by some, Alhallowes on the Cellers, for it stands on
Vaults: it is said to be builded by Sir John Poultney, sometimes Mayor. The
Steeple and Quire of this Church, stand on an arched Gate, being the entry to
a great house, called Cold Harbrough: Cold Harbrough.
the Quire of late being fallen down, is now again at length, in the year
1594. by the Parishioners new builded.

Touching this Cold Harbrough, I find, that in the 13. of Edward the second,
Sir John Abel, Knight, demised or let unto Henry Stow, Draper, all that his
capital Message, called the Cold Harbrough, in the Parish of All Saints ad
foenum, and all the purtenances within the Gate, with the Key which Robert
Hartford, Citizen, son to William Hartford, had, and ought, and the foresaid
Robert paid for it the rent of 33. shillings the year. This Robert Hartford
being owner thereof, as also of other lands in Surrey; deceasing without issue
male, left two daughters his Coheires, to wit, Idonia, married to Sir Ralph
Bigot, and Maude, married to Sir Stephen Cosenton, Knights, between whom the
said house and lands were parted. After the which John Bigot, Son to the said
Sir Ralph and Sir John Cosenton, did sell their moities of Cold Harbrough unto
John Poultney, son of Adam Poultney, the eighth of Edward the third. This Sir
John Poultney dwelling in this house, and being 4. times Mayor, the said house
took the name of Poultney's Inn. Notwithstanding, this Sir John Poultney, the
21. of Edward the third, by his Charter gave and confirmed to Humfrey de
Bohune, Earl of Hereford and Essex, his whole tenement, called Cold Harbrough,
with all the Tenements and Key adjoining, and appurtenances sometime pertaining
to Robert de Herford, on the way called Hay-wharfe lane, etc. for one Rose at
Midsummer, to him and his heirs, for all services, if the same were demanded.
This Sir John Poultney deceased 1349. and left issue, by Margaret his wife,
William Poultney, who dyed without issue: and Margaret his Mother was married
to Sir Nicholas Lovel, Knight, etc. Philip S. Clear gave two Messuages,
pertaining to this Cold Harbrough, in the Roperie, toward the enlarging of the
Parish Church and Churchyard of All Saints, called the less, in the 20. of
Richard the second.

In the year 1397. the 21 of Richard the second, John Holland, Earl of
Huntington, was lodged there, and Richard the second his Brother dined with
him: it was then counted a right fair and stately house. But in the next year
following, I find, that Edmond, Earl of Cambridge, was there lodged:
notwithstanding, the said house still retained the name of Poultney's Inn, in
the reign of Henry the sixth, the 26. of his reign. It belonged since to H.
Holland Duke of Excester, and he was lodged there in the year 1472. In the
year 1485. Richard the third, by his Letters Patents granted and gave to John
Writh, alias Garter, principal King of Arms of English men, and to the rest
of the Kings Heralds and Pursevants of Arms, all that Message with the
appurtenances, called Cold Harber, in the Parish of All Saints the little in
London, and their successors for ever. Dated at Westminster the second of
March, Anno regni suiprimo, without fine or see. How the said Heralds departed,
therewith, I have not read, but in the reign of Henry the eighth, the Bishop
of Durhams house, near Charing Cross, being taken into the Kings hand,
Cuthbert Tunstal, Bishop of Durham, was lodged in this Cold Harber, since the
which time it has belonged to the Earls of Shrewsbury, by composition (as is
supposed) from the said Cuthbert Tunstall. The last deceased Earl took it
down, and in place thereof builded a great number of small Tenements now
letten out for great rents, to people of all sorts.

Then is the Diers Hall, which Company was made a Brotherhood or Guild, The
Diers Hall.
in the fourth of Henry the sixth, and appointed to consist of a Guardian or
Warden, and a Communalty the 12. of Edward the fourth. Then be there diverse
large Brewhouses, and others, till you come to Ebgate lane, where that Ward
ends in the East. On the North side of Thames street be diverse lanes also,
the first is at the South end of Elbow-lane before spoken of, west from
Downegate, over against Greenewitch lane: then be diverse fair houses for
Merchants, and others all along that side. the next lane East from Downegate,
is called Bush lane, Bush-lane.
which turns up to Candlewicke street, Suffolk lane.
and is of Down-gate Ward. Next is Suffolk lane, likewise turning up to
Candlewicke street: Merchant Tailor School.
in this lane is one notable Grammar School, founded in the year 1561. by the
Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Merchant-taylors, in the Parish of S.
Laurence Poultney; Richard Hills, sometimes Master of that Company, having
before given 500. l. toward the purchase of an house, The Manner of the Rose.
called the Manor of the Rose, sometime belonging to the Duke of Buckingham,
wherein the said School is kept.

Then is there one other Lane, S. Laurence Lane.
which turns up to S. Laurence Hill, and to the Southwest corner of Saint
Laurence Churchyard: Poultney Lane.
then other Lane, called Poultney Lane, that goes up, of this Ward to the
South-east corner of S. Laurence Churchyard, and so down again, and to the
West corner of Saint Martin Orgar lane, and over against Ebgate lane: 13. Wards
on the east side of VValbrook, not having one house on the west of the said
Brook.
and this is all of Downegate Ward, the 13. in number lying East from the
watercourse of VValbrooke, and has not any one house on the west side of the
said Brook.

It has an Alderman, his Deputy; Common-Counsellors, nine; Constables, eight;
Seavengers, five; for the Wardmote Inquest, fourteen, and a Beadle: it is
taxed to the Fifteen at eight and twenty pounds.

WARDS ON THE WEST SIDE OF WALBROOKE: AND FIRST, OF VINTRIE WARD.
NOw I am to speak of the other Wards, Wards on the West side of Walbrooke,
and first, of Vintrie Ward.
12. in number, all lying on the West side of the course of Walbrook: and first
of the Vintry ward, so called of Vintners, and of the Vintrie, a part of the
bank of the River of Thames, where the Merchants of Bordeaux, craned their
Wines out of Lighters, and other Vessels, and there landed and made sale of
them, within forty days after, until the twenty eighth of Edward the first,
at which time the said Merchants complained, that they could not sell their
wines, paying poundage, neither hire houses or cellars to lay them in: and it
was redressed by virtue of the Kings Writ, directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs
of London, dated at Carlaveroke, or Carlisle. Since the which time, many fair
and large houses (with Vaults and Cellars for stowage of VVines, and lodging of
Bordeaux Merchants) have been builded, in place where before time were Cooks
houses: for Fitzstephen, in the reign of Henry the second, writes, that upon
the Rivers side, between the Wine in Ships, and the Wine to be sold in
Tavernes, was a common Cooks Row, etc. as in another place I have set down.
whereby it apeares, that in those days, (and till of late time) every man lived
according to his own professed Trade, Every man lived by his several
professed trade.
not any one interrupting another. The Cooks dressed meat, and sold no wine;
and the Taverner sold wine, but dressed no meat for sale, etc.

This Ward begins in the East, at the West end of Downegate Ward, at the
watercourse of Walbrooke, which parts them, to wit, at Granthams lane, on
the Thames side, and at Elbow lane, on the Land side: it runs along in
Thames street, West, some three houses beyond the Old Swan, a Brewhouse, and on
the Land side, some three houses West, beyond Saint James at Garlic hithe.

In breadth, this Ward stretches from the Vintrie North, to the wall of the
West gate of the Tower Royal: the other North part is of Cordwainer street
Ward.

Out of this Royal street by the South gate of Tower-Royall, runs a small
street, East to Saint John's upon Walbrooke, Horshoo-bridge street
which street is called Horseshoo-bridge, of such a bridge sometime over the
brook there, which is now vaulted over.

Then from the South gate West, runs one other street, Knight-riders street.
called Knight-riders street, by Saint Thomas Apostles Church, on the North
side, and Wringwren lane, by the said Church, at the West end thereof, and to
the East end of the Trinity Church in the said Knight-riders street, where this
Ward ends on that South side the street: but on the North side, it runs no
farther than the corner against the new builded Tavern, and other houses, in a
plot of ground where sometime stood Ormond place. Yet have ye one other lane
lower down in Royal street, stretching forth from over against Saint
Michaels Church, to and by the North side of Saint James Church by Garlic
hith, Kerion lane.
this is called Kerion lane: And thus much for the bounds of the Vintrie Ward.
Now on the Thames side west from Granthams lane, have ye Herbert lane, Brickles
lane.
or Brickles lane, so called of John Brikles, sometimes owner thereof.

Then is Simpsons lane, Simpsons lane.
of one Simpson; or Emperours-head lane, of such a sign: then the Three Cranes
lane, so called, not only of a sign of three Cranes at a Tavern door, but
rather of three strong Cranes of Timber, placed on the Vintrie wharfe by the
Thames side, to crane up Wines there, as is before showed: this Lane was of old
time, to wit, the 9. of Richard the second, Painted Tavern, or three Cranes
lane.
called the Painted Tavern lane, of the Tavern being painted.

Then next over against Saint Martins Church, is a large house builded of stone
and timber, with vaults for the stowage of wines, The Vintry Record.
and is called the Vintrie. There dwelled John Gisers, Vintner, Mayor of
London, and Constable of the Tower, and then was Henry Picard, Vintner, Mayor.
In this house Henry Picard feasted four Kings in one day; as in my Summary I
have showed.

Then next is Vannars lane, Vanners Lane.
so called of one Vannar that was owner thereof, it is now called Church lane,
of the coming up from S. Martins Church.

Next is Broad lane, for that the same is broader for the passage of Carts from
the Vintrie Wharfe, Broad lane.
than be the other lanes. At the North-west corner of this lane is the
Parish-Clerks Hall, Parish Clerks Hall.
lately by them purchased, since they lost their old Hall in Bishopsgate
street. Next is Spittle lane, of old time so called; since, Stodies lane,
Stodies lane
of the owner thereof, named Stodie. Sir John Stodie, Vintner, Mayor in the
year 1357. gave it, with all the Quadrant wherein Vintners Hall now stands,
Vintners Hall.
with the Tenements round about, unto the Vintners: the Vintners builded for
themselves a fair Hall, Almes-houses of the Vintners.
and also 13. Almes-houses there, for 13. poor people, which are kept of
charity, rent-free.

The Vintners in London were (of old time) called Merchants Vintners of
Gascoyne, and so I read them in the records of Edward the 2. the 11. year,
and Edward the 3. the ninth year, they were as well Englishmen, as strangers
borne beyond the Seas, but then subjects to the King of England, great Bordeaux
Merchants of Gascoyne and French wines; diverse of them were Majors of this
City; namely, Ioh. Adrian, Vintner, Reignold at Conduit, John Oxenford, Henry
Picard, that feasted the Kings of England, France, Scotland, and Cypres: John
Stodie, that gave Stodies lane to the Vintners: which four last named, were
Majors in the reign of Edward the third, and yet Gascoyne Wines were then to be
sold at London, not above 4. pence, nor Rhenish Wines above 6. pence the Gallon.

I read of sweet Wines, that in the 50. of Edward the third, John Peachie,
Fishmonger, was accused, for that he procured a License for the only sale of
them in London: which notwithstanding he justified by Law, he was imprisoned
and fined.

More I read, that in the 6. of Hen. 6. the Lombards corrupting their sweet
Wines, when knowledge thereof came to John Rainwell, Mayor of London, he (in
diverse places of the City) commanded the heads of the Buts and other vessels,
in the open streets, to be broken, to the number of one hundred and fifty, so
that the liquor running forth, passed through the City like a stream of rain
water, in the sight of all the people; from whence there issued a most
loathsome savor.

I read in the reign of Henry the 7. that no sweet VVines were brought into
this Realm, but Malmsies, by the Longobards, paying to the King for his
License, 6. ^. 8. d. of every But, besides 12. d. for Bottell-large. I
remember, within these 54. years, Malmsey not to be sold above 1. d. ob. the
pint. For proof whereof, it appears in the Church-Booke of S. Andrew
Undershaft, that in the year 1547. I. G. and S. K. then Churchwardens, for
80. pints of Malmsey, spent in the Church, after 1. d. halfepenny the pint,
paid at the years end for the same ten shillings.

More I remember, that no Sackes were sold, but Rumney, and that for Medicine
more than for drink: but now many kinds of Sackes are known and used. And so
much for Wines.

For the Vintrie, The Kings sons supped in the Vintrie
to end therewith, I read, that in the reign of Henry the 4. the young Prince
Henry, T. Duke of Clarence, I. Duke of Bedford, and Humfrey Duke of Gloucester,
the Kings sons, being at supper amongst the Merchants of London in the
Vintrie, in the house of Jews John, H^n. Scogan
Henry Scogan sent to them a Ballad, beginning thus:

My Noble Sons,
and oak my Lords dear,
I your Father
called unworthily,
Send unto you
this Ballad following here,
Written with mine
own hand full rudely:
Although it be,
that I not reverently
Have written to your
Estates, I you pray,
Mine uncunning
take benignely,
For Gods sake,
and hearken what I say.
Then follow in like Meeter, 23. staves, containing a persuasion from losing of
time foolishly, in lust and vice, but to spend the same in virtue and godliness;
as ye may read in Geffrey Chawcer his Works, Chawcer fol. 334 and 33^.
lately printed. The successors of those Vintuers and Wine-drawers, that
retayled by the Gallons, Pottell, Quart, Wine-tunners incorporated the 15. of
Hen. 6.
and Pint, were all incorporated by the name of Wine-tunners, in the reign of
Edward the third, and confirmed the 15. of Henry the sixth.

Next is Palmers Lane, Palmers lane, or Ancho^ lane. Plumers Hall.
now called Anchor Lane. The Plummers have their Hall there, but are Tenants to
the Vintners.

Then is Worcester House, Worcester House.
sometimes belonging to the Earls of Worcester, now divided into many
tenements. F^uiterers Hall.
The Fruiterers have their Hall there.

Then is the Old Swan, Old Swan.
a great Brew House. And this is all, on the Thames side, that I can note in
this Ward.

On the Land side, is the Royal street, and Pater noster Lane, Pater noster
Lane,
I think of old time called Arches: for I read, that Robert de Suffolk gave
to Walter Darford, (...). S. Ma^^ Ov^^^^.
his tenement with the appurtenance, in the Lane called Les Arches, in the
parish of S. Michael de Pater noster Church, between the wall of the Field
called Winchester field, on the East, and the same Lane on the West, etc. More
I read of a stone House, called Stoda de Winton, juxta Stodum bridge, which in
that Lane was over Walbrooke water.

Then is the fair Parish Church of S. Michael, Parish Church of S. Michael
(...), a College, one Almes-house or Hospit^^^.
called Pater noster Church in the Royal. This Church was new builded, and
made a College of S. Spirit, and S. Mary, founded by Richard Whittington,
Mercer, four times Mayor, for a Master, four Fellows, Masters of Art,
Clerks, Conducts, Chorists, etc. and an Almes-house, called Gods house or
Hospital, for thirteen poor men, one of them to be Tutor, and to have 16
pence the week, the other twelve, each of them to have 14. pence the week for
ever, with other necessary provision, an Hutch with three locks, a common
scale, etc.

These were bound to pray for the good estate of Richard Whittington, and Alice
his wife; their Founders; and for Sir William VVhittington, R. VVhittington,
^^n to Sir VV. VVhittington Knight.
Knight, and Dame Joan his wife; and for Hugh Fitzwarren, and Dame Molde his
wife, the Fathers and Mothers of the said Richard VVhittington, and Alice his
wife; for King Richard the second, and Thomas of Woodslocke, Duke of Gloucester,
special Lords and Promoters of the said Richard VVhittington, etc.

The License for this foundation was granted by King Henry the fourth, the
eleventh of his reign: and in the twelfth of the same Kings reign, the Mayor
and Communalty of London, granted to Richard VVhittington a vacant piece of
ground, thereon to build his College in the Royal: all which was confirmed by
Henry the 6. the third of his reign, to John Coventry, Ienkin Carpenter, and
William Grove, Executors to Richard VVhittington.

This foundation was again confirmed by Parliament, the tenth of Henry the
sixth, and was suppressed by the Statute of Edward the sixth. The Alms houses,
with the poor men, do remain, and are paid by the Mercers.

This Richard Whittington was (in this Church) three times buried: Richard
Whittington thrice buried.
first, by his Executors, under a fair Monument: then, in the reign of Edward
the sixth, the Parson of that Church, thinking some great riches (as he said)
to be buried with him, caused his Monument to be broken, his body to be spoiled
of his Leaden sheet, and again the second time to be buried. And in the reign
of Queen Mary, the Parishioners were forced to take him up, to lap him in
Lead, as before, to bury him the third time, and to place his Monument, or the
like, over him again, which remains, and so he rests.

Thomas Winford, Alderman, was buried in this Church, 1448.

Arnold Macknam, Vintner a Merchant of Bordeaux, 1457.

Sir Here Tanke, or Hartancleux, Knight of the Garter, borne in Almaine, a
noble Warrior in Henry the fifth and Henry the sixth's days.

Sir Edmond Mulshew, Knight, near to Thomas Cockham, Recorder of London.

The Lady Kyme.

Sir William Oldhall, Knight, 1460.

William Barnocke.

Sir John Young, Grocer, Mayor 1466.

Agnes, daughter to Sir John Young, first married to Robert Sherington, after to
Robert Mulleneux, then to William Cheyney, Esquire.

John Having, Gentleman.

William Roswell, Esquire.

William Postar, Clerk of the Crown, 1520.

Sir William Bailey, Draper, Mayor, 1533. with Dame Katharine his Wife, leaving
sixteen children.

John Haydon, Mercer, Sheriff, 1582. who gave Legacies to the 13. Almes-men,
and otherwise for a Lecture.

Vt fragrans Nardus, A goodly plain Marble Tomb in the Chancell, with new
Banners to adorn it, very lately hung up.

fama fuit iste Ricardus,
Albificans villam
qui just rexer at illam.
Flos Mercatorum,
fundator Presbyterorum,
Sic and regonarum
testis sit certus eorum.
Omnibus exemplum
barathrum vincendo morosum,
Condidit hoc Templum
Michaelis, quam speciosum?
Regia spes and pres:
divinis res rata turbis.
Pauperibus pr.
and Mayor qui fuit urbis,
Martius hunc vicit,
en Annos gens tibi dicit.
Finiit ipse dies,
sis sibi Christ quies.
Ejus sponsa pia, Generosa, probata, sophia Iungitur, etc.

Hic jacet Eduardus
Lupton cognomine dictus,
Occidit heu juvenis
cum spes foret omnibus una.
Pauperibus fuerat
studiosis ille patronus,
Mill and quingintos
tersaevos vidit ademptos
Moribus and studiis
qui vivens claruit olim;
Spiritus iste Jesus
men's a te suscipiatur.
Quisquis ades plora fata dolenda viri, A fair plated stone before the
Communion Table.

Hujus Collegii quique Magister erat;
Doctor, and in sacre Dogmate clarus erat;
Qui obiit Octobris and quoque nona fuit.
Credere nuncfas est spiritus astra tenet:
Spes me tua Jesus es, gratia, non opera.
At the upper end of this Street, Tower-Royall builded about Henry the 1. as
may be supposed.
is the Tower Royal, whereof that street takes name. This Tower and great
place was so called, of pertaining to the Kings of this Realm: King Stephen
was lodged there.
but by whom the same was first builded, or of what Antiquity continued, I have
not read more, than that in the reign of King Edward 1. second, fourth, and
seventh years, it was the tenement of Simon Beawmes. Also, that in the 36. of
Edward the third, the same was called the Royal, in the Parish of S. Michael
de Pater noster, Frisard.
and that in the three and fortieth of his Reign, he gave it by the name of
his Inn, called the Royal, in his City of London, in value twenty pounds by
year, unto his College of S. Stephen at Westminster. Notwithstanding, in the
reign of Richard the second, it was called The Queen Wardrobe, as appears
by this that follows:

King Richard, having in Smithfield overcome and dispersed the Rebels, he, his
Lords and all his Company, The Lady Princess lodged in the Tower Royal.
entered the City of London, with great joy, and went to the Lady Princess his
Mother, who was then lodged in the Tower-Royall, called the Queens Wardrope,
where she had remained three days and two nights, right sore abashed. But
when she saw the King her Son, she was greatly rejoiced and said, Ah Son,
what great sorrow have I suffered for you this day! The King answered and said;
Certainly, Madame, I know it well, but now rejoice, and thank God, for I have
this day recovered mine heritage, and the Realm of England, which I had
neere-hand lost.

This Tower seems to have been (at that time) of good defense, for when the
Rebels had beset the Tower of London and got possession thereof, taking from
thence whom they listed, as in my Annals I have showed; the Princess being
force to fly, came to this Tower Royal* where she was lodged, and remained
safe as ye have heard, and it may be also supposed, that the King himself
was at that time lodged there. I read, that in the year 1386. Ly^n King of
Armony, being chased out of his Realm by the Tartarians, received innumerable
gifts of the King and of his Nobles, King Richard lodged in the Tower-Royall.
the King then lying in the Royal, where he also granted to the said King of
Armony, a Charter of a thousand pounds by year during his life. This for
proof may suffice, that Kings of England have been lodged in this Tower,
though the same (of later time) has been neglected, and turned into stabling
for the Kings, horses, and now letten out to diverse men, and divided into
Tenements.

In Horse-bridge street is the Cutlers Hall, Culters Hall.
Richard de Wilehale 1295. confirmed to Paul Butelor, this house and edifices,
in the Parish of Saint Michael Pater noster Church, and Saint John's upon
Walbrooke, which sometime Lawrence Gisors, and his son Peter Gisors did
possess, and afterward Hugonis de Hingham, and lies between the Tenement of
the said Richard toward the South, and the lane called Hors-shoo bridge
toward the North, and between the way called Pater noster Church on the West,
and the course of Walbrooke on the East, paying yearly one Clove of
Gilliflowers at Easter, and to the poor and Covent of Saint Mary Overy, 6. s.
this house sometime belonged to Simon Dolesly, Grocer, Mayor, 1359. They of
this Company were (of old time) three Arts, or sorts of Workmen, to wit, the
first were Smiths, Forgers of Blades, and therefore called Bladers, and diverse
of them proved wealthy men, Bladers or Blade-Smiths.
as namely, Walter Nele, Blader, one of the Sheriffs, the twelth of Edward the
third deceased, 1352. and buried in S. James Garlic hith. He left Lands to
the mending of Highways about London, betwixt Newgate and VVicombe, Ealdgate
and Chelmesford, Bishopsgate and VVare, Southwarke and Rochester, etc. The
second were makers of Hafts, and otherwise garnishers of Blades: Haftmakers.
The third sort were Sheathmakers for Swords, Sheathmakers.
Daggers, and Knives. In the 10. of Henry the fourth certain ordinances were
made betwixt the Bladers, and the other Cutlers, and in the fourth of Henry the
sixth, they were all three Companies drawn into one Fraternity or Brotherhood,
by the name of Cutlers.

Then is Knight riders street, Knight riders street.
so called (as is supposed) of Knights well armed and mounted at the Tower
Royal, riding from thence through the street, West to Creed lane, and so out
at Ludgate toward Smithfield, when they were: there to Turney, Just, or
otherwise to show activities before the King and States of the Realm. In this
street is the Parish Church of Saint Thomas Apostles, Wring-wren lane,
by Wring-wren lane, a proper Church, Parish Church of S. Thomas the Apostle.
and in the year 1629. well repaired and finely garnished; but Monuments of
antiquity, I find none beyond the reign of Henry the eighth, except some
Arms in the windows, as also in the stone-worke, which some suppose to be of
John Barns Mercea, Mayor of London, in the year 1371. a great builder thereof,
H. Causton Merchant, was a Benefactor, and had a Chantry there about, 1396. T.
Roman, Mayor 1310. had also a Chantry there 1319. Fitz-Williams also a
Benefactor, had a Chantry there. More, Sir William Littlesbury, alias Horn,
(for King Edward the fourth so named him) because he was a most excellent
blower in a Horn, he was a Salter, and Merchant of the Staple, Mayor of
London in the year 1487. and was buried in this Church, having appointed (by
his Testament) the Bells to be changed for four new Bells of good time and
found; but that was not performed: he gave 500. Markers toward the repairing
of highways between London and Cambridge; his dwelling house, with a Garden,
and appurtenances in the said Parish, to be sold, and bestowed in charitable
actions, as his Executors would answer before God.

His house called the George in Breadstreet he gave to the Salters, George in
Breadstreet given to the Salters upon conditions not performed.
they to find a Priest in the said Church, to have six pounds, thirteen
shillings, four pence the year, to every Preacher at Paul's Cross, and at the
Spittle, 4. pence for ever; to the Prisoners of Newgate, Ludgate, Marshalsey,
and Kings Bench, in victuals ten shillings at Christmas, and ten shillings
at Easter for ever; which Legacies are not performed.

William Shipton, William Champneis, and John de Burford, had Chauntries there:
John Martin, Butcher, one of the Sheriffs, was buried there 1533. Those
Monuments that be extant of these latter times, be these following:

There lies buried near this Monument, On the North side of the Chancell.
Margaret one of the daughters of the Lord Broke, Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, in the reign of King Henry the eighth: who lineally descended of
the House of Broke of in Cheshire; which said Margaret was first married to
William Whorwood, second son to John VVhorwood of Compton in the County of
Stafford, Esquire, which said William dyed Attorney General to the said King
Henry the 8. After whose death, she took to her second Husband, William
Sheldon of Beeley in the County of Worcester, Esquire; who also dyed, leaving
her a Widow, and so she continued many years after; and then dyed, being
about the age of 80. years, and was buried in March, 1589. in the 32. year of
Qu. Elizabeth.

On the South side of the Chancell, a very fine, neat and well-contrived
Monument, but without any date, whereon these Verses are insculpt:

In mortem suam haec Carmina dum vixerat scripsit D. Katharina Killigreia.
Dormio nunc Domino,
Domini vitute resurgam;
Et (...) meum
carne videbo mea.
Mortua ne dicar,
fruitur pars altera Christo,
Et surgar capiti,
tempore, tota, meo.
Elizabethae in Obitum Katharinae Sororis Epicaedia.
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
Chara val^to Soror,
in Caelo morte triumphas,
Mors tua vita tibi,
mors tamen illa tuis.
Men's tua labe carens,
pietas, doctrina, modesta
Vita, lepos suavis
digna fuere Deo.
Vt junxit Sanguis,
nos jungat in aethere Christus:
Interea taceo
mortua morte tua.
Felicissimae and in Christo charissimae Memoriae Katharinae Kiligreiae,
Robertus Massonus Formanus Pastor Ecclesiae Londino-Gallicae, his Versibus
parentavit.
Coelestem (...)
conclusam pectore mentem
Audivi, aspexi,
saepius obstupui;
Caelicolam sancto
seclusam corpore mentem,
Quam colui carus,
maestus ovansque cano.
Quis non ereptas
tot dotes lugeat? and quis
Coelo caelestes
lividus invideat?
Cedere sed Patri
gnatos, terrena supernis
Est aequum, sequimur:
tu (...) praei.
Epitaphium praestant. Feminae, Katharinae Kiligreiae Autore Andrea Melvino.
Palladis and Phoebi
comes una, and Pieris una,
Pieridumque Soror,
Pieridumque Parens.
Gratia, Suada, Lepos,
Gravitas, Constantia, Candor,
Relligio, Pietas,
and Pudor and Probitas,
Atque Palestinae,
and Latiae, Graiaeque Camenae
Clausit olim uno
omnes pectore, nunc tumulo.
Aliud Epitaphium Autore Guilielmo Charco.
Hic Katharina jacet
de stemmate nobilitato
Cociadum, and claro
Kiligreio nupta marito:
Hoc satis est, Hospes:
Rhodanus nam caetera novit,
Et dives Rhenus
celebrat, sic fama Sororem
Musarum, and magnam
magnae Pietatis Alumnam.
Under the Communion Table, a stone engraven.

Here lies interred the body of Mr. John FFoy, Under the Communion Table.
Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, who departed this life 1. December. 1625.
and left issue 4. Sons, (viz.) John, George, Henry and Richard: He lived and
dyed in the true faith of Christ Jesus, which he has amply expressed, in a
worthy annual contribution toward the poor of this Parish. Then West from
the said Church on the same side, Ipres Inn.
was one great Message, sometime called Ipres Inn, of William of Ipres a
Flemming, the first builder thereof. This William was called out of Flanders,
King Stephen lodged in the Tower-Royall.
with a number of Flemmings to the aid of King Stephen, against Maude the
Empress, in the year 1138. and grew in favor with the said King for his
service, so far, that he builded this house near unto Tower-Royall, in the
which Tower it seems the King was then lodged, as in the heart of the City,
for his more safety.

Robert Earl of Gloucester, Brother to the Empress, being taken, was committed
to the custody of this William, to be kept in the Castle of Rochester, till
King Stephen was also taken, and then the one was delivered in exchange for the
other, and both set free: This William of Ipres gave Edredes Hith, now called
Queens Hith, to the Prior and Canons of the holy Trinity in London: he founded
the Abbey of Borley in Kent, etc. In the first of Henry the second, the said
William, with all the other Flemmings (fearing the indignation of the new King)
departed the Land, but it seems that the said William was shortly called back
again, and restored both to the Kings favor, and to his old possessions here,
so that the name and family continued long after in this Realm, as may appear
by this which follows.

In the year 1377. the 51. of Edward the third, the Citizens of London minding
to have destroyed John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and Henry Percy Marshall,
(for causes showed in my Annals) sought up and down, and could not find them,
for they were that day to dine with John of Ipres at his Inn, which the
Londoners wist not of, but thought the Duke and Marshall had been at the
Savoy, and therefore poasted thither. But one of the Dukes Knights seeing these
things, came in great haste to the place where the Duke was, and after that he
had knocked, and could not be let in, he said to Haveland the Porter, If thou
love my Lord and thy life, open the Gate: with which words he gat entry, and
with great fear he tells the Duke, that without the gate were infinite numbers
of armed men, and unless he took great heed, that day would be his last.
With which words the Duke leapt so hastily from his Oysters, that he hurt both
his legs against the form: Wine was offered, but he could not drink for
haste, and so fled with his fellow Henry Percy out at a back gate, and entering
upon the Thames, never stayed rowing, until they came to a house near the
Manor of Kennington, Kennington besides Lambeth.
where at that time the Princess lay, with Richard the young Prince; before
whom he made his complaint, etc.

On the other side, I read of a Message, called Ringed hall: King Henry the
eighth the 32. of his reign, gave the same (with four Tenements adjoining)
unto Morgan Philip, alias Wolf, in the Parish of St. Thomas Apostles in
London, etc.

Over Against Ipres Inn in Knight-riders street, at the corner toward Saint
James at Garlic hith, was sometime a great house builded of stone, and called
Ormond place, for that it sometime belonged to the Earls of Ormond. Ormond
place.
King Edward the fourth in the fifth of his reign, gave to Elizabeth his wife,
the Manor of Greenwitch, with the Tower and Park, in the County of Kent. He
also gave this Tenement called Ormond place, with all the appurtenances to the
same situate in the Parish of St. Trinity in Knight-riders street in London.
This house is now lately taken down, and diverse fair Tenements are builded
there, the corner house whereof is a Tavern.

Then lower down in Royal street, is Kerion lane, Kerion lane.
of one Kerion sometime dwelling there. In this lane be diverse fair houses
for Merchants; and amongst others, Glasiers Hall.
is the Glasiers Hall.

At the South corner of Royal street, Parish Church of S. Martin in the
Vintrie.
is the fair Parish Church of Saint Martin, called in the Vintrie, sometime
called S. Martin de Beremand Church. This Church was new buided about the year
1399. by the Executors of Matthew Columbars, Li. Trinitate London.
a stranger borne, a Bordeaux Merchant of Gascoine and French Wines: His Arms
yet remain yet in the East Window; and is a Cheveron, between three
Columbins. There lie buried in this Church, Sir John Gisors, Mayor, 1311. Henry
Gisors, his son, 1343. and John Gisors, his brother, 1350. He gave to his
son T. his great Mansion house, Gisors Hall, corruptly called Gerards Hall.
called Gisors Hall, in the Parish of Saint Mildred in Breadstreet. This Thomas
had issue, John and Thomas: John made a Feoffement, and sold Gisors hall, and
other his Lands in London, about the year 1386. Thomas deceased 1395. Henry
Vennar. Bartholomew de la Vauch. Thomas Cornwallis, one of the Sheriffs, 1384.
John Cornwallis Esquire, 1436. John Mustrell, Vintner 1424. William Hodson.
William Castleton. John Gray. Robert Dalusse, Barber, in the reign of Edward
the fourth, with this Epitaph.

As flowers in field, Epitaph.

thus passes life,
Naked, then clothed,
feeble in the end.
It shows by Robert Dalusse,
and Alison his Wife:
Christ them save
from the power of the Fiend.
Hic jacet Petrus de la Genebra, A fair Stone beyond the Pulpit.
filius and here is Ioannis de la Genebra, quondam Burgensis, and Mercatoris de
Civitate Burdegali. Qui obiit 27. die Martii, An. Domini 1439. Civis animae
propitietur Deus.

Hic jacet Willielmus Stokesby, A very fair plated Stone under the Communion
Table.
quondam Civis and Vintener London, and Iuliana uxor ejus. Qui obbiit 25. die
December. An. Dom. 1381. Cujus, etc.

Hic jacet Thomas Cornwaleis, Another close by it.
quondam Civis London. Qui obiit quarto die Ianuarii, Anno Domini 1384. Cujus,
etc.

Honorabilis viri Radulphi Astri Militis, A very goodly plated Stone at the
entrance into the Quire.
nuper Maioris ac Aldermanni and Piscenarii Civitatis London: and
praecarissimarum Dominae Margeria, ac Margareta uxorum ejus. Qui quidem
Radulphus obiit 18. die Novembris, An. Dom. 1494. Et dicta Domina Margareta
obiit die Ac praedicta Margeria ab hoc saeculo migravit 10. die Martii. An.
Dom. 1492. Cujus, etc.

Micolt, An ancient Marble Tomb in the Chancell.
quondam Civis and vinitarius London, and Ioanna uxor ejus, ac pueri eorundem.
Qui quidem Johannes obiit 17. die Aprilis, An. Dom. 1424. Quorum animae per Dei
immensam misericordiam in pace perpetua permaneant, ac requiem possideant.

Es testis, Christ,
quod non jacet hic lapis iste,
Corpus ut ornatur,
sed spiritus ut memoretur.
Hunc tu qui tum sis
magnus parvus puer ansis
Pro me funde preces,
quod sic mihi fit veniae spes.
Radulphus Astry, Another fair stone close by the other.
Generos. unus filiorum Rad. Astry, Militis, quondam Maioris Civitatis London.
Qui quidem Rad. filius in sua florida juventute, ab hoc saeculo migravit, 19.
die men's. Septembris, Anno Domini, 1501.

Henry Gisors gist yci, Dieu de sa' Ame tien pity, e John le filz a mercy.
Qui morust le veille de S. Katharine, En l' An de Grace, 1343.

Martis Pascha tenes, All these stones, fairly plated, are in the body of the
Church.

Edward Rex luce tiburci
Hunc del Foorll. Dominum,
strage ruisse dolet.
Is dabat Gascon,
Anglus sum cord Ioannes,
In Campis Barnet
mortis amara tulit.
Bis septingeno,
decies sept. and simul uno,
Mane resurgente
obviat iste Jesus.
Anglicus haec relegens,
miserere tui Peregrini,
Et pro te moriens,
te sciat esse pium.
Haec petra substrati
Kirkman tegit ossa Roberti,
Qui Rector fuerat
istius Ecclesiae.
M. D. deem quater
septem Christi cadit Anno,
Aprilis terna
raptus ab orb die.
Artibus ille Magister
erat, Ecclesia tandem,
Tristia post fati
gaudia dentur ei.
Sir Ralph Austrie, or Astry, Fishmonger, Mayor, new roofed this Church with
Timber, covered it with Lead, and beautifully glased it. He deceased 1494. and
was there buried, with his two wives. Ralph Austrie his son, Gent. William
Austrie, and other of that name. Bertrand, wife to Grimond Descure, Esquire, a
Gascione, and Merchant of Wines, 1494. Thomas Batson, Alice Fowler, daughter
and heir to John Howton, wife to John Hulton. James Bartlet and Alice his
wife. William Fennor, Roger Cotton, Robert Stocker, John Pemberton, Philip de
Plasse, John Stapleton, John Mortimer, William Lee, William Hamsteed, W.
Stokesbie, and Gilbert March, had Chantries there.

Then is the Parish Church of Saint James, Parish Church of St. James Garlic
Hith.
called at Garlic Hith, or Garlic hive, for that (of old time) on the River
of Thames, near to this Church, Garlic was usually sold. This is a proper
Church, whereof Richard Rothing, one of the Sheriffs, 1326. is said to be the
new builder, and lies buried in the same: so was Walter Nele, Blader, one of
the Sheriffs, 1337. John of Oxenford, Vintner, Mayor, 1341. I read in the
first of Edward the third, that this John of Oxenford gave to the Priory of the
holy Trinity, in London, two Tosts of Land, one Mill, fifty Acres of Land, two
Acres of Wood, with the appurtenances, in Kentish Town, in value twenty
shillings and three pence by year.

Richard Goodcheape, John de Cressingham, and John Whitthorne, and before them,
Galfrid Moncley, 1281. founded a Chantry there.

Monuments remaining there: Robert Gabeter, Esquire, Mayor of Newcastle upon
Tine, 1310.

John Gisors, William Tiligham, John Stanley, L. Strange, eldest son to the
Earl of Darby, 1503.

Nicholas Staham. Robert de Luton, 1361.

Richard Lions, a famous Merchant of VVines, and a Lapidary, sometime one of
the Sheriffs, beheaded in Cheap by Wat Tylar, and other Rebels, in the year
1381. his picture on his Gravestone very fair and large, is with his hair
rounded by his ears, and curled, a little beard forked, a gown girt to him,
down to his feet, of branched Damask, wrought with the likeness of flowers,
a large Purse on his right side, hanging in a Belt from his left shoulder, a
plain Hood about his neck, covering his shoulders, and hanging back behind him.

Sir John Wrotch, Fishmonger, Mayor, 1361. deceased 1407.

Thomas Stonard of Oxfordshire.

John Bromer, Fishmonger, Alderman, 1474.

The Lady Stanley, mother to the Lord Strange.

The Countess of Huntington, The Lady Herbert.

Sir George Stanley.

Gilbert Bovet, 1398.

A Countess of Worcester, and one of her children.

William Venor, Grocer, Mayor, 1389.

William More, Vintner, Mayor, 1395.

Robert Chichley, Mayor, 1421.

James Spencer, Vintner, Mayor, 1543.

Richard Plat, Brewer, founded a free School there, 1601.

Rogerus Jones, A fair Tomb in the East end of the Chancels South I Will.
Middletoni, in Comitatu Lancastrensi natus, vix puberta egressus, se Londinum
contulit, ubi Civitate donatus, and Artem Tinctoriam exercens, Agnetem, Thomae
Hacketti filiam, Matrimonio sibi junxit. Ex qua filios novem, quatuor vero
filias Suscepit. Quarum una Patre adhuc superstite diem obiit. hic cum varia
Civitatis munia laudabiliter obiisset, tandem in celebrem supremi ordinis
Senatum, Aldermannorum scilicet, cooptatus est; Mox Aeques abillustrissimo Rege
Iacobo creatus est, and paulo post Vicecomes Civitatis London est designatus.
Quo Magistratu nondum expleto, non sine magno bonorum luctu, vicesimo quinto
die mensis Iulii, Anno Domini 1605. pie in Domino requiescit.

Here lies buried the body of Richard Plat Brewer, A comely Monument in the
wall of the South I Will.
and sometime chosen Sheriff of London. The Founder of a free School, and six
Almes-houses, in Aldenham, in the County of Hertford. He dyed the 28. of
November, 1600. having taken to wife Alice Birtles, the daughter of John
Birtles, Esquire, and having issue four sons and one daughter.

Here Edmund Chapman, In the same wall a comely Monument.
closed in clay,
undoubtedly does rest,
Who to his Neighbors (while he lived)
the fruits of love expressed:
Fine Pewes within this Church he made,
and with his Arms support,
The Table, and the Seats in Quire,
he set in comely sort.
To Prisoners, and to Hospitals,
he living, was a friend,
And ever sought, the innocent
from danger to defend.
Esquier-Ioyner to our Queen,
he in his life time was,
And Yeoman of her Armory
at Greenwitch, in like case:
Wherein he like a servant just,
for duty duly done,
Unto himself of Prince and Peers
the love and favor won.
Threescore seven years he lived here,
in worship and good name,
And left this life, to live with Christ,
to his eternal fame.
His Soul, the fourteenth day of May,
did from his body fleet,
Which he with cheerful voice did yield
to Christ his Savior sweet:
And on the eighteenth of that month,
by computation just,
A thousand five hundred eighty eight,
his body was laid in dust.
But body and soul at last, be sure,
through Gods abundant grace,
Shall rise, and knit again in one,
and stand before his face:
Where, with his Saints elect (we hope)
he shall receive a Crown,
And live for ever with sweet Christ,
in glory and renown.
Thus, friends (by this dear friend of ours)
let us learn to live and dye,
That after death we may have (...)
above the starry sky.
And thus an end of Vintrie Ward, which has an Alderman, with a Deputy, common
Counselors 9. Constables 9. Scavengers 4. Ward-mote inquest 14. and a Beadle.
It is taxed to the Fifteen, 6. pound, 13. shillings, 4. pence.

CORDWAINER STREET Ward.
THe next is Cordwainer street Ward, Cordwainer street ward.
taking that name of Cordwainers, or Shoomakers, Curriers, and workers of
Leather dwelling there: for it appears in the Records of Henry the 6. the
ninth of his reign, that an order was taken then for Cordwainers and Curriers
in Corney street, and Sopers lane.

This Ward begins in the East, on the West side of VValbrooke, and runs
West through Budge row, Budge Row.
(a street so called of Budge, Furre, and of Skinners dwelling there:) then up
by Saint Anthonies Church, through Atheling (or Noble-street) as Leyland terms
it, VVathling street.
commonly called VVathling-street, to the Red Lion, a place so called, of a
great Lion of Timber placed there, at a gate entering a large Court, wherein are
diverse fair and large shops, well furnished with broad-cloathes, and other
Draperies of all sorts to be sold: and this is the farthest West part of this
Ward.

On the South side of this street from Budge row, lies a lane turning down by
the West gate of the Tower Royal, and to the South end of the stone Wall
beyond the said gate, which is of this Ward, and is accounted a part of the
Royal street.

Against this West gate of the Tower Royal, is one other Lane, that runs
West to Cordwainer street, and this is called Turnebase lane: Turnebase Lane.
on the South side whereof is a piece of Wring-wren lane, to the North-west
corner of Saint Thomas Church the Apostle. Then again out of the high street
called Watheling, is one other street which runs thwart the same, Cordwainer
street.
and this is Cordwainer street, whereof the whole Ward takes name.

This street begins by West-Cheape, and Saint Mary Bow Church is the head
thereof on the West side, and it runs down South, Hosier lane in
Cordwainer street.
through that part, which of latter time was called Hosier lane, now Bow lane,
and then by the west end of Aldermary Church, to the newbuilded houses, in
place of Ormond-House, and so to Garlickehill or hith, to S. James Church.

The upper part of this street toward Cheap, was called Hosier lane, of
Hosiers dwelling there in place of Shoomakers: but now those Hosiers being
worn out by men of other trades, (as the Hosiers had worn out the Shoomakers)
the same is called Bow lane, of Bow Church.

On the west side of Cordwainer street, is Basing lane, Basing lane.
right over against Turnebase lane. This Basing lane, west, to the back gate
of the Red Lion in Wathling street, is of this Cordwainer street Ward.

Now again on the North side of this high street, is Budge row: by the East
end of Saint Anthonies Church, have ye Saint Sithes lane, S. Sithes lane.
so called of S. Sithes Church, (which stands against the North end of that
Lane) and this is wholly of Cordwainer street Ward: also the South side of
Needlers lane, which reaches from the North end of Saint Sithes lane, Needlers
lane.
west to Sopers lane: then west from S. Anthonies Church, is the South end of
Sopers lane, Sopers lane.
which lane took that name, not of Sope-making, as some have supposed, but of
Alen le Sopar, in the ninth of Edward the second. I have not read of
Sope-making in this City, till within this hundred years, that John Lamb,
dwelling in Grasse-street, set up a boyling-house: for this City (in former
time) was served of white Soap in hard cakes (called Castle Soap, and other)
from beyond the Seas, Gray Soap made in London, dearer than bought from Bristow.
and of gray Soap, speckled with white, very sweet and good, from Bristow, sold
here for a penny the pound, and never above penny farthing, and black Soap for
an halfe-penny the pound.

Then in Bow lane (as they now call it) is Goose lane, Goose lane.
by Bow Church. William Essex, Mercer, had tenements there, in the 26. of
Edward the third.

Then from the South end of Bow lane, up VVathling street, till over against
the Red Lion: And these be the bounds of Cordwainer street Ward.

Touching Monuments therein: first, you have the fair Parish Church of S.
Anthonies in Budge row, Parish Church of S. Anthonies.
more vulgarly known by the name of Saint Antlins, on the North side thereof.
This Church was lately reedified by Thomas Knowles, Grocer, Mayor, and by
Thomas Knowles, his son, both buried there, with Epitaphs of the Father, thus:

Here lies graven
under this stone, Epitaph of Tho. Knowles.

Thomas Knowles,
both flesh and bone,
Grocer and Alderman
years forty,
Sheriff, and twice
Mayor truly.
And for he should
not lie alone,
Here lies with him
his good wife Joane:
They were together
sixty year,
And nineteen children
they had in feere, etc.
Thomas Holland, Mercer, was there buried, 1456.

Thomas VVindent, Mercer, Alderman, and Katharine his wife.

Thomas Hind, Mercer, 1528. He was a Benefactor to this Church, to Aldermarie
Church, and to Bow.

Hugh Acton, Merchant-Taylor, buried 1520. He gave 36. pounds to the repairing
of the Steeple of this Church.

Simon Street, Grocer, lies in the Church wall toward the South: his Arms be
three Colts, and his Epitaph thus:

Such as I am, Simon Street his Epitaph.

such shall you be:
Grocer of London
sometime was I,
The Kings Weigher
more than years twenty:
Simon Street
called in my place,
And good fellowship
feign would trace:
Therefore in Heaven,
everlasting life
Jesus send me,
and Agnes my wife.
Kerlie Merlie,
my words were the,
And Deo gratias
I coupled thereto.
I passed to God
in the year of grace,
A thousand
four hundred it was, etc.
Henry Collet, Mercer, Mayor, a great Benefactor to this Church. The pictures
of him, his wife, ten sons, and ten daughters, remain in the glasse-window,
on the North side of the Church: but the said Henry Collet was buried at
Stebunhith. Henry Halton, Grocer, one of the Sheriffs, deceased 1415. Thomas
Spite, Merchant-Taylor, 1533.

John Grantham and Nicholas Bull had Chauntries there.

Here lies William Dauntesey, An ancient Tomb in the South side
Mercer and Alderman of this City, and Merchant of the Staple of Callis; and
Agnes his wife: the which William deceased the 23. day of April, in the year
of our Lord God, 1543. Unto Sir Roger
Martin, Knight, A very goodly Tomb in the Chancell.

A Mercer and
a Merchant late;
By wisdom, and
by ways upright,
That so both wealth
and worship gate.
Well famed, beloved
of each estate,
Pleasant and sage
in gravity,
Rose by degrees
in dignity.
First Alderman
elected here,
Then Shrieve, and then
Lord Mayor he was:
Passed all with praise.
His faithful Feere,
Dame Elizabeth,
erected has
This Monument,
in mind, that as
With him a while
in Tomb to stay,
So afterward in bliss
to joy always.
Ex D. Elizabeth octo prolum Parens. Obiit in Christo, die 20. December. An. Do^.
1573. and regni Reg. Eliz. 16.

Here lies the Lady
Martin eke,
Of Grecia soil,
and Castlynes race,
Both constant, virtuous,
wise and meek,
That showed her self
in any place.
And God endued her
so with grace,
That she both lived
and died with praise.
Two husbands had she
in her days,
Whose corpse are both
enclosed here,
Together with
the foresaid Dame:
Her love to them
was aye so dear,
Her cost and charge
sustained the same:
These three, their deeds
will show their fame:
Who as she lived in amity,
So here she sleeps in unity.
Domina Elizab. cum Maritis.

Credimus quod Redemptor noster vivit, and in novissimo die videbimus Deum
Salvatorem nostrum, Job 19.

And Thomas Knowles
is placed here, At the west end of the same Tomb.

Whose bones from Bow
were hither borne:
His godly life
did well appear,
In helping those
that were forlorn,
And virtue did
him so adorn,
That he beloved
was of all:
Mercer he was,
when death did call,
In prime of years
his life always:
Who dying like
a worthy wight,
Did hope in Christ,
to live for aye.
His wife him wailes
in woeful plight,
And for mere love,
him here she pight,
With her second Spouse
to sleep in peace;
And she with them,
when life shall cease.
Ex eadem Domina Elizab. trium prolum parens. Qui quidem Thomas obiit 11. die
Iulii, An. a Messia nato, 1550.

Over a little door in the South side of the Quire, This is said to be the
true portraiture of John Wells, whose Executors builded the Standard in West-d
cap.
at the time of late new repairing the Church, was found an ancient figure of a
man, clothed in Scarlet furred, holding open his hands, as in admiration;
having rings on the thumb and fingers of his left hand, and two books before
him, one closed, and the other lying open, with these words to be read:

Recogitabo tibi omnes annos meos in amaritudine animae meae. On one leaf.


Mercy and Grace, On the other.
and for ever mercy, sweet Jesus, Ego rogo.

Next on the South side of Budge row, by the West corner thereof, and on the
East side of Cordwainer street, is one other fair Church, called Aldermarie
Church, because the same was very old, and elder than any Church of Saint Mary
in the City, till of late years the foundation of a very fair new Church was
laid there by Henry Keble, Grocer, Mayor, who deceased 1518. and was there
buried in a vault by him prepared, with a fair Monument raised over him on the
North side of the Quire, now destroyed and gone. He gave by his Testament 1000.
l. toward the building up of that Church; and yet was not permitted a resting
place for his bones there. Thomas Roman, Mayor, 1310. had a Chauntrie there.
Richard Chawcer, Richard Chawcer, Father to Geffrey Chawcer the Poet, as may be
supposed.
Vintner, gave to that Church his tenement and Tavern, with the appurtenances,
in the Royal street, the corner of Kirion lane, and was there buried, 1348.
John Briton, Ralph Holland, Draper, one of the Sheriffs, deceased, 1452.
William Tailor, Grocer, Mayor, deceased, 1483. He discharged that Ward of
Fifteenes to be paid by the poor. Thomas Hind, Mercer, buried in S.
Anthonies, gave 10. Fodder of Lead to the covering of the middle I Will of this
Aldermary Church. Charles Blount, Lord Montjoy, was buried there, about the
year 1545. he made or glazed the East window, as appears by his Arms: his
Epitaph made by him in his life time, thus:

Willingly have I sought;
and willingly have I found
The fatal end that wrought
thither as duty bound:
Discharged I am of that I ought,
to my Country by honest wound,
My soul departed Christ has bought:
the end of man, is ground.
Sir William Laxton, Grocer, Mayor, deceased 1556. and Thomas Lodge, Grocer,
Mayor, 1583. were buried in the Vault of Henry Keble, whose bones were unkindly
cast out, and his Monument pulled down, in place whereof Monuments are set up
of the later buried. William Blount, Lord Montjoy, buried there, 1594.

Here is fixed the Epitaph of
Sir Henry Kebyl, Knight,
Who was sometime of London Mayor,
a famous worthy wight,
Which did this Aldermary Church
erect and set upright.
Though death prevail with mortal wights; On the outside of the folding
Tables which hang in the uppe^ end of the Chancell.

and hasten every day,
Yet virtue over-lives the Grave,
her fame does not decay:
As memories do show revived,
of one that was alive,
Who being dead, of virtuous fame,
none should seek to deprive;
Which so in life deserved renown,
for facts of his to seee,
That may encourage other now,
of like good mind to be.
Sir Henry Keble, Knight, Lord Mayor
of London, here he sat,
Of Grocers worthy Company,
the chiefest in his state,
Which in this City grew to wealth,
and unto worship came,
When Henry reigned, who was the seventh
of that redoubted name:
But he to honor did atchieve
the second golden year
Of Henry's reign, so called the eighth,
and made his fact appear.
When he this Aldermanry Church
'gan build with great expense,
Twice thirty years agon, no doubt,
counting the time from hence:
Which work began the year of Christ,
well known of Christen men,
One thousand and five hundred just,
if ye will add but ten.
But lo, when man purposes most,
God does dispose the best,
And so before this work was done,
God called this Knight to rest.
This Church as then not fully built;
he dyed about the year,
When Ill May day first took his name,
which is down fixed here: 1516.

Whose works became a Sepulcher,
to shroud him in that case:
God took his soul, but corpse of his
was laid about this place.
Who when he dyed, of this his work
so mindful still he was,
That he bequeathed a thousand pounds
to have it brought to pass.
The execution of whose gift,
or where the fault should be,
The work as yet unfinished
shall show you all for me*
Which Church stands there; if any please
to finish up the same,
As he has well begun, no doubt,
and to his endless fame;
They shall not only well bestow
their Talent in this life,
But after death, when bones be rot,
their fame shall be most rife;
With thankful praise and good report
of our Parochians here,
Which have of right Sir Henry's fame,
afresh renewed this year.
God move the minds of wealthy men,
their works so to bestow
As he has done, that though they dye,
their virtuous fame may flow.
Inclita perpetuo durabit tempore Virtus,
Et floret fato non violenda truci.
Sir William Laxton lies interred
Within this hollow vault, A fair Tomb in the Chancell.

That by good life had happy death,
the end for which he sought.
Of poor and rich he was beloved,
his dealings they were just,
God has his soul, his body here
consumed is to dust.
Here lives by fame, that lately died,
Sir William Laxtons wife,
That ever was a doer of good,
and lived a virtuous life:
A mindful Matron of the poor,
and to the learned sort,
A true and faithful Citizen,
and dyed with good report.
He dyed the 29. day of July, 1556. Here lies buried Sir Thomas Lodge, A small
Monument laid on the ground by the Tomb, within the iron grate
Knight, and Dame Anne his wife. He was L. Mayor in the year of our Lord God,
1563. when God did visit this City with a great plague for our sins.

For we are sure that our Redeemer lives, and that we shall rise out of the
earth in the latter day, etc. Job 19.

At the upper end of Hosier lane, toward West-Cheape, is the fair Parish
Church of S. Mary Bow. This Church in the reign of William the Conqueror,
being the first in this City builded on Arches of stone, New Mary Church, or
S. Mary Bow in West Cheaping. L. Colchester
was therefore called new Mary Church, of Saint Mary de Arcubus, or le Bow, in
West Cheaping: As Stratford Bridge, being the first builded (by Matilda, the
Queen, wife to Henry the first) with Arches of stone, was called Stratford le
Bow, which names to the said Church and Bridge, remain till this day. The
Court of the Arches is kept in this Church, and takes name of the place, not
the place of the Court; but of what antiquity or continuation that Court has
there continued, I cannot learn.

This Church is of Cordwainer street Ward, and for diverse accidents happening
there, has bin made more famous than any other Parish Church of the whole
City, or Suburbs. First we read, that in the year 1090. and the third of
William Rufus, by tempest of wind, the roof of the Church of Saint Mary Bow in
Cheap was overturned, Roof of Bow Church overturned by tempest.
wherewith some persons were slain, and four of the rafters of six and
twenty foot in length, with such violence were pitched in the ground of the
high street, that scantly four foot of them remained above ground, which were
feign to be cut even with the ground, because they could not be plucked out;
for the City of London was not then paved, but a moorish ground.

In the year 1196. William Fitz Osbert, Bow steeple fortified.
a seditious Traitor, took the steeple of Bow, and fortified it with munitions
and victuals; but it was assaulted, and William with his accomplices, were taken
(though without bloodshed) for he was forced by fire and smoke to forsake the
Church, and then being by the Judges condemned, he was by the heels drawn to
the Elmes in Smithfield, A false accuser of his elder brother, in the end was
hanged.
and there hanged with nine of his fellows, where because his favoures came
not to deliver him, he forsook Mary's Son, (as he termed Christ our Savior)
and called upon the Devil to help and deliver him. Such was the end of this
deceiver, a man of an evil life, a secret murderer, a filthy fornicator, a
polluter of concubines, and (amongst other his detestable facts) a false
accuser of his elder brother, who had (in his youth) brought him up in
learning, and done many things for his preferment.

In the year 1271. a great part of the Steeple of Bow fell down, Bow steeple
fell down.
and slew many people, men and women. In the year 1284. the thirteenth of
Edward the first, Laurence Ducket, Goldsmith, having grievously wounded one
Ralph Crepin in West Cheap, fled into Bow Church, into the which (in the night
time) entered certain evil persons, friends unto the said Ralph, and slew the
said Laurence lying in the Steeple, and then hanged him up, placing him so by
the window, as if he had hanged himself, and so was it found by inquisition.
For the which fact, Lawrence Ducket being drawn by the feet, was buried in a
ditch without the City. But shortly after (by relation of a Boy, who lay with
the said Lawrence at the time of his death, and had hid him there for fear)
the truth of the matter was disclosed. For the which cause, Jordan Good-cheape,
Ralph Crepin, Gilbert Clarke, and Geffrey Clarke were attainted, and a certain
woman named Alice, that was chief causer of the said mischief, was burned,
and to the number of sixteen men were drawn and hanged; besides others, that
being richer, after long imprisonment, were hanged by the purse.

The Church was interdicted, Bow Church interdicted.
the doors and windows were stopped up with Thorns: but Lawrence was taken
up, and honestly buried in the Churchyard.

The Parish Church of Saint Mary Bow, by means of incroachment, and building
of houses, wanting room in their Churchyard for burial of the dead, John
Rotham, or Rodham, Citizen and Tailor, by his Testament dated the year 1465.
gave to the Parson and Churchwardens a certain Garden in Hosier lane, to be a
Churchyard: which so continued near a hundred years, but now is builded on,
and is a private man's house. The old Steeple of this Church was by little and
little re-edified, and new builded up, at the least so much as was fallen
down; many men giving sums of money to the furtherance thereof: So that at
length, to wit, in the year 1469. it was ordained by a Common Council, Bow
Bell to be rung nightly at nine of the clock.
that the Bow Bell should be nightly rung at nine of the clock.

Shortly after, John Done, Mercer, by his Testament dated 1472. according to
the trust of Reginald Longdon, gave to the Parson and Churchwardens of Saint
Mary Bow, two Tenements, with the appurtenances, since made into one, in Hosier
lane, then so called, to the maintenance of Bow Bell, the same to be rung as
aforesaid, and other things to be observed, as by the Will appears.

This Bell being usually rung somewhat late, as seemed to the young men
Prentises, and other in Cheap, they made and set up a time against the Clerk,
as follows:

Clarke of the Bow-Bell
with the yellow locks,
For thy late ringing,
thy head shall have knockes.
Whereunto the Clerk replying, wrote:

Children of Cheap,
hold you all still,
For you shall have the
Bow-bell rung at your will.
Robert Harding, Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs 1478. gave to the new work of
that Steeple forty pound. John Haw, Mercer, ten pound, Doctor Allen, four
pound, Thomas Baldry four pound, and other gave other sums, so that the said
work of the Steeple was finished in the year 1512. The Arches or Bows
thereupon, Bow or Arches on Bow steeple.
with the Lanthornes five in number, to wit, one at each corner, and one on the
top in the middle upon the Arches, were also afterward finished of stone,
brought from Cane in Normandy, delivered at the Customers Key for four
shillings eight pence the Tun. William Copland Tailor, the Kings Merchant,
and Andrew Fuller, Mercer, being Churchwardens 1515. and 1516. It is said that
this Copland gave the great Bell, which made the fifth in the ring, to be rung
nightly at nine of the clock. This Bell was first rung (as a knell) at the
burial of the same Copland. It appears, that the Lanthornes on the top of
this Steeple, were meant to have been glased, and lights in them placed nightly
in the winter, whereby travelers to the City might have the better sight
thereof, and not to miss of their ways.

In this Parish also was a Grammar School, Grammar school in Bow Churchyard.
by commandment of King Henry the sixth, which School was (of old time) kept
in an house for that purpose prepared in the Churchyard; but that School
being decayed, as others about this City, the Schoole-house was let out for
rent, in the reign of Henry the eighth, for four shillings the year, a Cellar
for two shillings the year, and two Vaults under the Church for fifteen
shillings both. Vaults under Bow Church.


The Monuments in this Church be these, viz. of sir John Coventry, Mercer,
Mayor, 1425. Nicholas Alwine, Mercer, Mayor, 1499. Robert Harding, Goldsmith,
one of the Sheriffs, 1478. John Lock, one of the Sheriffs, 1461. Edward
Banks, Alderman, Haberdasher, 1566. John Ward, William Pierson, Scriveuer, and
Attorney in the common place. In a proper Chapel on the South side the
Church, stands a Tomb, eleuate and arched: Ade de Buke, Hatter, glased the
Chapel, and most part of the Church, and was there buried.

All other Monuments be defaced.

Hauley and Sowtham had chauntries there.

Here lies Richard Lambert, An ancient Marble tomb in the Chancell, plated
about on the North side.
Grocer, late Alderman and Sheriff of London, Merchant-Adventurer, and free of
Muscovia and Russia, who deceased in the time of his Shrievalty, the fourth day
of April, An. Dom. 1567. etc.

Magnificus sed justificus, The like ancient Marble Tomb on the North side of
the Quire.

miseris sed amicus,
Vir speciosus, vir
generosus, virque pudicus.
Et peramabilis, and
venerabilis, atque piarum,
Vis, dux, lex, lampas,
flos Mayor Londoniarum.
In terrae ventre jacet
hic John rite Coventre
Dictus, quem necuit
veluti decuit lue plenus,
Bis septingenus
tricenus si trahis unum
Martius in sole,
triceno si trahis unum,
Virginis a partu carnis
modo mortuus artu,
Vivus erit Coelis tuba
clanxerit ut Gabrielis. Amen.
Here lies the body of Humphrey Walcot, A fair gravestone in the Chancell.
of Walcot, in the County of Salop, Esquire, Merchant-Adventurer, and of the
company of Grocers in this City of London. He died the 28. day of August, 1616.
being about the age of seventy one: Leaving behind him his wife Alice, the
daughter of Richard Halsy, Esquire: and by her he had ten children, five
sons, and five daughters; having had by her eight more, who dyed young.

Without the North side of this Church of Saint Mary Bow, A shed or standing
for the King called Crown Silde.
toward West Cheap, stands one fair building of stone, called in Record
Sidam, a shed which gratly darkeneth the said Church: for by means thereof,
all the windows and doors on that side are stopped up. King Edward the third,
upon occasion, as shall be showed in the Ward of Cheap, caused this sild or
shed to be made, and strongly to be builded of stone for himself, the
Queen, and other Estates to stand in, there to behold the Iustings, and other
shows at their pleasures. And this house (for a long time after) served to
that use: namely, in the reign of Edward the third, and Richard the second:
but in the year 1410. Henry the fourth, in the twelfth of his reign,
confirmed the said shed or building to Stephen Spilman, William Marchford, and
John Wattle, Mercers, by the name of one new Sildam, shed or building, with
shops, cellars, and edifices whatsoever apperataining, called Crounsilde or
Tamersilde, Crounsilde.
situate in the Mercery in West Cheap, and in the Parish of Saint Mary de
Arcubus in London, etc.

Notwithstanding which grant, the Kings of England, and other great Estates, as
well of foreign Countries repairing to this Realm, as inhabitants of the
same, have usually repaired to this place, therein to behold the shows of this
City, passing through West Cheap; namely, the great Watches accustomed in the
night, on the Even of Saint John Baptist, and Saint Peter at Midsummer, the
examples whereof were overlong to recite: wherefore let it suffice briefly to
touch one. K. Henry the eight came in the likeness of a Yeoman of his Guard,
to the Kings head in Cheap.


In the year 1510. on Saint John's Even at night, king Henry the eight came to
this place, then called the Kings head in Cheap, in the livery of a Yeoman of
the Guard, with an Halberd on his shoulder, and there beholding the VVatch,
departed privily, when the VVatch was done, and was not known to any but whom
it pleased him. But on Saint Peter's night next following, he and the Queen
came royally riding to the said place, and there with their Nobles beheld the
VVatch of the City, and returned in the morning.

This Church of Saint Mary, with the said shed of stone, all the housing in or
about Bow Churchyard, and without, on that side the high street of Cheap to
the Standard, be of Corndwayner street Ward. These houses were (of old time)
but sheds: for I read of no housing otherwise on that side the street, but of
diverse sheds, from Sopers lane to the Standard, etc. Amongst other, I read of
three shops or sheds by Sopers lane, pertaining to the Prior of the holy
Trinity within Aldgate: the one was let out for twenty eight shillings, one
other for twenty shillings, and the third for twelve shillings by the year.
Moreover, that Richard Goodcheape, Mercer, and Margery his wife, son to
Jordan Goodcheape, did let to John Dalinges the younger, Mercer, their shed and
chamber in West Cheap, in the Parish of Saint Mary de Arches, for three
shillings four pence by the year. Also the men of Breadstreete Ward contended
with the men of Cordwainer street Ward, for a sild or shed, opposite to the
Standard on the South side, and it was found to be of Cordwainer street Ward,
William Waldrone being then Mayor, the 1. of Henry the sixth.

Thus much for Cordwayner street Ward: Which has an Alderman, his Deputy,
Common Counselors eight, Constables eight, Scauengers eight, VVardmote in
quest men fourteen, and a Beadle. It stands taxed to the Fifteen in London,
at fifty two pounds sixteen shillings, in the Exchequer at fifty two pounds
six shillings.

CHEAP WARD.
NExt adjoining is Cheap Ward, Cheap Ward.
taking name of the Market there kept, called West Cheaping: which Ward, as a
river that has 3. heads, and running along to the uttermost of his bounds,
issues out on the sides into little streams: So this Ward, beginning on the
course of Walbrooke, and is not the meanest of the Wards (if for no other
cause, yet because it is nearest to the heart of the City) has his beginning
on the East from three places; The high street of the Poultry, The lower end
of Buckles bury, and The nether part of the Venell or Entry into Scalding
Alley; and so running along, as far as unto the North-east corner of Bow lane
on the South side, and from thence into Bow lane on the East side, until ye
come to the channel over against the cellar door under the Church; and then, on
the North side of Cheap, up to the Standard, stretching it self into diverse
Lanes and Pieces on the right hand, and on the left hand, as it comes along.

First, for the high street of the Poultry (which is the maine body of this
Ward:) On the South side thereof, toward the East, this Ward begins at the
corner house, now in the tenure of one Robert Knight, in the way going down to
Saint Mary Wool-Church, anciently known by the sign of the Lion: the out-most
part of which house, and of this Ward there (the house being divided) is at the
crosse-channell over against (or very near) the great West door of
Wool-Church, and so it goes along on the South side of the Poultry to the
great Conduit, and so into Bow lane, as is aforesaid.

Secondly, for Buckles bury, this Ward begins there toward the lower end: On
the North side, at a Channel near to the end of the house, bearing the sign
of the Christopher, toward the East, now in the tenure of one John Hodges: On
the South side, it begins at the East end of the great new Frame of
Building, over against the said Christopher; which is the Tenement on the East
side, next to the black Bull; and so it goes into all the Barge. And then
VVestward, it goes on both sides the way, viz. on the North side, to the great
Conduit, and so to Bow lane, as is aforesaid; and on the South side, to the end
of Saint Sythes lane. Then crossing over the Channel, to S. Bennet Shorhogs
Church, it stretches all along through Needlers lane, by St. Pancrates Church,
on the same side, until ye come to a great Gate, which is in the nooke of a
little passage or entry to the West, and is the back gate of a house,
standing in Bow lane, sometime the dwelling house of Master Paruis. Then again
it stretches from the Chain in the midst of Sopers lane (on both sides the
Lane) upward toward the North, into Cheap on the South side, and so into Bow
lane, as is aforesaid.

Thirdly, for the last place of this Wards beginning: On the North side of the
high street, near unto the Stockes-Market, is an Alley or Lane, called
Scalding Alley, not erroneously (as some have published) but truly, as nearest
to the most ancient denomination thereof; which was, Scalding-house, alias,
Scalding-wike, and Scalding lane, as appears by good records extant of two
hundred years continuance. Within the Venell or entry of this Lane or Alley,
near unto the Well, that stands in a corner to the West, this Ward
begins at the end of the stone wall, wherein is the door leading unto the
Parsonage house and Church of Saint Mildred (of which, more anon) and it
runs on that side the Channel along to the East corner of the said Church,
and from thence on the North side of the street, into the Compter, and
Cony-hoope lane, and within Cony-hoope lane, into all Skinners Alley, and the
Grocers Hall and Garden; and then back again into the Old Iewry Lane, on the
West side as far as Alderman Welds house, and on the East side as far as
the dead stone Wall of the great house over against it, sometime Alderman
Andersons house. Then to return to the west end of Old Iewry again, this
Ward stretches along on the North side by the Mercers Hall unto Iron-mongers
lane, (which all wholly on both sides is in this Ward) and so into Catton
street. In Catton street this Ward enters, toward the East, at a house
anciently known by the sign of the Talbot, on the South side, now in the
tenure of Master Packhurst; and over against it, on the North side, at a deep
Channel, issuing out of a house, and so goes up to the west on both sides,
videlicet, on the South side of the way, beyond the end of Saint Lawrence lane,
until ye come to that middle part of the Church wall, which is beyond the
Church Porch; and on the North side, from that corner of the Church wall, it
goes on the East side of the Channel to the Church yard; and from thence, on
both sides the way, unto the outward gate leading unto Guild Hall yard, and
adjoining to the Tavern of the three Tons. Then again to come into Cheap,
there, on the North side, is Saint Lawrence lane, all which is wholly of this
Ward, and so is Honey lane above that; and so it reaches westward as far as
a shallow Channel, close beyond the Standard. And thus stand the bounds of
Cheap Ward.

Now, for Antiquities, and things worthy of memory in Cheap Ward.

First, in the maine body of this Ward, that is, the Poultry, stands the
proper little Church, that bears the name of Saint Mildred in the Poultry, S.
Mildreds Church.
the Virgin; which name was given surely for distinction, not for superstition:
For so was the custom of the Kingdom (and yet is) in building these thing for
the service of God, that the Founders called them by the name of some Apostle,
Saint, Martyr, or Confessor, as best liked their own conceit at the present
time, to distinguish them from others.

Who this Mildred was; whether she was that eldest daughter of Merwaldus, King
of West- Mercians, as some think, or that she was daughter of Ethelbert,
King of Kent, one of the Founders of Paul's Church; I find no Record to
specify, neither is it much material: but it is probable, that she was some
holy and devout Maid, which the people of that age held to be a Saint
afterward in heaven.

In what years this Church was first erected, or who was the first Founder of
it, we find not: But it appears by some ancient Evidences of the said
Church, that from the beginning it had not so much spare ground about it, as to
make a Church yard of; until in the year of our Lord God 1420. and the eighth
of King Henry the fifth, Thomas Morsted, Esquire, and Surgeon to the Kings,
Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth, (and afterward, in Anno
Dom. 1436. was Sheriff and Alderman of London) gave unto the Church a parcel
of ground, The Church yard given.
lying between his dwelling house and the said Church (and adjoining unto the
said Church toward the North) to make a Church yard of, for the burial of
their dead; containing in length, from the course of Walbrooke, toward the
west, forty five foot, and in breadth, from the Church toward the North,
thirty five foot.

Within short time after, The Parsonage house and chambers.
some body, of religious and charitable disposition, erected upon the sides of
the said Church yard, but upon Posts and Pillars, with Cloisters underneath,
toward the west, a Parsonage house, or Mansion and free dwelling of the
Ministers and Rectors of the said Church: and toward the East four chambers,
then called the Priests Chambers; now converted into a Tenement or dwelling
house, and demised for yearly rent. But the Church yard is much abridged, and
of late foulely defaced, and the lights of the said Parsonage hindered by
additions of Pieces to the said ancient chambers, which ought not to be.

After some years expired, Church taken down and new built.
the Parson and Parishioners, as it seems, seeing the Church to be very old,
purposed to take it down, and to build it new again: Which they began to do
about the year of our Lord God, 1456. At what time Robet Snell and John King
were Churchwardens, and continued in the office till the end of the year
1467. Toward the which Building, as it may appear by their Accounts, John
Saxton being Rector or Parson of the said Church, gave thirty two pounds; and
afterward Richard Bowyer being Parson, gave six pound and fifteen shillings.

Of later days, to wit, Anno Domini 1594. and 35. of Queen Elizabeth, of
blessed memory, this Church yard, and all the Buildings thereon, Church yard
and Buildings supposed to be concealed.
which had been thus long in the free possession of the Ministers and
Parishioners of the said Church, were, through the information of an evil
minded man, then Tenent in the chambers, sold for concealed land; whereby the
said Tenement, Church yard, and Cloisters, were like to be lost from the
possession of the Church, and the Ministers of the Church to be charged with
an yearly rent of their Parsonage house for ever. But the Parson and
Parishioners, by a Judicial proceeding then in her Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, cleared all the whole Soil from that incombrance: the trial
whereof was held by Nisi prius in the Guild Hall of London, and the Record is
kept in Master Fanshawes Office for the Exchequer.

Richard Shore, Draper, one of the Sheriffs in the year 1505. gave fifteen
pounds to the making of a Porch to this Church.

In the great East window of this Church are the Arms of diverse Gentlemen, as
Benefactors: and namely, the Arms of Lovell and Pury, quartered, and the Arms
of Richard Keston, single.

All the rooffing of the Church is garnished with the Arms of one Thomas
Ashehill, who had lent a great sum of money toward the new building of the
said Church, and was one of the Churchwardens there, in the year 1474. and
lies buried there in the South Chapel: His Arms also are to be seen in the
same Chapel, in the window to the East.

Besides this Thomas Ashehill are buried in this Church, as by their Monuments
appear, John Saxton, of whom we heard before, with this Epitaph;

Hanc subter speciem
corpus jacet ecce Iohannis,
Saxton qui fuerat
vocitatus ejus in Annis:
Hunc qui plasmavit
de terra, suppeditavit,
Nunc Pater and Flamen
sibi dent cum Prole locamen,
Qui obiit die Men's.
Anno 14 Cujus, etc.
Others buried here, as appears by Monuments.

John Hildie, Poulter, 1416. John Kendall, 1468. John Garland, 1476. Robert
Bois, 1485. and Simon Lee, Poulters, 1487. Thomas Lee, of Essex, Gentleman,
William Harlingridge, Christopher Seliocke, 1494. Robert Draiton, Skinner,
1484. John Christopherson Doctor of Physic, 1524 William Turner, Skinner,
1536. Blase White, Grocer, 1558. Thomas Hobson, Haberdasher, 1559. William
Hobson, Haberdasher, 1581. Thomas Tusser, 1580. with this Epitaph:

Here Thomas Tusser,
clad in earth, does lie,
That sometime made
the points of Husbandry:
By him then learn thou may;
here learn we must,
When all is done, we sleep,
and turn to dust:
And yet, through Christ,
to Heaven we hope to go;
Who reads his books,
shall find his faith was so.
And last of all, Thomas Iken, Skinner, with this Epitaph:

In Hodnet and London
God blessed my life
Till forty and six years,
with children and wife:
And God will raise me
up to life again,
Therefore have I thought
my death no pain.
Thomas Iken, qui obiit 10. die Martii, 1590.
And there also lies buried Elizabeth his wife, and diverse of their children:
where, on a Pillar in the Chancell, toward the South, is this Monument:

In this Chancell lies the body of Thomas Iken, Citizen and Skinner of London,
who was borne in Hodnet in the County of Salope, and had to wife Elizabeth the
daughter of Roger Smith of Newport-Pagnell in the County of Buckingham, by whom
he had six sons and eight daughters: which Thomas departed this life the
tenth day of March, Anno Dom. 1590.

In the year 1594. Thomas Lane, Citizen and Serivener of London, by his last
Will and Testament gave his small Tenement, over against London Wall, near
Bishopsgate, unto the Church toward the reparations thereof, and relief of
the poor of the Parish.

On the North side of the said Church yard, remain two Tombs of Marble, but
not known of whom, or otherwise than by tradition, it is said they were of
Thomas Muschampe, and William Brothurs, about 1547, etc.

Some four houses West from this Parish Church of Saint Mildred, Counter in
the Poultry.
is a Prisonhouse, pertaining to one of the Sheriffs of London, and is called
the Counter in the Poultry. This has been there kept and continued time out of
mind; for I have not read of the original thereof. West from this Counter,
was a proper Chapel, called of Corpus Christi, Chapel of Corpus Christi.
and Saint Mary at Cony hope lane end, in the Parish of Saint Mildred, founded
by one named Ionnirunnes, a Citizen of London, in the reign of Edward the
third, in which Chapel was a Guild or Fraternity, that might dispend in Lands
better than twenty pound by year: it was suppressed by Henry the eighth, and
purchased by one Thomas Hobson, Haberdasher: he turned this Chapel into a
fair Warehouse and shops toward the street, with lodgings over them.

Then is Cony hope lane, Cony hope lane.
of old time so called, of a sign of three Conies hanging over a Poulters
stall at the Lanes end. Within this Lane stands the Grocers Hall, which
Company, being of old time called Pepperers, were first incorporated by the
name of Grocers, in the year 1345. at which time they elected for Custos or
Guardian of their Fraternity, Grocers Hall purchased and builded.
Richard Oswin, and Laurence Hallwell, and twenty Brethren were then taken in,
to be of their Society. In the year 1411. the Custos or Guardian, and the
Brethren of this Company, purchased of the Lord Robert Fitzwaters, one plot of
ground with the building thereupon in the said Cony hope lane, for 320. Marks,
and then laid the foundation of their new common Hall.

About the year 1429. the Grocers had license to purchase 500. Marks land:
since the which time, near adjoining unto the Grocers Hall, the said Company
had builded seven proper houses for seven aged poor Alms people. Almes-houses
by the Grocers hall.
Thomas Knowles, Grocer, Mayor, gave his Tenement in Saint Anthonies Church
yard to the Grocers, toward the relief of the poor Brethren in that Company.
Also Henry Keble, Grocer, Mayor, gave to the seven Alms people, six pence
weekly for ever, which pension is now increased by the Masters, to some of them
two shillings a piece weekly, and to some of them less, etc. Henry Ady,
Grocer, 1563. gave a thousand Marks to the Grocers to purchase lands. And sir
Henry Pechy, Knight Banneret, free of that Company, gave them five hundred
pound to certain uses: he builded Almes-houses at Ludingstone in Kent, and
was there buried.

West from this Cony hope lane is the old Jury, whereof some portion is of
Cheap Ward, as before is showed: at the South end of this Lane, is the Parish
Church of S. Mary Cole-Church, Parish Church of S. Mary Cole-Church.
named of one Cole that builded it: this Church is builded upon a vault above
ground, so that men are forced to go to ascend up thereunto by certain steps. I
find no Monuments of this Church more, than that Henry the fourth granted
license to William Marshall and others, to found a Brotherhood of Saint
Katharine therein, because Thomas Becket and Saint Edmond the Archbishop were
baptized there. More I read of Bordhangly lane, to be of that Parish: and thus
much for the North side of the Poultry. The South side of the said Poultry,
beginning on the bank of the said brook, over against the Parish Church of
Saint Mildred, passing up to the great Conduit, has diverse fair houses, which
were sometimes inhabited by the Poulters, but now by Grocers, Haberdashers, and
Vpholsters.

Concerning other Antiquities there: first, Buckles bury of one Buckle.
is Buckles bury, so called of a Manor and Tenements pertaining to one
Buckle, who there dwelled, and kept his Courts. This Manor is supposed to be
the great stone-building, yet in part remaining on the South side of the
street, which of late time has been called the Old Barge, of such a sign
hanged out, near the gate thereof. This Manor, or great House, has of long
time been divided and letten out into many tenements: and it has been a
common speech, Barges towed up Walbrook unto Buckles bury.
that when Walbrooke did lie open, Barges were rowed out of the Thames, or
towed up so far: and therefore the place has ever since been called the Old
Barge.

Also, on the North side of this street, directly over-gainst the said Buckles
bury, was one ancient and strong Tower of stone the which Tower King Edward
the third, in the eighteenth of his reign, by the name of the Kings house,
called Cornet stoure in London, Cornet stoure in Buckles bury the Kings
Exchange. Exchequer.
did appoint to be his Exchange of money, there to be kept. In the 29. he
granted it to Frydus Guynysane, and Landus Bardoile, Merchants of Luke, for
twenty pound the year. And in the 32. he gave the same Tower to his College,
or free Chapel of Saint Stephen at Westminster, by the name of Cornet stoure
at Buckles bury in London.

This Tower, of late years, was taken down by one Buckle, a Grocer, meaning,
in place thereof, to have set up and builded a goodly frame of Timber: but the
said Buckle greedily laboring to pull down the old Tower, a part thereof fell
upon him, which so sore bruised him, that his life was thereby shortened: and
another that married his widow, set up the new prepared frame of Timber, and
finished the work.

This whole street, called Buckles bury, on both the sides throughout, is
possessed of Grocers and Apothecaries. Toward the west end thereof, on the
South side, breaks out one other short Lane, Peneritch street.
called in Records Peneritch street, it reaches but to Saint Sythes lane,
Parish Church of S. Sithe Benet Shrog. Needlers lane.
and Saint Sythes Church is the farthest part thereof; for by the west end of
the said Church, begins Needlers lane, which reaches to Sopers lane, as is
aforesaid. This small Parish Church of St. Sith, has also an addition of
Bennet shorn, (or Shrog, or Shorehog) for by all these names have I read it,
but the ancientest is Shorn: wherefore it seems to take that name of one
Benedict Shorn, sometime a Citizen and Stockefishmonger of London, a new
builder, repairer, or benefactor thereof, in the year of Edward the second: so
that Shorn is but corruptly called Shrog, and more corruptly Shorehog.

There lie buried in this Church, John Froysh, Mercer, Mayor, 1394. John
Rochford, Rob. Rochford, John Hold, Alderman, Hen. Frowike, Mercer, Mayor,
1435. Edw. Warrington, John Morris, John Huntley, Richard Lincoln, Felmonger,
1548. Sir Ralph Warren, Mercer, Mayor, 1553. Sir John Lion, Grocer, Mayor,
1554. these two last have Monuments, the rest are all defaced. Edward Hall,
Gentleman of Greyes Inn, common Sergeant of this City, and then Vnder-Sheriffe
of the same, he wrote the large Chronicles from Richard the second, till the
end of Henry the eighth, was buried in this Church.

Grace and Religion, A fair Monument in the East wall of the Chancell.

with the best of Nature,
All striving to excel,
yet all agreeing
To make one absolute
and perfect creature:
Would any see a sight,
so worth the seeing?
He comes too late:
here she lies buried,
With whom they lately lived,
and now are dead.
In the Vault there by,
Lies buried the body of Anne (...) of John Farrar, Gentleman, and Merchant
Adventurer of this City, daughter of William Shepherd, of Great Rowlright, in
the County of Oxenford, Esquire. She departed this life the 12. day of July,
An. Dom. 1613. being then about the age of 21. years. To whose well-deserving
memory, this Monument is by her said husband erected.

Here was a Bud, A small gilt engraven Plate fastened under the Monument.

beginning for her May:
Before her Flower,
Death took her hence away.
But for what cause?
That friends might joy the more,
Where their hope is,
she flourishes now before.
She is not lost,
but in those joys remain,
Where friends may see,
and joy in her again.
Here lies buried the right Worshipful, A fair ancient Marble Tomb in the
Chancell.
Sir Ralph Warren, Knight, Alderman, and twice Lord Mayor of this City of
London, Mercer, Merchant of the Staple at Callis; with his two wives, Dame
Christian, and Dame Ioane: Which said Sir Ralph departed this life the 11. day
of July, An. Dom. 1553.

Here lies Katharine Prettyman, A fair plated stone in the midst of the
Chancell.

a Maid of seventeene years,
In Suffolk borne, in London bred,
as by her death appears.
With Natures gifts she was adorned,
of honest birth and kin,
Her virtuous mind, with modest grace,
did love of many win.
But when she should with honest match
have lived a wedded life,
Stay there (quoth Jove) the world is naught,
for she shall be my wife,
And Death, since thou have done thy due,
lay nuptial rites aside,
And follow her unto the grave,
that should have been your Bride:
Whose honest life, and faithful end,
her patience therewithal,
Does plainly show, that she with Christ
now lives, and ever shall.
She departed this life the 11. day of August, 1594. Quod mihi dilectissimus
and memorabile pii, A plated stone in the North I Will.

Donavit, breviter
abstulit ecce Deus.
Dulcis Ioannes
artorum parvule-cultor
Occidis heu pietas
and lachrymosa dies.
Affer opem quicunque
pores medicabile vultu,
Et aliud dederis
si mihi sancte Deus.
Obijt 3. die Aprilis, 1592.
Then, Parish Chruch of S. Pancrate.
in Needlers lane have ye the Parish Church of Saint Pancrate, a proper small
Church, but diverse rich Parishioners therein, and has had, of old time, many
liberal Benefactors: But of late, such as (not regarding the order taken by
Queen Elizabeth) the least Bell in their Church being broken, Justices charged
to punish such as sell Bells from their Churches, Eliz. 14.
have rather sold the same for half the value, than put the Parish to charge
with new casting: late experience has proved this to be true, besides the
spoil of Monuments there.

In this Church are buried Sir Aker, John Aker, John Barnes, Mercer, Mayor,
1370. John Beston, and his wife, Robert Rayland, John Hamber, John Gage, John
Rowley, John Lamb, John Hadley, Grocer, Mayor, 1379. Richard Gardener, Mercer,
Mayor, 1478. John Stockton, Mercer, Mayor, 1470. John Dane, Mercer, John
Parker, Robert Marshall, Alderman, 1439. Robert Corcheford, Robert Hatfield,
and Robert Hatfield, Nicholas Wilfilde, and Thomas his son, the Monuments of
all which be defaced and gone.

There do remain, of Robert Burley, 1360. Richard Wilson, 1525. Robert
Packenton, Mercer, slain with a Gunne, shot at him in a morning, as he was
going to morrow Mass from his house in Cheap, to Saint Thomas of Acars, in
the year 1536. The murderer was never discovered, but by his own confession,
made when he came to the Gallows at Banbury, to be hanged for Felony. T.
Wardbury, Haberdasher, 1545. James Huysh, Grocer, 1590. Ambrose Smith, etc.

Hereunder lies buried James Huysh, A fair Monument in the North wall of the
Quire.
Citizen and Grocer of London, third son of John Huysh, of Beuford, in the
County of Somerset, Esquire: which James had to his first wife, Margaret
Bourchier; by whom he had issue eleven children: And to his second wife, Mary
Moffet, by whom he had issue, 18. children. He dyed the 20. day of August, Anno
Dom. 1590.

Hac defunctus Huysh
tenui sub mole quiescit,
Nec tamen hac totus
mole quiescit Huysh.
Corpus inest Tumulo,
colit aurea spiritus astra,
Scilicet hunc Coelum
vendicat, illud humus.
Londinensis erat Civis
dum fata sinebant:
Iam cum sydereo
Millre Miles agit.
Bis Thalami sociam
duxit, prior edidit illi
Vndenas proles,
altera bisque novem.
Munificam persaepe
manum porrexit egenis,
Virtutum fautor,
Pieridumque fuit.
Nil opus est plures
illi contexere lauds,
Sufficit in Coelo*
jam reperisse locum.
Hoc qualecunque Monumentum, Rowlandus, dicti Iacobi haeres, posuit pietatis
ergo.

Here lies a Mary,
mirror of her sex
For all that best their
souls or body decks.
Faith, form, or fame,
the miracle of youth,
For zeal and knowledge
of the sacred truth,
For frequent reading
the whole holy Writ.
For fervent prayer,
and for practice fit,
For meditations,
full of use and art,
For humbleness,
in habit and in heart,
For pious, prudent,
peaceful, praisefull life,
For all the duties
of a Christian wife;
For patient bearing
seven dead-bearing throws,
For one alive, which
yet dead with her goes.
From Travers her dear
Spouse, her father Hayes,
Lord Mayor, more honored
in her virtuous praise.
Quam pie obiit puerpera die octavo Martii, Anno Aetatis 29. Anno Salutis 1614.
Then is a part of Sopers lane, turning up to Cheap.

By the assent of Stephen Abunden, Pepperers in Sopers lane.
were admitted to sell all such Spices, and other Wares, as Grocers now use to
sell, retaining the old name of Pepperers in Sopers lane; till at length, in
the reign of Henry the sixth, the same Sopers lane was inhabited by
Cordwainers and Curriers, after that the Pepperers or Grocers had seated
themselves in a more open street, to wit, in Buckles bury, where they yet
remain. Thus much for the South Wing of Cheap Ward.

At the West end of this Poultry, and also of Buckles bury, West Cheap a large
Market place.
begins the large street of West Cheaping, a Market place so called, which
street stretches West, till ye come to the little Conduit by Paul's gate, but
not all of Cheap Ward. In the East part of this street stands the Great
Conduit, Great Conduit in West Cheap.
of sweet water, conveyed by pipes of Lead under ground from Paddington, for
service of this City, castellated with stone, and cisterned in Lead, about the
year 1285. and again new builded and enlarged by Thomas Ilam, one of the
Sheriffs, 1479.

About the midst of this street is the Standard in Cheap; of what antiquity,
the first foundation I have not read. But Henry the sixth, by his Patent dated
at Windsore the 21. of his reign, which Patent was confirmed by Parliament,
1442. granted license to Thomas Knolles, John Chichle, and other, executors to
John Wells, Grocer, sometime Mayor of London, with his goods to make new the
highway, which leads from the City of London toward the Palace of
Westminster, before and nigh the Manor of Savoy, parcel of the Duchy of
Lancaster; a way then very ruinous, and the pavement broken, to the hurt and
mischief of the subjects: Which old pavement, then remaining in that way,
within the length of five hundred foot, and all the breadth of the same,
before and nigh the site of the Manor aforesaid, they to break up, and with
stone, gravel, and other stuff, one other good and sufficient way there to
make, for the commodity of the subjects. And further, The old Standard in
Cheap, with a Conduit therein, taken down, and newbuilded.
that the Standard in Cheap, where diverse executions of the Law beforetime had
been performed, which Standard at that present was very ruinous with age, in
which there was a Conduit should be taken down, and another competent
Standard of stone, together with a Conduit in the same, of new, strongly to be
builded, for the commodity and honor of the City, with the goods of their said
Testator, without interruption, etc.

Of executions at the Standard in Cheap, Executions at the Standard in Cheap.
we read, that in the year 1293. three men had their right hands smitten off
there, for rescuing of a prisoner, arrested by an Officer of the City. In the
year 1326. the Burgesses of London caused Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exceter,
Treasurer to Edward the second, and other, to be beheaded at the Standard in
Cheap (but this was by Paul's Gate.) In the year 1351. the 26. of Edward the
third, two Fishmongers were beheaded at the Standard in Cheap, but I read not
of their offense. 1381. Wat Tyler beheaded Richard Lions and other there. In
the year 1399. Henry the fourth caused the Blank Charters, made by Richard the
second, to be burnt there. In the year 1450. Jack Cade, Captain of the
Kentish Rebels, beheaded the Lord Say there. In the year 1461. John Davy had
his hand stricken off there, because he had stricken a man before the Judges
at Westminster, etc.

Then next is the great Cross in West Cheap: Great Cross in West Cheap
first builded.
Which Cross was there erected in the year 1290. by Edward the first, upon
occasion thus: Queen Elianor his wife died at Hardeby (a Town near unto the
City of Lincoln) her body was brought from thence to Westminster, and the King
in memory of her, caused in every place where her body rested by the way, a
stately Cross of stone to be erected, with the Queens Image and Arms upon
it; as at Grantham, Woborne, Northhampton, Stony-Stratford, Dunstable, S.
Albones, Waltham, West Cheap, and at Charing, from whence she was conveyed to
Westminster, and there buried.

This Cross in West Cheap, Cross in Cheap new builded.
being like to those other which remain till this day, and being by length of
time decayed; John Hatherley, Mayor of London, procured in the year 1441.
license of K. Henry the sixth, to re-edifie the same in more beautiful manner,
for the honor of the City: and had license also to take up 200. fodder of Lead
for the building thereof, of certain Conduits, and a common Granary. This
Cross was then curiously wrought, at the charges of diverse Citizens: Ioh.
Fisher, Mercer, gave 600. Marks toward it, the same was begun to be set up,
1484. and finished 1486. the second of Henry the 7. It was after gilt over, in
the year 1522. against the coming in of Charles the fifth Emperor, in the
year 1553. against the Coronation of Queen Anne, new burnished against the
Coronation of Edward the sixth, and again new gilt 1554. against the coming
in of King Philip: since the which time, Cross in Cheap indighted, the Images
broken.
the said Cross having been presented by diverse Juries (or Quests of
Wardmote) to stand in the highway, to the let of carriages (as they alleged)
but could not have it removed; it followed, that in the year 1581. the twenty
one of June, in the night, the lowest Images round about the said Cross (being
of Christ his resurrection, of the Virgin Mary, King Edward the Confessor, and
such like) were broken, and defaced. Proclamation was made, that whosoever would
bewray the doers, should have forty Crowns; but nothing came to light: the
Image of the blessed Virgin, at that time was robbed of her Son, and her arms
broken, by which she staid him on her knees, her whole body was also haled
with ropes, and left likely to fall: but in the year 1595. was again fastened
and repaired, and in the year next following, a new misshapen Son, as born out
of time, all naked, was laid in her arms, the other Images remaining broke as
before. But on the East side of the same Cross, the steps being taken thence
under the Image of Christ's resurrection defaced, was then set up a curious
wrought Tabernacle of gray Marble, Image of Diana let upon the Cross in Cheap.
and in the same an Alabaster Image of Diana, and water conveyed from the
Thames, prilling from her naked breast for a time, but now decayed. Socrat. li.
1. cap. 13.


In the year 1599. the timber of the Cross at the top being rotted within the
lead, Top of the cross being feared to fall, was taken down.
the arms thereof bending, were feared to have fallen, to the harming of some
people; Cross in Cheap commanded to be repaired.
and therefore the whole body of the Cross was scaffolded about, and the top
thereof taken down, meaning in place thereof to have set up a Pyramid; but some
of her Majesty's honorable Counselors directed their letters to sir Nicholas
Mosley, then Mayor, by her Highness express commandment concerning the Cross,
forthwith to be repaired, and placed again as it formerly stood, etc.
Notwithstanding, the said Cross stood headless more than a year after:
whereupon the said Counselors in greater number, meaning not any longer to
permit the continuance of such a contempt, Command again sent for repairing the
Cross in Cheap, it being an ancient Ensign of Christianity.
wrote to Will. Rider, then Mayor, requiring him by virtue of her Highness said
former direction and commandment, without any further delay, to accomplish the
same her Majesty's most princely care therein, respecting especially the
antiqity and continuance of that Monument, ancient Ensign of Christianity,
etc. dated the 24. of December, 1600. After this a cross of timber was framed,
set up, covered with lead, and gilded, the body of the Cross downward cleansed
of dust, the Scaffold carried thence. About 12. nights following, the Image of
our Lady was again defaced, by plucking off her crown, and almost her head,
taking from her her naked child, and stabbing her in the breast, etc. Thus
much for the Cross in West Cheap.

Then at the West end of West Cheap street, was sometime a Cross of stone,
called the Old Cross. Ralph Higden in his Polycronicon sait, that Walter
Stapleton, Bishop of Exceter, Treasurer to Edward the 2. was by the Burgesses
of London beheaded at this Cross, then called the Standard, without the North
door of S. Paul's Church, and so is it noted in other writers, that then lived.
This old Cross stood and remained at the East end of the Parish Church, called
S. Michael in the Corn by Paul's gate, near to the North end of the
Old-Exchange, till the year 1390. the 13. of Richard the 2. in place of which
old Cross then taken down, the said Church of S. Michael was enlarged, and
also a fair water-Conduit builded about the 9. of Henry the sixth.

In the reign of Edward the 3. diverse Iustings were made in this street,
Iustings and Tournament in West Cheap.
betwixt Sopers lane and the great Cross, namely, one in the year 1331. about
the 21. of September, as I find noted by diverse writers of that time. In the
middle of the City of London (say they) in a street called Cheap, the stone
pavement being covered with sand, that the horse might not slide, when they
strongly set their feet to the ground, the King held a Tournament 3. days
together with the Nobility, Edward the 3. held Tournament or Iusts in West
Cheap 3. days together.
valiant men of the Realm, and other, some strange Knights. And to the end the
beholders might with the better ease see the same, there was a wooden Scaffold
erected cross the street, like unto a Tower, Queen Philip and her ladies
fell from a Scaffold in Cheap.
wherein Queen Philip, and many other Ladies, richly attired and assembled from
all parts of the Realm, did stand to behold the Justs: but the higher frame in
which the Ladies were placed, brake in sunder, whereby they were (with some
shame) forced to fall down, by reason whereof the Knights and such as were
underneath were grievously hurt: wherefore the Queen took great care to save
the Carpenters from punishment, and through her prayers (which she made upon
her knees) pacified the King and Council, and thereby purchased great love of
the people. A shed or standing made for the King to behold the shows in Cheap.
After which time the King caused a Shed to be strongly made of stone for
himself, the Queen, and other States to stand on, and there to behold the
Justings, and other shows at their pleasure, by the Church of S. Mary Bow, as
is showed in Cordwainer street Ward. Thus much for the high street of Cheap.

Now let us return to the South side of Cheap Ward: Southside of Cheap
street so fat as Cheap Ward reaches.
from the great Conduit west be many fair and large houses, for the most part
possessed of Mercers, up to the corner of Cordwainer street, corruptly called
Bow lane, which houses in former times were but sheds, or shops, with sollors
over them, as of late one of them remained at Sopers lane end, wherein a woman
sold seeds, roots, and herbs: but those sheds or shops, by encroachments on
the high street, are now largely builded on both sides outward, and also
upward, some three, four, or five stories high.

Now of the North side of Cheap street and Ward, North side of Cheap Ward.
beginning at the great Conduit, and by S. Mary Cole Church, where we left.
Next thereunto Westward is the Mercers Chapel, sometime an Hospitali,
entitled of S. Thomas of Acon, or Acars, Hospital of S. Tho. of Acars.
for a Master and Brethren, Militia hospitalis, etc. says the Record of Edward
the third, the 14. year, it was founded by Thomas Fitztheobald de Heili, and
Agnes his wife. Sister to Thomas Becket, in the reign of Henry the second.
They gave to the Master and Brethren the lands with the appurtenances, that
sometimes were Gilbert Beckets, father to the said Thomas, in the which he was
borne, there to make a Church. There was a Charnell and a Chapel over it of
S. Nicholas and S. Stephen. This Hospital was valued to dispend 277. pounds,
three shillings four pence surrendered the 30. of Henry the eighth, the 21. of
October, and was since purchased by the Mercers, by means of sir Richard
Gresham, and was again set open on the Eve of S. Michael, 1541. the 33. of
Henry the 8. It is now called the Mercers Chapel, Mercers Chapel.
therein is kept a free Grammar School, A free School in the Hospital of S.
Thom. of Acars.
as of old time had bin accustomed, commanded by Parliament. Here be many
Monuments remaining, but more have been defaced: James Butler, Earl of Ormond,
and Dame Ioane his Countess, 1428. John Norton Esquire, Stephen Cavendish,
Draper, Mayor, 1362. Thomas Cavendish, William Cavendish, Thomas Ganon called
Pike, one of the Sheriffs, 1410. Hungate of Yorkshire, Ambrose Cresacre, John
Chester, Draper, John Trusbut, Mercer, 1437. Thomas Norland, Sheriff, 1483.
Sir Edmond Sha, Goldsmith, Mayor, 1482. Sir Thomas Hill, Mayor, 1485. Thomas
Ilam, Sheriff, 1479. Lancelot Laken, Esquire, Ralph Tilne, Sheriff, 1488.
Garth, Esquire, John Rich, Thomas Butler, Earl of Ormond, 1515. Sir W. Butler,
Grocer, Mayor, 1515. William Brown, Mercer, Mayor, 1523. John Lock, 1519. Sir
Thomas Baldry, Lock his Arms in the windows.
Mercer, Mayor, 1523. Sir W. Lock, Mercer, Sheriff, 1548. Sir I. Allen,
Mercer, Mayor, 1525. deceased 1544. Sir Thomas Leigh, Mercer, Mayor, 1558. Sir
Richard Malory, Mercer, Mayor, 1564. Humfrey Baskervile, Mercer, Sheriff,
1561. Sir George Bond, Mayor, 1587, etc.

Before this Hospital toward the street, was builded a fair and beautiful
Chapel arched over with stone, and thereupon the Mercers Hall, a most curious
piece of work: Sir John Allen, Mercer, being founder of that Chapel, was
there buried, but since his Tomb is removed thence into the body of the
Hospital Church, and his body-roome divided into shops, are letten out for
re^t. These Mercers were enabled to be a Company, and to purchase lands to the
value of 20. li. the year, the 17. of Richard the 2. they had 3. messuages and
shops in the Parish of St. Martin Oteswich, in the Ward of Bishops-gate, for
the sustentation of the poor, and a Chantry, the 22. of Richard the second.
Henry the fourth in the 12. of his reign, confirmed to Stephen Spilman, W.
Marchford, and John Whatile, Mercers, by the name of one new Seldam, shed, or
building, with shops, ce^lers, and edifices whatsoever appertaining, called
Crownsilde, situate in the Mercery in West Cheap, Crownsilde, under Bow Church.
in the Parish of St. Mary de Arcubus in London, etc. to be holden in Burgage,
as all the City of London is, and which were worth by year, in all issues
according to the true value of them, 7. li. 13. s. 4. d. as was found by
inquisition before Thomas Knolles, Mayor, and Eschetor in the said City. Henry
the sixth, in the 3. of his reign, at the request of John Coventry, John
Carpenter, and William Grove, granted to the Mercers to have a Chaplain, and a
Brotherhood, for relief of such of their Company, as came to decay by
misfortune on the Sea. In the year, 1536. on Saint Peter's night, King Henry
the eighth, and Queen Jane his wife, stood in this Mercers Hall, then new
builded, and beheld the marching Watch of the City, most bravely set out, sir
John Allen, Mercer, one of the Kings Council, being Mayor.

Next beyond the Mercers Chapel, Ironmonger lane.
and their Hall, is Ironmonger lane, so called of Ironmongers dwelling there,
whereof I read in the reign of Edward the first, etc. In this Lane is the
small Parish Church of St. Martin, Parish Church of S. Martins Pomary.
called Pomary, upon what occasion I certainly know not. It is supposed to be
of Apples growing, where now houses are lately builded: for my self have seen
large void places. Monuments in that Church none to be accounted of.

Farther west, S. Laurence lane.
is St. Laurence lane, so called of St. Laurence Church, which stands
directly over against the north end thereof. Antiquities in this Lane I find
none other, than that among many fair houses, there is one large Inn for
receipt of Travelers, called Blossoms Inn, Blossoms Inn.
but corruptly Bosoms Inn, and has to sign S. Laurence the Deacon, in a
border of Blossoms or Flowers.

Then near to the Standard in Cheap, Honey lane.
is Honey lane, so called, not of sweetness thereof, being very narrow, and
somewhat dark, but rather, of often washing and sweeping, to keep it clean. In
this Lane is the small Parish Church, called Alhallowes in Honey lane: Parish
Church of Alhallowes Honey lane.
There be no Monuments in this Church worth the nothing. I find, that John
Norman, Draper, Mayor, 1453. was buried there: He gave to the Drapers his
Tenements on the North side the said Church, they to allow for the Beam light
and Lamp, 13. shillings 4. pence yearly, from this Lane to the Standard. And
thus much for Cheap Ward, in the high street of Cheap; for it stretches no
farther.

Now, for the North Wing of Cheap Ward, Catte-street.
have ye Catte-streete, corruptly called Catteten street, which begins at
the North end of Ironmonger lane, and runs to the west end of St. Laurence
Church, as is before showed.

On the North side of this street is the Guild Hall, wherein the Courts for
the City be kept: namely, 1. The Court of Common Council, The Guild Hall, and
Courts kept.
2. The court of the Lord Mayor and his Brethren the Aldermen, Lib. Fle^^^.
3. The court of Hustings, 4. The court of Orphans, 5. The 2. courts of the
Sheriffs, 6. The court of the Wardmote, 7. The court of Hallmote, 8. The court
of Requests, commonly called the Court of Conscience, 9. The Chamberlaines
court for Prentises, and making them free. This Guild Hall, says Robert
Fabian, was begun to be builded new in the year 1411. the twelfth of Henry the
fourth, by Thomas Knoles, then Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen: The same
was made of a little cottage, a large and great house, as now it stands;
toward the charges whereof, the Companies gave large benevolences. Also
offenses of men were pardoned for sums of money toward this Work,
extraordinary Fees were raised, Fines, Amercements, and other things employed,
during 7. years, with a continuation there of 3. years more, all to be
employed to this building.

The first year of Henry the sixth, John Coventry and John Carpentar,
Executors to Richard Whitington, gave toward the paving of this great Hall
twenty pound, and the next year fifteen pound more to the said Pavement with
hard stone of Purbecke: They also glased some Windows thereof, and of the
Majors Court, on every which Window, the Arms of Richard Whitington are
placed. The foundation of the Majors court was laid in the third year of the
reign of Henry the sixth; and of the Porch, on the South side of the Majors
court, in the fourth of the said King. Then was builded the Majors Chamber, and
the Council Chamber, with other rooms above the stairs.

Having here so just occasion, speaking of that former ancient Council
Chamber, The new Council Chamber at the Guild Hall, and the building thereof.
which has continued so ever since; I cannot but account it expedient (as in
no place better fitting) to remember the fair and goodly new Council Chamber;
a worthy Act and Honor, whereby to renown deservedly the City for ever. The
said new Council Chamber, with a fair Room over the same, appointed for a
Treasury, wherein to preserve the Books and Records belonging to the City;
and another room also underneath the said Chamber, reserved for necessary use
and employment, began to be builded the first week after Easter, in the time
of the Maioralty of Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight and Alderman; in the year of
our Lord, 1614. It was fully finished shortly after Michaeh^as, 1615. at the
latter end of the Maioralty of Sir Thomas Hayes, Knight and Alderman. But the
Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen his brethren, kept their first Court in the said
new Council Chamber, The first Court keep in the new Council Chamber.
on the seventh day of November, in the year of our Lord, 1615. Sir John
Iolles, Knight and Alderman, being then Lord Mayor: By whose order and
direction, the said building was performed, from the first beginning thereof,
to the final finishing of the same; amounting to the charge of 1740. pounds:
than which, no money (in my mind) could be better bestowed, nor more to the
Cities credit and renown.

Last of all, a stately Porch, entering the great Hall, was erected, the front
thereof toward the South, being beautified with Images of stone, such as is
showed by these verses following, made about some thirty years since, by
William Elderton, at that time an Attorney in the Sheriffs Courts there:

Though most the Images
be pulled down, Verses made on the Images over the Guild Hall gate.

And none be thought
remain in Town,
I am sure there be
in London yet
Seven Images, such,
and in such a place,
As few or none,
I think, will hit:
Yet every day
they show their face,
And thousands see them
every year,
But few, I think,
can tell me where:
Where Jesus Christ
aloft does stand, Names of Images.

Law and Learning
on either hand;
Discipline in
the Devils neck,
And hard by her
are three direct;
There Justice, Fortitude
and Temperance stand,
Where find ye the like
in all this Land?
Diverse Aldermen glazed the great Hall, and other Courts, as appears by their
Arms in each window. William Hariot, Draper, Mayor, 1481. gave forty pound to
the making of two Loovers in the said Guild Hall, and toward the glazing
thereof. Kitchens by the Guild Hall.
The Kitchens, and other houses of Office adjoining to this Guild Hall, were
builded of later time, to wit, about the year 1501. by procurement of Sir John
Sha, Goldsmith, Mayor, (who was the first that kept his Feast there) toward
the charges of which work, the Mayor had of the Fellowships of the City (by
their own agreement) certain sums of money; as, of the Mercers forty
pounds; the Grocers, twenty pounds; the Drapers, thirty pounds; and so of the
other Fellowships through the City, as they were of power.

Also Widows, and other wel-disposed persons, gave certain sums of money:
as, the Lady Hill, ten pounds; the Lady Austrie, ten pounds; and so of many
other, till the work was finished. Since the which time, the Majors Feasts
have been yearly kept there, which before-time had been kept in the Tailors
Hall, and in the Grocers Hall. Nicholas Alwin, Grocer, Mayor, 1499. deceased
1505. gave by his Testament, for a hanging of Tapestrie, to serve for
principal days in the Guild Hall, 73. l. 6. s. 8. d. How this gift was
performed, I have not heard: for Executors of our time, having no conscience,
(I speak of my own knowledge) prove more Testaments than they perform.

Now for the Chapel or College of our Lady Mary Magdalen, Chapel or
College at Guild Hall. Patent.
and of All Saints by the Guild Hall, called London College: I read, that the
same was builded about the year 1299. and that Peter Fanelore, Adam Frauncis,
and Henry Frowicke Citizens, gave one Message with the appurtenances, in the
Parish of S. Foster, to William Brampton, Custos of the Chauntry, by them
founded in the said Chapel, with four Chaplains, and on the other house in
the Parish of S. Giles without Creplegate, in the 27. of Edward the third, was
given to them.

Moreover I find, that Richard the 2. in the 20. of his reign, granted to
Stephen Spilman, Mercer, license to give one message, three shops, and one
garden, with the appurtenances, being in the Parish of S. Andrew Hubberd, to
the Custos and Chaplains of the said Chapel, and to their successors, for
their better relief and maintenance for ever.

King Henry the 6. in the eighth of his reign, gave license to John Barnard,
Custos, and the Chaplains, to build of new the said Chapel or College of
Guild Hall: Chapel or College at Guildhall new builded.
and the same Henry the 6. in the 27. of his reign, granted to the
Paris-Clerks in London, a Guild of S. Nicholas, for two Chaplains, by them to
be kept in the said Chapel of S. Mary Magdalen, near unto the Guild Hall,
and to keep 7. Almes-people. Henry Barton, Skinner, Mayor, founded a Chaplain
there: Roger Depham, Mercer, and Sir William Langford, Knight, had also
Chaplains there. This Chapel or College had a Custos, 7. Chaplains, 3.
Clerks, and 4. Quiresters.

Monuments there have been sundry, as appears by the Tombs of Marble yet
remaining, seven in number, but all defaced. The uppermost in the Quire, on the
South side thereof, above the Revestrie door, was the Tomb of John Wells,
Grocer, Mayor 1451. The likeness of Wels are graven on the Tomb, on the
Revestrie door, and other places on that side the Quire. Also in the glass
window, is the likeness of Wells, with hands elevated out of the same Wels,
holding scrowles, wherein is written, Mercy: the writing in the East window
(being broken) yet remains Wells. John Wells a principal benefactor to
Guild hall College.
I found his Arms also in the South glass window: all which do show, that
the East end and South side of the Quire of this Chapel, and the Revestire,
were by him both builded and glazed. On the North side of the Quire, the Tomb
of Thomas Knesworth, Fishmonger, Mayor 1505. who deceased 1505. who deceased
1515. was defaced, and within these 44. years again renewed by the
Fishmongers. Two other Tombs lower there are, the one of a Draper, the other
of a Haberdasher, their names not known: Richard Stomin is written in the
window by the Haberdasher. Under flat stones do lie diverse Custos of the
Chapel, Chaplains and Officers to the Chamber.

Amongst others, John Clipstone, Priest, sometime Custos of the Library of the
Guild Hall, 1457. Another of E. Alison, Priest, one of the Custos of the
Library, 1510. etc. Sir John Langley, Goldsmith, Mayor, 1576. lies buried in
the vault, under the Tomb of John Wells beforenamed. This Chapel or
College, valued to dispend 12. l. 8. s. 9. d. by the year, was surrendered
amongst other: the Chapel remains to the Mayor and Communalty, wherein they
have service weekly, as also at the election of the Mayor, and at the Majors
Feast, etc.

Adjoining to this Chapel on the South side, Library at Guild Hall.
was sometime a fair and large Library, furnished with Books, pertaining to
the Guild Hall and College.

These Books (as it is said) were, in the reign of Edward the 6. sent for by
Edward Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector, with promise to be restored shortly:
men laded from thence three Carries with them, but they were never returned.
This Library was builded by the Executors of R. VVhitington, and by VV. Bury.
The Arms of VVhitington are placed on the one side in the stone-worke: and two
letters, to wit, W. and B. for William Bury, on the other side: it is now
losted through, and made a storehouse for Clothes.

South-west from this Guild Hall, Parish Church of S. Laurence, in the Jury.
is the fair Parish Church of S. Laurence, called in the Jury, because (of
old time) many Jews inhabited thereabout. This Church is fair and large, and
has some Monuments, as shall be showed. I my self, more than 70. years
since, have seen in this Church the shanke bone of a man (as it is taken) and
also a tooth of a very great bigness, The tooth of some monstrous Fish as I
take it.
hanged up, for show, in chains of iron, upon a pillar of stone; the tooth
(being about the bigness of a man's fist) is long since conveyed from thence:
the thigh or shanke bone, A shanke bone of 25. inches long, of a man, as is
said, but might be of an Elephant.
of 25. inches in length by the Rule, remains yet fastened to a post of
timber, and is not so much to be noted for the length, as for the thicknes,
hardness and strength thereof; for when it was hanged on the stone pillar, it
fretted (with moving) the said pillar, and was not it self fretted, nor (as
seems) is not yet lightened, by remaining dry: but where or when this bone was
first found or discovered, I have not heard; and therefore, rejecting the
fables of some late Writers, I overpasse them. Walter Blundell had a Chauntry
there, the 14. of Edward the second, There lie buried in this Church,
Elizabeth, wife to John Fortescue; Katharine Stoketon, John Stratton, Philip
Albert, John Fleming, Philip Agmondesham, William Skywith, John Norlong, John
Baker, Thomas Alleyne, William Barton, Mercer, 1410. William Melrith, Mercer,
one of the Sheriffs, 1425. Simon Barlet, Mercer, 1428. Walter Chartsey,
Draper, one of the Sheriffs, 1430. Richard Rich, Esquire of London, the
Father, and Richard Rich his son, Mercer, one of the Sheriffs, 1442.
deceased, 1469. with this Epitaph:

Respice quod opus est
Praesentis temporis aevum,
Omne quod est, mihil est,
Praeter amare Deum.
This Richard was Father to John, buried in S. Thomas Acars, which John was
Father to Thomas, Father to Richard Lord Rich, etc. John Pickering, honorable
for service of his Prince, and for the English Merchants beyond the Seas, who
deceased, 1448. John Atkenson, Gentleman, Dame Mary S. Maure, John Waltham,
Roger Bonifant, John Chayhee, John Abbot, John Marshall, Mercer, Mayor, 1493.
William Purchat, Mayor 1498. Thomas Burgoyne, Gentleman, Mercer, 1517. A wife
to a Master of Defense, servant to the Princes of Wales, Duchess of Cornwall,
and Countess of Chester.

Sir Michel Dormer, Mayor, 1541.

Robert Charsey, one of the Sheriffs, 1548.

Sir William Row, Ironmonger, Mayor, 1593.

Samuel Thornhill, 1597.

Lo here the Lady Margaret North, An ancient Tomb in the Chancell.

in Tomb and earth does lie;
Of husbands four the faithful Spouse,
whose fame shall never dye.
One Andrew Fraunces was the first,
the second Robert hight,
Surnamed Chartsey, Alderman:
Sir David Brook, a Knight,
Was third. But he that passed all,
and was in number fourth,
And for his virtue made a Lord,
was called, Sir Edward North.
These all together do I wish
a joyful rising day:
That of the Lord, and of his Christ,
All honor they may say.
Obiit 2. die Iunii, An. Dom. 1575. Hic jacet Simon Bennington, Civis and
Pannarius London, An ancient Tomb in the South wall*
Sustentatorum istius Capellae, ac unius Capellani, in eadem divina quotidie
celebratis. Cujus animae Propitietur Deus.

Hic incineratur corpus quondam Galfridi Bullayne, A gravestone on the ground,
well plated.
Civis, Merceri, and Maioris London, Qui ab hac -- Ann. Dom. 1463. Cujus animae
pax sit perpetua. Amen.

The word (Now thus) 32. times dispersed in Brass all over the Gravestone.

Hic jacet Thomas Boleyne, de Comitatu Norfolciae, Armiger: Qui obiit ultimo
die Mensis Aprilis, An. Dom. 1571. Cujus, etc.

Here lies Sir Richard Gresham, An ancient Tomb East in the wall.
Knight, sometimes Lord Mayor of London and Audrey his first wife, by whom he
had issue, Sir John Gresham, and Sir Thomas Gresham, Knights, William and
Margaret: which Sir Richard deceased the 20. day of February, An. Domini, 1548.
And the third year of King Edward the sixth his reign. And Adurey deceased
the 28. day of December, An. Dom. 1522.

Here lies the body of Geffrey Felding, A gravestone plated before the Tomb.
sometime Mayor of this City, and Angel his wife, and Thomas, Richard, and
John, sons of the said Geffrey, Ann. Dom. 1517.

Hic jacet Johannes Marshall, Civis and Mercerus Civitatis London. An ancient
Marble Tomb in the North side of the Quire.
Qui quidem Johannes obiit 4. die Januarii, An. Dom. 1498. Et Ioanna Vxor ejus:
quae quidem Ioanna obiit 18. die Decembris, 1484. Quorum, etc.

Hereunder lies buried the body of the Lady Alice Avenon, A fair Monument in
the North wall of the Quire.
being one of the daughters and heirs of Thomas Huchen, Citizen and Mercer of
London, whose last husband was Sir Alexander Avenon, Alderman, and late L.
Mayor of this City of London. Her second husband, was John Blundell, of
London, Mercer, by whom she had issue one son, named Philip, deceased, and
eight daughters, whereof five lived until they were married, and they were
coheires to their Father; namely, Elizabeth, married unto Edmond Hogan, of
London, Mercer; Mary, unto Sir Gerard Crockar, of Oxfordshire, Knight;
Theodora, married first unto John Denton, of Oxfordshire, Gent. and after unto
Justinian Champneis, of Kent, Esquire; Anne, married to Thomas Cordel, of
London, Mercer; and Susanna, unto Richard Freston, of London, Gent. The which
Alice Blundel, in the time of her widdowhood, left a foundation within the
Mercers Hall in London, for thirteen penny Ioaves of good sweet bread, to be
given (in her name) among thirteen poor folks of this Parish of Saint
Laurence in the Old Iewrie, every Sunday at Morning Prayer for ever, in the
presence of the worshipful of the same Parish. And her first husband was Hugh
Methwold of London, Mercer, by whom she had issue, William, her son and
heir, and a daughter named Anne, deceased. The which Dame Alice departed this
world, the 21. day of November, Ann. Dom. 1574. unto whom God send (through
Jesus Christ) a joyful resurrection. Amen. Aetatis suae, 61.

Qualis vita, finis ita.
Hereunder rests, A small Monument on a pillar in the North I Will.
in assured hope of the resurrection, the bodies of John Fox, Citizen and
Goldsmith of London, and Johanna his wife: whose lives as they were blameless
and holy, so their end was full of peace. The said John was the Founder of the
free School of Deane, in the County of Cumberl. besides 18. d. weekly to an
Almes-man, belonging to the Goldsmiths Hall. And other charitable deeds, to the
poor prisoners, and Hospitals in the City of London: The memory of whose good
deeds, God grant others to do the like. The said John, being of the age of 78.
fell on sleep the 8. day of June, 1597. And Iohanna his wife, of the age of
87. departed this life the 9. of February, 1600.

Fiducia Christianorum, Resurrectio Mortuorum.

Thus much for Cheap Ward, which has an Alderman, his Deputy; Common
Counselors, 11. Constables, 11. Scavengers, 9. for the Wardmote Inquest, 12.
and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteen, at 72. l. 16. s. and in the
Exchequer, at 72. l. 11. s.

COLEMAN STREET Ward.
NExt to Cheap Ward, on the North side thereof, is Coleman street Ward, and
begins also in the East, on the course of Walbrooke, in Lothbury, and
runs West, (on the South side) to the end of Ironmongers lane, and on the
North side, to the West corner of Basings Hall street. On the South side of
Lothbury, is the street called the Old Iewrie, the one half, and better, on
both sides toward Cheap, is of this Ward.

On the North side lies Coleman street, whereof the Ward takes name, wholly
on both sides North to London wall, and from that North end along by the Wall,
and Mooregate, East, to the course of Walbrooke. And again, from Coleman
street, West, to the Iron grates: and these be the bounds of this Ward.

Antiquities therein to be noted, are these: Lothbery.
First, the street of Lothbery, Lathbery, or Loadbery, (for by all these names
have I read it) took the name (as it seems) of a Bery, or Court of old time
there kept, but by whom, it is grown out of memory. This street is possessed
(for the most part) by Founders, that cast Candlestickes, Chafingdishes, Spice
Morters, and such like Copper or Laten works, and do afterward turn them with
the foot, and not with the wheel, to make them smooth and bright, with turning
and scratting, (as some do term it) making a loathsome noise to the
by-passers, that have not been used to the like; and therefore by them
disdainedly called Lothburie. On the South side of this street, amongst the
Founders, be some fair houses and large, for Merchants; namely, one that of
old time was the Jews Synagogue, The Jews Synagogue.
which was defaced by the Citizens of London, after that they had slain 700.
Jews, and spoiled the residue of their goods, in the year 1262. the 47. of H.
the 3. And not long after, in the year 1291. King Edward the first banished
the remnant of the Jews out of England, as is before showed.

The said Synagogue being so suppressed, certain Friars got possession
thereof: For in the year 1257. (says Matthew Paris) there were seen in London
a new order of Friars, Fratres de Saccae, or de poenitentia.
called De Poenitentia Jesus, or Fratres de Sacca, because they were apparelled
in Sackcloth, who had their house in London, near unto Aldersgate, without the
gate, and had license of Henry the third, in the 54. of his reign, to remove
from thence to any other place: and in the 56. he gave unto them this Jews
Synagogue. After which time, Eleanor the Queen, wife to Edward the first,
took into her protection, and warranted unto the Prior and brethren De
poenitentia Jesus Christi of London, the said land and building in Cole-church
street, Cole-church street, or Old Iew^^e.
in the parish of Saint Olave in the Jury, and S. Margaret in Lothburie, by her
granted, with consent of Stephen de Fulborn, Vnder-warden of the Bridge-house,
and other brethren of that house: for threescore Marks of Silver, which they
had received of the said Prior and brethren of repentance, toward the building
of the said Bridge. This order of Friars gathered many good scholars, and
multiplied in number exceedingly, until the Council at Lions, by the which it
was decreed, that (from that time forth) there should no more Orders of begging
Friars be permitted, but only the four Orders; to wit, the Dominicke or
Preachers, the Minorites or gray Friars, the Carmelites or white Friars, and
the Augustines: and so from that time the begging Friars decreased and fell to
nothing.

Now it followed, that in the year 1305. Robert Fitzwalter requested and
obtained of the said King Edward the first, To. Fitzwalter his house.
that the same Friars of the Sack, might assign to the said Robert their
Chapel or Church, of old time called the Synagogne of the Jews, near
adjoining to the then mansion place of the same Robert, which was in place
where now stands the Grocers Hall: and the said Synagogue was at the North
corner of the Old Iewry. Robert Large, Mercer, Mayor, in the year 1439. kept
his Maioraltie in this house, and dwelled there until his dying day.

This house stands and is of two Parishes, as opening into Lothbury, of Saint
Margarets Parish, and opening into the Old Iewry, of Saint Olaves Parish. The
said Robert Large gave liberally to both these Parishes, but was buried at S.
Olaves.

Hugh Clopton, The Wind mill Tavern in the old Jury.
Mercer, Mayor, 1492. dwelled in this house, and kept his Maioralty there. It
is now a Tavern, and has to sign a Windmill.

And thus much for this house, sometime the Jews Synagogue, since, an house of
Friars, then a Noble-mans house, after that, a Merchants house, wherein
Maioralties have been kept, and now a Wine-Taverne.

Then is the Old Jury, The Old Jury.
a street so called of Jews sometime dwelling there, and near adjoining, in
the Parishes of S. Olave, The Jews brought from Rone by William Duke of
Normandy.
S. Michael Bassings Hall. S. Martin Ironmonger lane, S. Laurence, called the
Iewrie, and so West to Woodstreete. William, D. of Normandy, first brought them
from Rone to inhabit here.

William Rufus favored them so far, W. Rufus favored them.
that he swear by Lukes face, his common Oath, if they could overcome the
Christians, he would be one of their Sect.

Henry the second grievously punished them for corrupting his coin. Hen. the
1. punished them.


Richard the first forbade Jews and women to be present at his Coronation,
Rich. the 3. forbade them to come to his coronation.
for fear of enchantments: for breaking of which commandment, many Jews were
slain, who being assembled, to present the King with some gift, one of them
was stricken by a Christian, which some unruly people perceiving, fell upon
them, beat them to their houses, and brent them therein, or slew them at their
coming out.

Also the Jews at Norwich, S. Edmondsbury, Lincoln, Stanford, and Lyn, were
robbed and spoiled; and at York, to the number of 500. besides Women and
children, entered a Tower of the Castle, proffered money to be in surety of
their lives, but the Christians would not take it: whereupon they cut the
throats of their own wives and children, and cast them over the walls on the
Christians heads, and then entering the Kings lodging, they burned both the
house and themselves.

King John, in the eleventh of his reign, commanded all the Jews, King John
tormented the Jews.
both men and women, to be imprisoned and grievously punished, because he
would have all their money: some of them gave all they had, and promised more,
to escape so many kinds of torments; for every one of them had one of their
eyes at the least plucked out. Amongst whom there was one, which being
tormented many ways, would not ransom himself, till the King had caused
(every day) one of his great teeth to be plucked out, by the space of seven
days, and then he gave the King ten thousand Marks of silver, to the end
they should pull out no more: the said King at that time spoiled the Jews of
sixty six thousand marks.

The 17. of this King, The Barons rifled the Jews.
the Barons brake into the Jews houses, rifled their coffers, and with the
stone of their houses, repaired the gates and walls of London.

King Henry the third, in the eleventh of his reign, (...). of Hen. 3. Hen 3.
excheted the lands and goods of the Jews.
granted to Semaine or Ballaster, the house of Benomye Mittun the Jew, in the
Parish of S. Michael Bassinghanghe, in which the said Benomye dwelt, with the
fourth part of all his Land in that Parish, which William Elie held of the fee
of Hugh Nevell, and all the land in Coleman street, belonging to the said
Benomye, and the fourth part of the land in the Parish of S. Laurence, which
was the fee of Thomas Buckerell, and were excheted to the King for the murder
which the said Benomye committed in the City of London, to hold to the said
Semaine, and his heirs, of the King, praying at Easter a pair of gilt
Spurs, and to do the service thereof due unto the Lords Court.

In like manner, and for like services, the King granted to Guso for his
homage, the other part of the Lands of the said Benomye in S. Michaels Parish,
which Law the Painter held, and was the Kings Exchete; and the Lands of the
said Benomye, in the said Parish, which Walter Turner held, and 15. foot of
Land which Hugh Harman held, with 15. iron Else of Land, and an half, in the
front of Ironmonger lane, in the Parish of S. Martin, which were the said
Benomyes, of the sea of the Hospital of S. Giles, and which Adam the Smith
held, with 2. stone houses, which were Moses the Jew of Canturbury, in the
Parish of S. Olave, and which are of the fee of Arnold le Reus, and are the
Kings Exchetes, as aforesaid.

The 16. of the said Henry, The Jews builded them a Synagogue in London.
the Jews in London builded a Synagogue, but the King commanded it should be
dedicated to our blessed Lady, and after gave it to the Brethren of S. Anthony
of Vienna, and so was it called S. Anthonies Hospital.

This King Henry founded a Church and house for converted Jews, Hen. the 3.
founded an house for converted Jews.
in a new street by the Temple, whereby it came to pass, that (in short time)
there was gathered a great number of Converts.

The 20. of this King Henry, seven Jews were brought from Norwich, Jews stale
a child and circumcised him, and minded to have crucified him.
which had stolen a Christened child, had circumcised, and minded to have
crucified him at Easter, wherefore their bodies and goods were at the Kings
pleasure. The 26. the Jews were constrained to pay to the King 20000. Marks,
at two terms in the year, or else to be kept in perpetual prison.

The 35. he takes inestimable sums of money of all rich men; Hen. 3. exacteth
money of the Jews.
namely, of Aaron, a Jew borne at York, 14000. marks for himself, and ten
thousand marks for the Queen, and before, he had taken of the same Jew as
much, as in all amounted to 30000. marks of silver, and two hundred marks of
gold to the Queen.

In the 40. year were brought up to Westminster 202. Jews from Lincoln,
Jews hanged for crucifying of a child.
for crucifying a child, named Hugh, 18. of them were hanged.

The 43. a Jew at Tewkesburie fell into a Privy on the Saturday, and would not
that day be taken out, for reverence of his Sabbath; wherefore Richard Clare,
Earl of Gloucester, kept him there till Monday, that he was dead.

The 47. the Barons slew of the Jews at London, 700. Jews slain at London.
700. the rest were spoiled, and their Synagogue defaced, because one Jew would
have forced a Christian to have paid more than 2. s. for the lone of 20. s. a
week.

The third of Edward the first, Usury forbidden.
in a Parliament at London, usury was forbidden to the Jews: and that all
Usurers might be known, the King commanded that every Usurer should wear a
Table on his breast, the breath of a paveline, or else to avoid the Realm.

The sixth of the said King Edward, a reformation was made for clipping of the
Kings Coin; for which offense, 267. Jews were drawn and hanged; English
Jews hanged.
three were English Christians, and other were English Jews.

The same year the Jews crucified a child at Northampton, Jews hanged at
London, for crucifying a child at Northampton.
for the which fact, many Jews at London were drawn at horse tails and hanged.

The eleventh of Edward the first, John Perkham, Archbishop of Canturburie,
commanded the Bishop of London to destroy all the Jews Synagogues in his
Dioces.

The 16. of the said Edward, All the Jews in England apprehended and redeemed
for money.
all the Jews in England, were (in one day) apprehended by precept from the
King, but they redeemed themselves for 12. thousand pounds of silver;
notwithstanding in the 19. of his reign he banished them all out of England,
giving them only to bear their charge till they were out of his Realm: the
number of Jews then expulsed, were 15060. persons. All the Jews banished this
Realm.
The King made a mighty mass of money of their houses, which he sold, and yet
the Commons of England had granted, and gave him a fifteenth of all their
goods, to banish them. And thus much for the Jews.

In this street called the Old Iewrie, Parish Church of S. Olave Vpwell in the
Iewrie.
is a proper Parish Church of S. Olave Vpwell, so called in Record, 1320. John
Brian, Parson of Saint Olave Vpwell, in the Iewry, founded there a Chauntry,
and gave two messuages to that Parish, A Well was under the East end of this
Church, late turned to a Pump, but decayed.
the 16. of Edward the second, and was by the said King confirmed. In this
Church, to the commendation of the Parsons and Parishioners, the Monuments of
the dead remain less defaced than in many other. First, of William Dikman,
Fereno, or Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffs of London, 1367. Robert Havelocke,
Ironmonger, 1390. John Organ, Mercer, one of the Sheriffs, 1385. John Forest,
Vicar of Saint Olaves, and of Saint Stephen, which at that time was as a
Chapel annexed to S. Olave, 1399. Henry Friole, Tailor, 1400. Thomas Morsted,
Esquire, Chirurgian to Henry the fourth, fifth, and sixth, one of the
Sheriffs, 1436.

He builded a fair new I Will, to the enlargement of this Church, on the north
side thereof, wherein he lies buried, 1450. Adam Breakspeare, Chaplain, 1411.
William Kirkbie, Mercer, 1465. Robert Large, Mercer, Mayor, 1440. He gave to
that Church 200. l'. John Belwin, Founder, 1467. Gabriel Rave, Fuller, 1511.
Wentworth, Esquire, 1510. Thomas Michell, Ironmonger, 1527. Giles Dewes,
servant to Henry the seventh, and to Henry the eighth, Clerk of their
Libraries, and Schoolmaster for the French tongue to Prince Arthur, and to the
Lady Mary, 1535. Edmond Burlacy, 1583. John Brian.

Here lies under this Tomb, An ancient Marble Tomb in the East end of the
Quite.
the body of Richard Chamberlain, Ironmonger, Alderman and late Sheriff of
London, Merchant Adventurer, and free of Russia, who had two wives, Anne, the
first of whom he had issue, 8. sons and 5. daughters. Of Margaret his last
wife no issue, which Richard dyed the 19. day of November, An. Dom. 1566.

To the poor he was liberal,
and gave for Gods sake,
But now his fame is plentiful,
and he an heavenly Make,
He was like one of us,
according to our mould,
But now he is unlike us,
in heaven where he would.
His time was short, in sickness rare,
as to all is known:
But now his time shall long endure,
and never be cast down.
Hic requiescit in Gratia and misericordia Dei, A placed stone on the ground in
the South I Will.
Robertus Large, quondam Mercerui and Mayor istius Civitatis. Qui obiit 24. die
Aprilis, 1441. Et Elizabeth uxor ejus, ac pueri eorundem. Cujus, etc.

Humfrido Weld militi, and nuper Maiori Civitatis London, vire integerrimo,
sanctissimo, summa in Deu^ pietate, in homines fide ac comitate praedito:
Joanne Weld unicus filius and haeres, hoc Monumentum pietatis ergo moerens
posuit.

Habuit ex Anna uxore, prima filia Nicholai wheler Armigeri, filios duos,
Humfridum, olim defunctum, and Ioannem Maritum Franciscae filiae Gulielmi
Whitmore Armig. and quinque filias, Ioannam, nuptam Roberte Brook, de
Cockfield, in Com. Suff. militi. Annam, nuptam Ricardo Corbet, de Stoke super
Terne, in Com. Salop. Armigero, Mariam, Saram and Elizabetham, olim defunctas.
Post cujus obitum, duxit uxorem secundam Mariam, filiam Stephani Slani Militis,
adhuc superstitem.

Obiit 29. die Novembris, An. Dom. 1610. Aetatis suae, 64. Quem tegit hoc
marmor, A goodly Tomb is the South I Will.

Quem cassum lumine flemus,
Abstulit una dies,
Quantum si forte requiris,
Weldus erat nomen,
Mayor celeberrimus urbis;
Justitiae splendour,
verae pietatis Imago,
Religionis amans,
aevi prudentia nostri,
Men's humilis, purusque
animus, patiensque laborum,
Frons hilaris, faciles
aures, pectusque fidele,
Os verax, mites
oculi, gravitate refulgens
Vultus; Cor placidum
studiosis, dextra benigna,
Quos non instimulent
nobis reticentibus ipsi,
Incipient scopuli
vivis sermonibus uti;
Just Welde minor
si spes, si fama fuisset,
De te Welde minor
nostra querela foret.
Thomas Cambell Eques, A very fair and costly Tomb in the East end of the
Chancell.
secundo Regis Iacobi, Civis London ejusdem Vrbis patricius and Praetor
aequissimus and prudentissimus: domicilium sibi hoc in perpetuam memoriam
dicatum habet: feliciter bis nuptus erat, and ex 1. conjugio filii nati sunt 6.
filiae, 7. ex inde vero nepotes 39. quem cives privatim and public, honorifice
omnes colebant. Annos autem 78. cum adimplesset, suorum and omnium honestorum
cum luctu, fato concessit, 13. die Februarii, An. Dom. 1613.

Transiit ad vivos
e vivis Pacis alumnus,
Iustitiae columen;
Qui decus inde suum
Extulit egregie:
Pietatem caetera praeter
Dilexit: cultus,
Religione, side.
Non patrem tantum
proles, sine murmr luctus
Percipit; at vetuit
mors superare modum:
Vulnus opemque ferens,
aeque. Quid plangitis ultra?
Angelus en factus!
nec minor ante fuit.
Quae potuit cuiquam,
optari Mors, vitaque honor
Fulta: and amicitiis
inclita; prole, fide.
Obtigit haec, Cambelle,
tibi, utraque scilicet annis
Maturis, meriti
and plenus amoris obis.
Digna viro tibi vita
fuit, qui viveret ultra,
Dignaque mors vita
sed meliora frui.
Terminus incertae
mors vitae, and certa salutis
Spes promissa rapit,
non colit ima fides. A very fair Monument in the nether part of the Church.

Memoriae.
Henrici Anderson, Equitis Aurati, Alderdermanni Civitatis London, and
Elizabethae uxoris ejus, filiae Fran. Bowyer, Alderm. Land. Qui 8. liberos
habuere, viz. 2. filios, Georg. defunct. and Rich. qui uxorem duxit Mariam,
fill. primogenit. Rob. Spencer, Dom. Wormeleiton. Kath. nuptam Tho. Derham, de
West Derham, in Com. Norff. Armig. Elizab. nupt. Tho. Cowley, Market. Land.
Francise. nupt. Rob. Nedeham, de Shaurigton, in Com. Salop. Armig. Saram and
Mariam innupt. Qui obiere: Haec Iul. 9. 1599. Ille 13. April. 1605.

Pietatis ergo moerens posuit Rich. Anderson filius haeres.
Edwinus Smith, An engraven plate, in the South wall of the Quire.
filius Roberti Smith, Civis and Aromatarii Londinensis, apud Cantabrigiensis
in Artibus Magister, ibidemque Collegii Jesus Socius praedilectus, propter
summam ingenii ubertatem, memoriam, noticiam, pietatem, modestamque
festivitatem, omnibus gratus: singular sui generis ornamentum, and par decus
Collegii (non dicam Academiae) futurus, diem obiit, horum omnium cum
incredibili luctu, nono Calend, Septembris, qui festus D. Bartholomaeo fuit.
Anno salutis, 1598. Aetatis suae, 23.

Ecclesiast. 44. ver. 8. Reliquit nomen, narrantur lauds.
From this Parish Church of S. Olave, to the North end of the Old Iewrie, and
from thence West to the North end of Ironmonger lane, and from the said corner
into Ironmonger lane, almost to the Parish Church of S. Martin, was (of old
time) one large building of stone, very ancient, made in place of Jews houses,
but of what antiquity, or by whom the same was builded, or for what use, I have
not learned, more than that King H. the 6. in the 16. of his reign, gave the
office of being Porter or keeper thereof, Kings Palace in the Old Iewrie.
unto John Stent, for term of his life, by the name of his Principal Palace
in the Old Iewry. This was (in my youth) called the Old Wardrobe: but of later
time, the outward stone wall has been by little and little taken down, and
diverse fair houses builded thereupon, even round about.

Now for the North side of this Lothburie, beginning again at the East end
thereof: Upon the Watercourse of Walbrooke, have ye a proper Parish Church,
called S. Margaret, which seems to be newly re-edified and builded, about the
year 1440. For Robert Large gave to the Quire of that Church one hundred
shillings, and 20. pounds for Ornaments, more, to the vaulting over the
watercourse of Walbrooke by the said Church, for the enlarging thereof, two
hundred Marks.

There be Monuments in this Church, of Reginald Coleman, Son to Robert
Coleman, buried there, 1483. This said Robert Coleman may be supposed the
first builder or owner of Coleman street, and that Saint Stephens Church, then
builded in Coleman street, was but a Chapel belonging to the Parish Church of
S. Olave in the Iewry: for we read (as before) that John Forest, Vicar of Saint
Olaves, and of the Chapel annexed of S. Stephen, deceased in the year 1399.
Hugh Clopton, Mercer, Mayor, deceased, 1496. Anselme Becket, John Julian,
William Ilford, Chanteries there, Sir Brian Tuke, Knight, Treasurer of the
Chamber to King Henry the eighth, and Dame Grisilde his wife, that deceased
after him, were there buried 1536. John Fetiplace, Draper, Esquire, 1464. and
Joan his wife, Sir Hugh Witch, Mercer, Mayor, son to Richard Witch, intombed
there, 1466. He gave to his third wife three thousand pound, and to Maids
marriages five hundred marks.

Here lies buried Dame Grisilde Tuke, late wife of Sir Brian Tuke, A fair
ancient Tomb in the North I Will of the Quire.
Knight, Treasurer of the Chamber to King Henry the eighth. She dyed the 28.
day of December, 1538.

Under this stone lies George Beamon, A plated stone by the Communion Table.
Clerk, and Doctor in Divinity, who departed this life the 29. day of April,
An. Dom. 1571. A man merciful and good to the poor, and borne in Kinnegall in
Cumberland: whose body and Soul God grant a joyful resurrection.

Se piu Si puote.
No wealth, no praise, A goodly ancient Tomb in the Chancell.

no bright renown, no skill,
No force, no fame,
no Princes love, no toil,
Though foreign Lands
by travels search you will,
No faithful service
of thy Country foil,
Can life prolong
one minute of an hour:
But death at length
will execute his power.
For Sir John Leigh,
to sundry Countries known,
A worthy Knight,
well of his Prince esteemed:
By seeing much,
to great experience grown:
Though safe on seas,
though sure on land he seemed,
Yet here he lies,
too soon by death oppressed,
His fame yet lives,
his soul in heaven has rest.
Here lies Ioh. Dimock, A fair plated stone before the ascending to the
Communion Table.
son to John Dimock, Esquire, sometimes Citizen and Draper of London: he
married Anne his first wife, by whom he had one son: which Anne dyed the year
of Christ, 1558. After whom he married his second wife Mary, by whom he had a
daughter. He served the Princes of famous memory, King Henry the eighth, and
King Edward the sixth. For his faithful and good service he was well esteemed;
for his upright dealing he was well beloved of his equals; for his benevolence
to the poor, he was both praised and prayed for. He lived 100. years
lacking 7. very commendably, and the 14. of July, 1585. he dyed Christianly.

Here lies the body of Christian Towerson, A fair Pyramide erected against
the South wall of the Quire.
wife of William Towerson of London, Merchant, who lived together 21. years
and 6. months, and had issue 10. children. Leaving behind her John, William,
Robert, Elizab. and Mary. She left this life the 19. day of February, 1611.

Here rests in hope of a joyful resurrection, A small Monument newly erected
in the East end of the Quire.
the body of Nicholas Style, late Alderman of London, who was borne at Langley,
in the Parish of Beckingham, in the County of Kent: the son of Humfrey Style,
Knight, and of Dame Bridget his wife. He married Gertrude, the daughter of
Thomas Bright of London, Ironmonger, with whom he lived most lovingly and
faithfully the space of forty years, and by her had three sons and four
daughters; of whom remained living at his decease, one son, Humfrey, and one
daughter, Mary. He dyed the sixteenth day of November, An. Dom. 1615.

By the West end of this Parish Church, Conduit in Lothbery.
have ye a fair Water-conduit, builded at the charges of the City, in the
year 1546. Sir Martin Bows being Mayor, two Fifteenes were levied of the
Citizens, toward the charges thereof: This water is conveyed (in great
abundance) from diverse springs, lying betwixt Hoxton and Iseldon.

Next is the Founders Hall, The Fou^ders Hall.
a proper house: and so to the South-west corner of Bassings Hall street, have
ye fair and large houses for Merchants; namely, the corner house, at the end
of Bassings Hall street, an old piece of work, builded of stone, sometime
belonging to a certain Jew, named Mansere, the son of Aron, the son of
Coke the Jew, the seventh of Edward the first: since, to Rahere de Sopars lane;
then, to Simon Francis. Thomas Bradbery, Mercer, kept his Maioralty there, Bay
Hall,
deceased, 1509. Part of this house has been lately employed as a
Market-house, for the sale of woollen Bays, Watmoles, Flanels, and such like.
Alderman Bennet now possesses it.

On this North side, against the Old Jury, Coleman street.
is Coleman street, so called of Coleman, the first builder and owner thereof,
as also of Cole-church, or Coleman-church, against the great Conduit in Cheap.
This is a fair and large street, on both sides builded with diverse fair
houses, besides Alleys, with small tenements, in great number. On the East side
of this street, almost at the North end thereof, Armourers Hall.
is the Armourers Hall, which Company of Armourers were made a Fraternity or
Guild of S. George, with a Chantry in the Chapel of S. Thomas, in Paul's
Church, in the first of Henry the 6. Also on the same side is Kings Alley,
Kings Alley-Love lane.
and Love Lane, both containing many tenements. And on the west side, toward
the South end, is the Parish Church of S. Stephen, wherein the Monuments are
defaced: Notwithstanding, I find, that William Crayhag founded a Chauntry
there, in the reign of Edward the second, and was buried there. Also John
Essex, the 35. of Edward the third. Adam Goodman, the 37. of Edward the third.
William King, Draper, sometime own of Kings Alley, the 18. of Richard the
second. John Sokeling, the tenth of Henry the sixth. John Arnold,
Leather-seller, the seventeenth of Henry the sixth. Thomas Brudbery, Mercer,
Mayor, the first of Henry the eighth. His Tomb remains on the North side of
the Quire. Richard Hamney, 1418. Kirnigham, 1468.

Sir John Garme, Richard Colsel, Edmond Harbeke, Currier: all these were
Benefactors, and buried there.

Here lies in peace the body of the Right Worshipful, A fair Monument in the
Chancell.
Sir William Glover, Knight, late Citizen and Alderman of London, who for the
many good gifts, both in sincere Religion, wisdom, and gravity, wherewith he
was very plentifully graced, was elected Sheriff of London, and served the
same, Anno Domini, 1601. He had lived in good name and fame fifty eight years,
and very blessedly departed this transitory life, the seventeenth day of
December. 1603. Leaving two sons, (viz.) Thomas and William; and five
daughters, viz. Anne, married to Barn Roberts, of Willesden, in the County of
Middlesex, Esquire; Susan, Elizabeth, Mary, and Alice, behind him, to condole
the want of so kind and loving a Father.

To whose dearest Memory, the Lady Anne Glover, the most sorrowful Widow of
the said Sir William, lamenting his death, and her own unrecoverable loss; at
her own charge erected this Monument, in testification both of her love and
duty.

Here lies the body of Barn Roberts, eldest son of Francis Roberts of
Willesden, in the County of Middlesex, Esquire; who took to wife Anne, eldest
daughter of Sir William Glover, Knight, and Alderman of Land. by whom he had
issue, three sons, and five daughters. The said Barn Roberts dyed the 30.
day of January, 1610. being of the age of 34. years, and five months. In
remembrance of whom, his said wife, (of her very kind and loving affection) at
her own proper cost and charges, has caused this Monument to be made and
erected, An. Dom. 1611.

If humane worth
could have preserved him still, Another close by the greater.

He had been much
too strong for death to kill.
Yet being conquered,
he got by the strife,
A better being,
in a better life:
So that great Victor
over Nature, left him
More happiness ten fold
than he bereft him.
Gulielmo Danieli, Equiti Aurato, alteri e Iudicibus co^munium Placitorum, A
fair Tomb in the East end of the South I Will.
qui Maii 19. Annos natus septuaginta tria, An. Do. 1610. diem ult. explevit,
devotu^ Carmen.

Qui Patriae Leges
aequo moderamine flexit,
Et Iudex populo
gratus amansque fuit,
Hoc decorat genio
marmor placidoque pioque,
Stabit in aeternum
quod bona fama tegit.
Gentem si quaeras?
erat ille Checestriensis,
Overtabelio
nobilis ortus agro.
Vxores binas duxit,
nec pignora desunt,
Connubii duplicis
pulchra, pudica, pia.
Filius egregii nominis
speciemque parentis,
Qui celebrat primi
munus amoris erat.
Elizabetha illi soror est,
ab utroque parente
Onsyloi vivit
quae sociata toro.
Conjugii sed Martha
decus non sola secundi,
Coco Equiti nupta est,
nec satiatur Hymen,
Nam binas expectat
adhuc sub matre sorores,
Foelices thalamos
utraque digna manet.
Margareta and illis
paulo est maturior annis,
Nomine Iudithae
sit tibi nota minor.
Sic numero florens
natorum, munere Iudex,
Ordine Eques obiit,
plenus honor senex.
Anna defuncti Iudicis piissima vidua, in perpetuum amoris memoriaeque
testimonium, lugubre hoc Monumentum extrui fecit.

In this I Will lie the bodies of George Golding, A hans^^ small Monument is the
wall by the other.
Esquire, buried the 27. day of November, 1584. and of Anne Bartelet, widow,
buried 12. day of June, 1596. and of Mary Golding, widow, late wife of the
said George, and daughter of the said Anne, buried the 29. of April, 1612. by
her said husband and mother, according to her own desire. She lived a widow
28. years, religiously to God, hospitably to her friends, and charitably to
all, especially to poor widows: and deceased the 25. day of April, 1612.
being then 79. years of age.

An honest heart, A fair Monument in the South wall of the Quite.

religiously affected,
A zealous soul,
a charitable mind,
True dealing conscience,
all untruth rejected;
All these in one
are hard and far to find:
Yet in the course,
both time and truth have tried,
In youth and age,
John Tailor lived and dyed.
His honest heart,
his honest friends have found;
His zeal to God,
God and the godly know;
His charity,
His true relief may sound,
That on the poor
his bounty did bestow:
His heavenly rest,
upon this point resolved,
To be with Christ,
I wish to be dissolved.
Here lies buried the body of John Tailor, Esquire, Citizen and Haberdasher of
London, who married Berseba, daughter of Edward Hall, late Citizen and
Haberdasher of London, deceased, and had by her only one daughter, named
Elizabeth; first married to Francis Smith, Citizen and Mercer of London,
deceased, by whom she had one son, named Francis Smith; and since married to
Thomas Freake, of Serne, in the County of Dorset, Esquire, by whom she has
five sons and daughters, now living. He has given by his Will 200. pound in
money, to be delivered and lent to young men of the Company of Haberdashers; to
distribute every Sunday (weekly, for ever) two shillings in bread and the
advantage, to poor householders of this Parish. And also twenty pound more for
a stock, to be yearly employed for ever, in buying and providing of Fuel for
the same poor. The blessed token of
the Daughters love,
Unto the Fathers kind
and loving care,
May to the world
this Monument approve,
How blessed Parents
in their Children are:
And blessed God, that
so his love expresses,
Who thus both Parents
and the Children blesses.
Sepelitur hic cor. Philippi Paskin, A grave stone in the same I Will.
Qui obiit 12. Calend. Iunii, Anno Dom. 1580. Anno Aetat. 52. duos post se
reliquit fill. Tho. and Ric. and unig. filiam Ioannam ex chariss. sibi Con. Anna.

Here lies Dame Jane, A comely Monument on a Pillar in the Quire.
daughter and sole heir of John White, of this Parish, Esquire: First married
to Samuel Thornehill, of Bromley, in the County of Kent, Esquire, by whom she
had issue two sons, Timothy and John, and one daughter, named Elizabeth. She
secondly married Sir Richard Smith, Knight, son of Thomas Smith, of
Oestenhanger, in the County of Kent, Esquire, and had issue by him but one
daughter, named Mary. The said Dame Jane died the 13. of October, 1607. being
about the age of 33. years. In whose remembrance, her said husband caused this
Monument to be made, 1608.

Lady Bradvery gave 30. s. per annum in Charcoales to the poor of this Parish
for ever from the worshipful Company of Mercers.

On the Southside of the Chancell is a fair gravestone, with this Epitaph in
brass:

Georgius heu quondam jacet
hic Skeffingtonus humatus,
Mercator Stapulae
clarus in urbe fuit.
Quae spes divitiis
bona quam fallacia mundi,
Quam subito pereunt
quae valuere vide?
Ast qui terram olim
vano fragilem pede pressit,
Aeterna hic petiit
firmior astra fide.
Obiit An. Dom. 1581. die 1. Iulii. A. vero aetatis suae 43. On the lower end
of the Chancell is a fair gravestone with this Epitaph in brass:

Our life is all but death,
time that insueth
Is but the death of time
that went before.
Youth is the death of
childhood, age of youth,
Die once to God, and
then thou die no more.
Agnes the wife of
Leonard Darr, whose sight
By sickness much impaired,
in heavenly light
Look, lived, and died,
as dimnesse her were given,
That her souls eyes might
better look to heaven.
Leonardus Darr nuper Mayor ville de Totnes, posuit in mortem Agnetae
charissimae conjugis suae. Obiit 29. Ianuarii 1596.

John White, Citizen and Haberdasher, 1585. gave 12. d. weekly in bread to the
poor of this Parish for ever.

William Man, Citizen and Merchant-taylor, 1585, gave the remainder of a lease
of years to come in a lease of Tenements in Swanne alley, to the poor of this
Parish, and the Town of Buckingham, 2. l. 10. s.

Stephen Scudamore, Citizen and Vintner, 1585. gave weekly 12. d. in bread to
the poor of this Parish for ever.

John Tailor, Citizen and Haberdasher, gave in stock 20. l. for Billets,
Fagots, or Coals, for provision for the poor of this Parish for ever; and 2.
s. weekly in bread for ever to the poor householders, 1600.

Dame Anne Glover gave a stock of ten pounds for provision for the poor of
this Parish, for wood or coal for ever, 1612.

Mistress Dane, widow, gave to the poor 10. s. per annum for ever, from the
Company of Ironmongers, 1614.

Henry Gibs, sometimes servant to Sir Maurice Abbot, Knight and Alderman of
London, gave to the poor of this Parish 50. l.

Dame Daniel, sometimes wife to Sir William Daniel, gave a stock for the poor
of this Parish 30. l. 1616.

Hugh Cap, Citizen and Plasterer of London, gave 100. l. to purchase lands for
the poor of this Parish for ever, 1616.

John Terry, stranger, gave in stock to the poor of this Parish 10. l. for
ever, 1617.

Christopher Air, Merchant, Citizen, and Lether-seller of London, gave 240.
pounds for the building of six Almeshouses, and 400. pounds to purchase lands
toward the maintenance of six poor couple of this parish for ever, 1624.

Sir Richard Smith, Knight, gave in stock for provision of Sea-coales for the
poor of this Parish, one hundred pounds every year to be returned for the
use of the poor for ever, 1627. And another hundred pounds afterward for
relief of the poor also.

I obtained these instructions, by the help and assistance of my loving friend
and brother, Thomas Price, Parish Clarke there.

This Church was sometime a Synagogue of the Jews, Parish Church of S.
Stephen, sometime a Synagogue of the Jews.
then a Parish Church, then a Chapel to St. Olaves in the Iewry, until the
seventh of Edward the fourth, and was then incorporated a Parish Church.

By the East end of this Church is placed a Cock of sweet water, Cocked water*
St Streets Church
taken out of the maine Pipe that goes into Lothbery. Also, in London Wall,
Co^^ at (...) Wall.
directly against the North end of Coleman street, is a Conduit of water, made
at the charges of Thomas Exmew, Goldsmith, Mayor, 1517.

And let here be the end of this Ward, which has an Alderman, his Deputy,
common Counselors four, Constables four, Scavengers four, of the Wardmote
Inquest thirteen, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteen, fifteen pound,
sixteen shillings, nine pence.

BASSINGS HALL WARD.
THe next adjoining to Coleman street Ward, Bassings Hall Ward.
on the West side thereof, is Bassings Hall Ward, a small thing, and consists
of one street, called Bassings Hall street, of Bassings Hall, the most
principal house, whereof the Ward takes name. It begins in the South, by
the late spoken Market house, called the Bay Hall, which is the last of Coleman
street Ward. This street runs from thence North down to London Wall, and
some little distance both East and West, against the said Hall: And this is the
bounds of Bassings Hall Ward.

Monuments on the East side thereof, amongst diverse fair houses for Merchants,
have ye three Hals of Companies; Masons Hall.
namely, the Masons Hall for the first; but of what antiquity that Company is,
I have not read. The next is the Weavers Hall: Weavers Hall.
which Company has been of great antiquity in this City, as appears by a
Charter of Henry the second, in these words; Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. to be
englished thus:

Henry, King of England, Duke of Normandy, Patent of Henry 2.
and of Guian, Earl of Anjou, to the Bishop, Justices, Sheriffs, Barons,
Ministers, and all his true Lieges of London, sends greeting: Know ye, that
we have granted to the Weavers in London their Guild, with all the Freedoms
and Customs that they had in the time of King Henry my Grandfather: Henry 1.
so that none but they intermit within the City of their Craft, but he be of
their Guild; neither in Southwarke, or other places pertaining to London,
otherwise than it was done in the time of King Henry my Grandfather. wherefore
I will and straightly command, that over all lawfully they may treat, and have
all aforesaid, as well in peace, free, worshipful, and wholly, as they had it,
freer, better, worshipfullier, and whollier, than in the time of King Henry my
Grandfather. So that they yield yearly to me two Marks of Gold, at the Eeast
of Saint Michael. And I forbid, that any man to them do any unright, or
disease, upon pain of ten pound. Witness Thomas of Canterbury, Warwick fili
Gar, Chamberlain, at Winchester.

Also I read, Patent.
that the same Henry the second, in the 31. of his reign, made a Confirmation
to the Weavers, that had a Guild of Fraternity in London; wherein it appears,
that the said Weavers made woollen cloth, and that they had the correction
thereof. But amongst other Articles in that Patent, it was decreed, That if any
man made cloth of Spanish wool, mixed with English wool, the Portgrave or
principal Magistrate of London ought to burn it, etc.

Moreover, Matthew Paris.
in the year 1197. King Richard the first, at the instance of Hubert,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Iusticiar of England, ordained, That the woollen
clothes in every part of this Realm, should be in breadth two yards within the
Lists, and as good in the midst as in the sides, etc. King Henry the third
granted to the Citizens of London, that they should not be vexed for the
Burels, or Cloth-listed, according to the constitution made for breadth of
cloth the 9. of his reign, etc. Richard the 2. in the third of his reign,
granted an order of agreement between the Weavers of London, Englishmen, and
Aliens or Strangers borne, brought in by Edward the third.

Lower down, Girdlers Hall.
is the Girdlers Hall: and this is all touching the East side of this Ward.

On the West side, Bakewall Hall.
almost at the South end thereof, is Bakewell Hall, corruptly called Blackwell
Hall. Concerning the original whereof, I have heard diverse opinions, which I
over-passe as fables, without color of truth: for though the same seemed a
Building of great antiquity, yet (in mine opinion) the foundation thereof was
first laid since the Conquest of William, Duke of Normandy: for the same was
builded upon Vaults of stone, which stone was brought from Cane in Normandy.
The like of that of Paul's Church, builded by Mauritius and his successors,
Bishops of London. But that this house has been a Temple, or Jewish Synagogue
(as some have fantasied) I allow not, seeing that it had no such form of
roundnesse, or other likeness. Neither had it the form of a Church, for the
assembly of Christians, which are builded East and West: but contrariwise, the
same was builded North and South, and in form of a Noble man's house: and
therefore the best opinion (in my judgment) is, that it was (of old time)
belonging to the Family of the Bassings, which was in this Realm a name of
great antiquity and renown, and that it bare also the name of that Family, and
was called therefore Bassings Haugh, Bassings Hall.
or Hall. Whereunto I am the rather induced, for that the Arms of that Family
were (of old time) so abundantly placed in sundry parts of that house, Arms of
the Bassings.
even in the stoneworke, but more especially on the walls of the Hall, which
carried a continual painting of them on every side so close together, as one
Escocheon could be placed by another, which I my self have often seen and
noted, before the old Building was taken down. These Arms were a Gerond of
twelve points, Gold and Azure. How Bassings Hall Ward took that name
Of the Bassings therefore, builders of this House, and owners of the ground
near adjoining, that Ward takes the name; as Coleman street Ward of
Coleman, and Faringdon Ward of William and Nicholas Faringdon, men that were
principal owners of those places.

And of old time the most Noble persons that inhabited this City, were
appointed to be principal Magistrates thereas was Godfrey de Magun (or
Magnavilla) Portgrave or Sheriff, in the reign of William the Conqueror, and
of William Rufus; Hugh de Buch, in the reign of Henry the first; Aubery de
Vere, Earl of Oxford. After him, Gilbert Becket, in the reign of King
Stephen. After that, Godfrey de Magnavilla, the son of William, the son of
Godfrey de Magnavilla, Earls of Essex, were Portgraves or Sheriffs of London
and Middlesex. In the reign of Henry the second, Peter Fitzwalter: after him,
John Fitznigel, etc. So likewise in the reign of King John, the 16. of his
reign, a time of great troubles, in the year 1214. Solomon Bassing, Solomon
Bassing and other of that name
and Hugh Bassing, Barons of this Realm, as may be supposed, were Sheriffs;
and that the said Solomon Bassing was Mayor in the year 1216. which was the
first of Henry the third. Also Adam Bassing, son to Solomon (as it seems) was
one of the Sheriffs, in the year 1243. the 28. of Henry the third.

Unto this Adam de Bassing, King Henry the third, in the 31. of his reign, gave
and confirmed certain Messuages in Aldermanbury, and in Milk street (places
not far from Bassings Hall) and the advowson of the Church at Bassings Hall,
with sundry liberties and privileges.

This than was afterward Mayor, in the year 1251. the 36. of Henry the third.
Moreover, Thomas Bassing was one of the Sheriffs, 1269. Robert Bassing,
Sheriff, 1279. and William Bassing was Sheriff, 1308, etc. For more of the
Bassings in this City I need not note, only I read of this Family of Bassings
in Cambridge shire, called Bassing at the Bourne, Bassing Bourne.
and more shortly, Bassing-Bourne, and gave Arms, as is before showed, and was
painted about this old Hall. But this Family is worn out, and has left the
name to the place where they dwelt. Thus much for this Bassings Hall.

Now how Bakewell Hall took that name, Bakewell Hall given to the City.
is another question: For which I read, that Thomas Bakewell dwelled in this
house, in the 36. of Edward the third, and that in the 20. of Richard the
second, the said King, for the sum of fifty pounds, which the Mayor and the
Co^monalty had paid into the Hanapar, granted license, so much as was in him,
to John Frosh, William Parker, and Stephen Spilman (Citizens and Mercers) that
they, the said Message, called Bakewell Hall, and one Garden, with the
appurtenances, in the Parish of St. Michael of Bassings Haugh, and of St.
Laurence in the Iewry of London, and one Message, two Shops, and one Garden,
in the said Parish of S. Michael, which they held of the King in Burgage, might
give and assign to the Mayor and Commonalty for ever.

This Bakewell Hall thus established, Bakewell Hall a Market place for woollen
clothes.
has been long since employed, as a weekly Market place for all sorts of
woollen clothes, broad and narrow, brought from all parts of this Realm there
to be sold. In the 21. of Richard the second, Richard Whitington, Mayor; and
in the 22. Drew Barringtine being Mayor, it was decreed, that no Foreign or
Stranger should sell any woollen cloth, but in the Bakewell Hall, upon pain of
forfeiture thereof.

This house (of late years) growing ruinous, and in danger of falling, Richard
May, Merchant-Taylor, at his decease gave toward the new building of the
outward part thereof, 300. pounds, upon condition that the same should be
performed within 3. years after his decease. Bakewell Hall new builded.
Whereupon the old Bakewell Hall was taken down, and in the month of February
next following, the foundation of a new, strong, and beautiful Storehouse
being laid, the work thereof was so diligently applied, that within the space
often months after, to the charges of 2500. pounds, the same was finished, in
the year 1588.

Next beyond this house, are placed diverse fair houses for Merchants, and
others, till ye come to the back gate of Guild Hall, which gate, and part of
the building within the same, is of this Ward. Some small distance beyond this
gate, Coopers Hall.
the Coopers have their common Hall.

Then is the Parish Church of Saint Michael, Parish Church of S. Michael.
called St. Michael at Bassings Hall, a proper Church, lately re-edified or new
builded: whereto John Burton, Mercer, and Agnes his wife, were great
Benefactors; as appears by his mark, placed throughout the whole Roof of the
Quire, and middle I Will of the Church. He deceased in the year 1460. and was
buried in the Quire, with this Epitaph:

John Burton lies under here,
Sometimes of London Citizen and Mercer;
And Jenet his wife with their progeny,
Been turned to earth, as ye may see.
Friends free, what so ye be,
Pray for us, we you pray;
As you see us in this degree,
So shall you be another day.
Francis Cook, John Martin, Edward Bromflit, Esquire of Warwickshire, 1460.

Richard Barnes, sir Roger Roe, Roger Velden, 1479.

Sir James Yerforde, Mercer, Mayor, deceased 1527. buried under a fair Tomb,
with his Lady, in a special Chapel by him builded, on the north side of the
Quire.

Sir John Gresham, Mercer, Mayor, deceased, 1554. Sir John Ailife, Surgeon,
then a Grocer, one of the Sheriffs, 1548. Nicholas Bakhurst, one of the
Sheriffs, 1577. Sir Wolston Dixi, Skinner, Mayor, 1585. And sir Leonard
Hallyday, Mayor, 1605. but no Monuments were made for them, nor so much as any
Gravestone laid.

Hereunder lies buried the bodies of Sir James Yerforde, An ancient Monument
in the North I Will of the Quire.
Knight, Mercer, and sometimes Lord Mayor of this City of London; and of Dame
Elizabeth, his wife. The which Sir James deceased the 22. day of June, An. Dom.
1527. And the said Elizabeth deceased the 18. day of August, An. Dom. 1548.

In Surgery brought up in youth,
a Knight here lies dead; An ancient Marble (...) in the Chancell

A Knight, and eke a Surgeon such,
as England seld has bred.
For which so sovereign gift of God,
wherein he did excel,
King Henry 8. called him to Court,
who loved him dearly well.
God gave the gift, the king gave goods,
the gift of God to enhance;
Where God and such a Prince do join,
such man has happy chance.
King Edward for his service sake,
bade him rise up a Knight;
A name of praise, and ever since,
he Sir John Ailife hight.
Right Worshipful, in name and charge,
in London lived he than;
In Blackwell Hall, the Merchant chief,
first Sheriff, then Alderman. Blakewell Hall was his dwelling house

The Hospitals bewail his death,
the Orphan children moan,
Their chief Erector being dead,
and Benefactor gone.
Dame Isable, who lived with him,
his faithful Wife and Make,
With him (as dearest after death)
does not her Knight forsake.
The Knight, 1548.
the 24. of October
yielded up his breath,
And she soon after followed,
to live with him in death.
Here lies buried under this Tomb, An ancient Marble tomb in the South lle
of the Quire.
the body of Sir John Gresham, Knight; sometime Alderman and Lord Mayor of this
City of London; who had two wives, Dame Mary his first wife, by whom be had
issue five sons and six daughters: by Dame Katharine, his last wife, no
issue. Which Sir John deceased the 23. day of October, Anno Domini, 1556. And
Dame Mary died the 21. day of September, 1538. Dame Katharine died, --

His jacet Dom. Richard. Sarich, Under the Communion Table.
quondam Rector istius Eccles. Qui obiit 13. November. An. Dom. 1359. Cujus
animae propitieture Deus.

Thus have you noted one Parish Church of St. Michael Blackwell Hall, a Market
place for woollen clothes; the Masons Hall, Weavers Hall, Girdlers Hall, and
Coopers Hall. And thus I end this Ward, which has an Alderman, his Deputy,
for Common Counsel four, Constables two, Scavengers two, for the VVardmote
inquest seventeene, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteen in London 7.
pounds, and likewise in the Exchequer at 7. pounds.

CREPLEGATE WARD.
THe next Ward is called of Creplegate, Creplegate Ward.
and consists of diverse streets and lanes, lying as well without the Gate and
Wall of the City, as within. First, within the Wall on the East part thereof,
toward the North, it runs to the west side of Bassings Hall Ward: and
toward the South, it joyneth to the Ward of Cheap, it begins at the west
end of St. Laurence Church in the Jury, on the North side, and runs west to
a Pumpe, where sometime was a Well with 2. Buckets, at the South corner of
Alderman bury street, which street runs down North to Gay-spur lane, and so
to London Wall, which street and lane are wholly (on both sides) of this Ward,
and so be some few houses (on both the sides) from Gay-spur lane, by and
against the Wall of the City, East to the Grates, made for the watercourse of
the channels, and west to Creplegate.

Now on the South side, From the Standard to the Cross in Cheap, on the North
side, is of Creplegate Ward.
from over against the west end of Saint Laurence Church to the Pumpe, and then
up Milkstreet, South unto Cheap, which Milkstreet is wholly (on both the
sides) of Creplegate Ward, as also without the South end of Milkstreet, a part
of West Cheap, to wit, from the Standard to the Cross, is all of Creplegate
Ward. Then down great Woodstreete, which is wholly of this Ward on both the
sides thereof; so it little Woodstreete, which runs down to Creplegate.

Out of this Woodstreete be diverse lanes; namely, on the East side is Lad lane,
which runs East to Milkstreete corner; down lower in Woodstreete is Love
lane, which lies by the South side of S. Albans Church in Woodstreet, and
runs down to the Conduit in Aldermanbury street. Lower down in
Woodstreete, is Addlestreete, out of the which runs Philip lane down to
London Wall. Philip lane.
These be the Lanes on the East side.

On the west side of Woodstreete, is Huggen lane, by the South side of S.
Michaels Church, and goes through to Gutherous lane. Then lower is Maiden lane,
which runs West to the North end of Gutherons lane, and up the said Lane on
the East side thereof, till against Kery lane, and back again: then the said
Maiden Lane, on the North side, goes up to Staining lane, and up a part
thereof on the East side, to the farthest North part of Haberdashers Hall; and
back again to Woodstreete, and there lower down is Silverstreete, which is
of this Ward, till ye come to the East end of St. Olaves Church on the South
side, and to Monkes-well street on the North side; then down the said
Monkeswell street on the East side thereof, and so to Creplegate, do make the
bounds of this Ward within the walls.

Without Creplegate Forestreete runs thwart before the Gate, from against
the North side of Saint Giles Church, along to More lane end, and to a Posterne
lane end, that runs betwixt the Town ditch on the South, and certain
Gardens on the North, almost to Moregate; at the East end of which lane is a
Pot-makers house, which house, with all other the Gardens, Houses, and Allies
on that side to More-fields, till ye come to a Bridge and Cow-house, near
unto Fensbury Court, is all of Creplegate Ward.

Of these More-fields you have formerly read, An. 1477. Rose Ioccline then
being L. Mayor.
what a moorish rotten ground they were, unpassable, but for Cawswaies
purposely made to that intent; what they were also in our own nearer times of
memory, even till Sir Leonard Hallyday was Lord Mayor of London, I am very well
assured many do perfectly remember: And what they are now at this instant, by
the honorable cost and care of this City, and the industrious pains and
diligence of that worthy Citizen, Master Leate, we all (to our continual
comfort) do evidently behold. M. John Speed, my especial kind friend;
acquainted me with the draught of a Map, done after that true shape and
model, as at the first (by the forenamed Gentleman) they were intended, and
labored with the then Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, that the same might
have bin accordingly effected. But how it was prevented, I know not, only I
purposed to have been at so much charge, as to have had that Map (in some apt
and convenient form) printed in this book: but that I could not attain
thereto; being promised, that at the next impression I shall have it.

For the Walks themselves, and continual care of the City, to have them in
that comely and worthy manner maintained: I am certainly persuaded, that our
thankfulness to God being first truly performed, they are no mean cause of
preserving health and wholesome air to the City, and such an eternal honor
thereto, as no iniquity of time shall ever be able to deface.

Then to turn back again through the said Posterne lane to More lane, which
More lane, with all the Allies and buildings there, is of this Ward. After that
is Grubstreete, more than half thereof to the streightning of the street, next
is White-crosse street, up to the end of Beech lane; and then Red-crosse street
wholly, with a part of Golding lane, even to the Posts there placed, as a
bounder.

Then is Beech lane before spoken of, the East side of the Red-crosse, and the
Barbican street, more than half thereof, toward Aldersgate street, and so
have you all the bounds of Creplegate Ward without the walls.

Now for Antiquities and Ornaments in this Ward, to be noted: I find, first at
the meeting of the corners of the Old Jury, A Pumpe at the corner of
Alderman-bury street.
Milkstreet, Lad lane, and Alderman bury, there was (of old time) a fair Well
with two Buckets, of late years converted to a Pumpe. How Alderman bury
street took that name, many fables have been bruted, all which I overpasse, as
not worthy the counting: but to be short, I say, this street took the name
of Aldermans bury (which is to say, a Court) there kept in their Bery, or Court
Hall, now called the Guild Hall, which Hall (of old time) stood on the East
side of the same street, not far from the West end of Guild Hall now used.

Touching the Antiquity of this old Aldermans bury or Court, I have not read
other, (...) Alderman bury Hall by Alderman bury Church.
than that Richard Renery, one of the Sheriffs of London, in the first of
Richard the first, which was in the year of Christ, 1189. gave to the Church
or Saint Mary at Osney by Oxford, certain ground and rents in Alderman bury of
London, as appears by the Register of that Church, as is also entered into the
Hoistings of the Guild Hall in London.

This old Bery, Court, or Hall continued, and the Courts of the Mayor and
Aldermen were continually holden there, until the new Bery, Court, or Guild
hall that now is, was builded and finished, which Hall was first begun to be
founded in the year 1411. and was not fully finished in 20. years after. I my
self have seen the ruins of the old Court Hall, in Alderman-bury street,
which of late has been employed as a Carpenters yard, etc.

In this Alderman-bury street be diverse fair houses on both the sides, meet
for Merchants or men of worship, and in the midst thereof is a fair Conduit,
made at the charges of W. Eastfield, sometime Mayor, who took order as well for
water to be conveyed from Teyborne, and for the building of this Conduit, not
far distant from his dwelling house; as also for a Standard of sweet water to
be erected in Fleetstreet, all which was done by his Executors, as elsewhere is
showed.

Then is the Parish Church of S. Mary Aldermanbury, Parish Church of S. Mary
Aldermanbury.
a fair Church, with a Churchyard and Cloister adjoining, in the which
Cloister is hanged and fastened a shanke-bone of a man (as is said) very great,
Shankebone of a man 28. inches and a half long.
and larger by 3. inches and a half, than that which hangs in S. Laurence
Church in the Jury; for it is in length 28. inches and a half of assise, but
not so hard and steely, like as the other, for the same is light, and somewhat
pory and spongy. This bone is said to be found amongst the bones of men
removed from the Charnell house of Paul's, or rather from the Cloister of Paul's
Church: of both which reports I doubt, for that the late Reyne Wolf, Reyne
Wolf a grave Antiquary, collected the great Chronicles, increased, and
published by his Executors, under the name of Ralph Holenshead.
Stationer (who paid for the carriage of those bones from the Charnell to the
Morefields) told me of some thousands of Carre loads and more to be conveyed,
whereof he wondered; but never told of any such bone in either place to be
found, neither would the same have bin easily gotten from him, if he had heard
thereof, except he had reserved the like for himself, being the greatest
preserver of antiquities in those parts for his time.

True it is, that this bone (from whence soever it came) being of a man, as the
form shows) must needs be monstrous, and more than after the proportion of
five shanke bones of any man now living amongst us. There lie buried in this
Church Simon Winehcombe, Esquire, 1391. Robert Combarton, 1422. John Wheatly,
Mercer, 1428. Sir William Estfild, Knight of the Bath, Mayor, 1438. a great
Benefactor to that Church, under a fair Monument: he also builded their
steeple, changed their old Bells into 5. tuneable Bells, and gave 100. l. to
other works of that Church.

Moreover, Conduit in Aldermanbury.
he caused the Conduit in Aldermanbury, which he had begun, to be performed at
his charges, and water to be conveyed by pipes of Lead, from Teyborne to
Fleetstreete, as I have said. And also from High Bery, to the parish of S.
Giles without Creplegate, where the Inhabitants of those parts incastellated
the same in sufficient Cisternes. John Middleton, Mercer, Mayor, 1472. John
Tomes, Draper, 1486. William Bucke, Tailor, 1501. Sir William Brown, Mayor,
1507. Dame Margaret Ienings, wife to Stephen Ienings, Mayor, 1515. A Widow,
named Starkey, sometime wife to Mody. Ralph Woodcocke, Grocer, one of the
Sheriffs, 1586. Dame Mary Gresham, wife to Sir John Gresham, 1528. Thomas
Godfrey, Remembrancer of the Office of the First fruits.

Thomas Digges, Esquire, son and heir of Leonard Digges, of Wotton, in the
County of Kent, Esquire, and of Bridget his wife, daughter to Thomas Wilford,
Esquire, which Thomas deceased the 24. day of August, An. Dom. 1595.

Agnes, A fair Tomb in the North side of the Chancell.
wife to Thomas Digges, Esquire, daughter of Sir William Sentleger, Knight, and
of Vrsula his wife, daughter of George Nevil, Lord of Aburgaveny, by whom the
said Thomas had issue, Dudley, his son and heir; Leonard, his second son;
Margaret and Vrsula, now living, beside William and Mary, who died young.

Deo Opt. Max. and memoriae.
Hic resurrectionem mortuorum expectat Thomas Digsaeus, Armiger, ex Antiqua
Digsaeorum in Cantia Familia oriundus, vir fide and pietate in Deum singulari,
rei militaris admodum peritus, optimarum literarum studiosus, and scientiis
Mathematicis ad miraculum (ut ex libris editis constat) eruditissimus: Quem
Deus in Coelestem Patriam, Anno salutis, 1595. evocavit: charissimo Marito Vxor
moestissima posuit.

Here lies in an assured hope to rise in Christ, Thomas Digges, Esquire,
sometime Muster-Master of the English Army in the Low Countries: A man
zealously affected to true Religion, wise, discreet, courteous, faithful to
his friends, and of rare knowledge in Geometry, Astrology, and other
Mathematical sciences: who finished this transitory life with a happy end, in
Anno 1595.

That the dead might live, Christ dyed.

Here lies buried, A plated stone by the Communion Table.
Elizabeth Norreis, daughter of the right Honorable Sir Henry Norreis, Knight,
Lord Norreis of Ricot, who deceased the 18. day of April, 1574.

Armig. hic Jon. Constantinus positus; A mavelous ancient plated stone.
genetrici subjacet; aeterne laetenur in arce polorum. Qui Februo cessit. Mil.
1. Cent. quatuor bis and octo.

Here lies entombed, A very fair Tomb in the South side of the Quire.
Ralph Woodcock, Grocer and Alderman of London, who departed this life the
first day of September, 1586. aged, 67. years. He had four wives, Helen
Collier, by whom he had five son and three daughters.

Good Bower, by whom he had ten sons and five daughters. Elenor Carew, by whom
he had one daughter. And Mary Lovyson, by whom he had no issue.

Elizabeth, A fair plated stone by the Communion Table.
whose
husband Davy hight,
Lies buried here till
time the Trumpet blow:
But sure the heavens
possess her sacred spright,
Her virtuous life and
godly end did show.
And they that knew her
paths of perfect love,
The sundry gifts that
garnished her life,
Can witness well, and
by her end approve,
There seldom has been
seen a better wife.
Give God the praise for
such her happy race:
And pray, that we
like virtues may embrace.
She died the 12. day of August, 1569.
Beneath this Church have ye Gay-spur lane, Gay-spur lane.
which runs down to London Wall, Priory or Hospital called, Elsing Spittle.
as is before showed. In this lane, at the North end thereof, was (of old time)
a house of Nuns, which house being in great decay, Will. Elsing, Mercer, in the
year of Christ, 1329. the 3. of Edward the 3. began in place thereof the
foundation of an Hospital, for sustentation of 100. blind men. Toward the
erection whereof, he gave his 2. houses in the Parishes of S. Alphage, and our
blessed Lady in Aldermanbury, near Creplegate.

This house was after called a Priory or Hospital of S. Mary the Virgin,
founded in the year 1332. by W. Elsing, for Canons regular: the which W.
became the first Prior there. Robert Elsing, son to the said W. gave to the
said Hospital, 12. l. by the year, for the finding of 3. Priests, he also
gave 100. s. toward the enclosing of the new Churchyard without Ealdgate:
Charter House Churchyard without Aldosgate, and one other the like without
Ealdgate.
and 100. s. to the enclosing of the new Churchyard without Aldersgate: to
Tho. Elsing his son, 80. l. the rest of his goods to be sold, and given to the
poor. This house valued, 193. l. 15. s. 5. d. was surrendered the eleventh of
May, the 22. of Henry the 8.

A brief remembrance of SYON College, in the Parish of Saint Alphage.
IN the same place where the foresaid Elsing Spittle and Priory were formerly
situated; A College for the Clergy of London.
there is now newly erected a College for the Clergy of London, and liberties
thereof, called by the name of Syon College: And Almes-houses for twenty poor
people, ten men, and ten women.

This was done by the especial care and pains of M. John Simson, Rector of S.
Olaves Hartstreet London, one of the Executors of the last Will and Testament
of M. Thomas White, Doctor White of S. Dunstanes in the West.
Doctor in Divinity, Vicar of S. Dunstanes in the west, and one of the Canons
Residentiary of S. Paul's Church London: which forenamed Thomas White (besides
sundry sums of money, and great yearly (...) by him to pious and charitable uses
in diverse places) gave 3000. l. to purchase and build the foresaid College for
the use of the Clergy, and Almes-houses for the 20. poor people aforesaid.

He also gave unto the said College and Almes-houses 160. l. per annum for
ever, An hundred and threescore pounds yearly allowed.
whereof there is 120. l. yearly allowed for the maintenance of the poor
Almes-men and women. And 40. l. yearly for 4. dinners for the Clergy, who are
to have 4. Latin Sermons in the year; one every quarter, and upon these days
are to dine together in the College.

In the same College the aforenamed John Simson did in his life time at his
own proper costs and charges build a very fair and spacious Library, A fair
and goodly Library in Syon College.
containing 121. foot in length, within the walls, and above 25. foot in
breadth. And has furnished it with wainscot, stalls, deskes, seats, and other
necessary and useful ornaments befieting the place.

He likewise at his cost and charges erected the new building adjoining to the
Library, A new building joined to the Library.
all along the Southside of the College Court, for lodging for the Governors,
or others at their appointment.

to this Library there have been already diverse bountfull and well disposed
Benefactors, Liberal Benefactors to the Library, and their gift.
who have given large sums of money toward the furnishing of it with books.

The right Honorable Paul, Lord Viscount Bayning, gave fifty pounds.

The right Honorable Anne, Vicountesse Bayning, his wife, gave 50. l.

Sir George Croke, Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of his Pleas before
him assigned to be holden, gave 100. l.

Rebecca, Lady Rumney, widow to Sir William Rumney, late Alderman of London,
gave 100. l.

M. Thomas Gonnell, late Citizen and Merchant-Adventurer of London, gave by his
Will 100. l.

M. John Greenough, late Citizen and Woolman of London, gave by his Will fifty
pounds.

M. Robert Parkhurst, Citizen and Alderman of London, gave fifty pounds.

Besides diverse others; whose names, legacies, gifts, and books bought
therewith: are (by way of a grateful memorial) registered in a fair Book
kept in the Library.

The Monuments that were in this Church defaced, Thomas Cheney, son to William
Cheney, Thomas, John, and William Cheney, John Northampton, Draper, Mayor,
1381. Edmond Hungerford, Henry Frowike, Ioane, daughter to Sir William Cheney,
wife to William Stokes, Robert Edarbroke, Esquire, 1460. Dame Ioane Ratcliffe,
William Fowler, William Kingston, Thomas Swineley, and Helen his wife, etc.

The principal I Will of this Church, toward the North, was pulled down, and a
frame of four houses set up in place: the other part from the steeple upward,
was converted into a Parish Church of S. Alphage, Parish Church of S. Alphage.
and the Parish Church which stood near unto the Wall of the City by
Creplegate, was pulled down, the plot thereof made a Carpenters yard, with
saw-pits.

The Hospital it self, the Prior, and Canons house, with other Lodgings, were
made a dwelling house, the Churchyard is a Garden plot, and a fair Gallery on
the Cloister: the lodgings for the poor are translated into stabling for
horses.

In the year 1541. Sir John Williams, Master of the Kings Jewels, dwelling in
this house, on Christmas Even at night, about seven of the clock, Elsing
Spittle burned.
a great fire began in the Gallery thereof, which burned so sore, that the
flame firing the whole house, and consuming it, was seen all the City over,
and was hardly quenched; whereby many of the Kings Jewels were burned, and more
imbeselled (as was said.)

Sir Rowland Hayward, Mayor, dwelled in this Spittle, and was buried there,
1593. Richard Lee, alias, Clarenciaulx, King of Arms, 1597.

Here lies the body of Sir Rowland Hayward, A very goodly Monument in the wall
of the Quire on the South side.
Knight, twice Lord Mayor of this City of London, and living an Alderman the
space of 30. years, and (at his death) the ancientest Alderman of the said
City. He lived beloved of all good men, and died (in great credit and
reputation) the fifth day of December, Ann. Dom. 1593. And the 36. year of the
reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth. He had two virtuous wives, and
by them many happy children.

Ioane, daughter of William Tillesworth, Esquire, was the first wife to Sir
Rowland Hayward, by whom he had issue, 3. sons and 5. daughters, which 3. sons,
and 2. of the daughters died in their infancy. The eldest of the surviving
daughters, named Elizabeth, was first married to Richard VVaren, Esquire, and
(after his decease) to Thomas Knevet, Esquire, one of her Majesty's Privy
Chamber. Susanna, the second daughter, was married to Henry Townsend, Esquire.
Ioane the third daughter, was married to John Thin, Esquire.

Katharine, the second wife of Sir Rowland Hayward, was daughter to Thomas
Smith, Esquire, by whom he had likewise issue three sons and five daughters,
whereof one son and one daughter died infants. The two sons and four
daughters yet living, are George, John, Alice, Katharine, Mary, and Anne, all
young, and unmarried at their fathers death.

Decus vitae, est honorata Mors.
This Tomb was erected by the appointment of Edward Pilsworth, and William
Cotton, Citizens of London, and Executors of the said Sir Rowland.

Here lies buried under this stone the body of Robert Hodgson, A Gravestone at
the entrance into the Quire door.
Esquire, one of the Auditors of the Queens Majesty's Court of Exchequer, who
died the 26. day of May, in the year of our Lord 1577. Now to return to
Milkestreet, so called of milk sold there, there be many fair houses for
wealthy Merchants and other: among the which I read, that Gregory Rokesley,
Gregory Rokesley, Mayor of London, his house rent 20. shillings the year.
Mayor of London, in the year 1275. dwelled in this Milkstreete, in an house
belonging to the Priory of Jews in Sussex, whereof he was Tenant at will,
paying 20. s. by the year without other charge: such were the rents of those
times.

In this Milkestreete, Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen.
is a small Parish Church of Saint Mary Magdalen, which has of late years
been repaired: William Brown, Mayor, 1513. gave to this Church forty pounds,
and was buried there. Thomas Exmew, Mayor, 1528. gave forty pounds, and was
buried there: so was John Milford, one of the Sheriffs, 1375. John Olney,
Mayor, 1475. Richard Rawson, one of the Sheriffs, 1476. Henry Kelsey. Sir John
Brown, Mayor, 1497. Thomas Muschampe, one of the Sheriffs, 1463. Sir William
Cantilow, Knight, Mercer, 1462. Henry Cantilow, Mercer, Merchant of the Staple,
who builded a Chapel, and was buried there, 1495. John West, Alderman, 1517.
John Machel, Alderman, 1558.

Thomas Skinner, Clothworker, Mayor, 1596.

Here lies the corpse of Thomas Skinner, late Citizen and Alderman of London, A
comely Monument in the South I Will of the Quire.
borne at Saffron Walden in Essex, who in the 63. year of his age, and on the
5. day of December, Anno Dom. 1596. being then Lord Mayor of this City,
departed this life, leaving behind him three sons, John, Thomas, and Richard:
and three daughters, Aunc, Julian, and Elizabeth.

Here lies interred the body of Mistress Mary Collet, wife of M. John Collet,
Citizen and Salter of London, who deceased the 22. of December, An. Dom. 1613.
being aged 35. years.

This Marble witness, A fair Stone in the same I Will before the Monument
forenamed.

dew-dropt with the eyes
Of grived Niobe, ^els
thee, that here lies
Her second husband joy,
her first content,
Her parents comfort,
her friends ornament,
Her neighbors welcome,
her dear kinreds loss,
Her own health's foe,
deeming all pleasure dross,
The world a layle, whence,
through much pain we see
Her soul at length
has purchased liberty;
And soared on high where
here Redeemer lives:
Who (for her torment)
rest and glory gives.
Here lie the bodies of Gerard Gore, A comely (...) the Chancell, by another
much more ancient Tomb of Henry Cantilowe.
Citizen, Merchant-Taylor, and Alderman of London, and of Helen his wife: who
lived together married 57. years. The said Gerard died the 11. day of
December, 1607. in the 91. year of his age. And she departed this life the
13. day of February, in the foresaid year, being 75. years old.

Here lies the body of Thom. Henshawe, A fair Stone at the entrance into the
Quire.
Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, who had to wife Flower Henshawe, and
had issue by her 9. sons, and 4. daughters. He deceased the 11. day of January,
1611. aged, 76. years: and she died the 6. of March, 1615. aged, about 60.
years.

Here lies the body of sir William Stone, A very fair Monument in the
Chancell on the North side.
Knight, free of the Clothworkers and Turkey Companies, sometime Alderman of
this City. He was the son of Reynold Stone, Citizen and Fishmonger of London.
The said Sir William departed this life the 14. of September, 1609. aged, 63.
years, etc.

As the Earth, the
Earth does cover,
So under this stone
lies another.
Sir William Stone,
who long deceased,
Ere the worlds love
him released,
So much it loved him.
For they say,
He answered death
before his day,
But it is not so:
for he was sought
Of one that both him
made and bought.
He remained
the great Lords treasure,
Who called for him
at his pleasure,
And received him.
Yet be'it said,
Earth grieved that heaven
so soon was paid.
Here likewise lies
inhumed in one bed,
Dame Barbara,
the welbeloved wife
Of this remembered Knight:
whose souls are fled
From this dim Vale,
to everlasting life.
Where no more change,
nor no more separation
Shall make them fly
from their blessed habitation.
Grass of levitie,
Span in brevity,
Flowers felicity,
Fire of misery,
Winds stability
Is mortality.
Their Riches were
like corn lent to the field,
What it received
it manifold did yield.
Their bodies have a grave
their virtues none,
But shall with time grow green,
when they are gone.
Stone walls, brass Towers,
decay as flowers:
One gone, their good
is, Lo, here they stood.
So transitory
is our glory.
This Stone, A comely Monument in the east end of the South I Will.
this Verse,
two Mountfords do present,
The corpse of one,
the others Monument:
Two lovely brethren,
by their virtues known,
Whom Cambridge, and
Kings College called their own.
Osbert and Richard,
of which worthy pair,
The first employed
by Sea in great affair,
Made Heaven his Haven,
and at that Port, the other
(By land) did overtake
his elder Brother.
So now the bones
of both are laid asleep,
These in this Church,
those in the Eastern Deep:
Till all the dead
shall wake from Sea and Land,
Before the Judge
of quick and dead to stand.
Amen.
We sonne-lesse parents,
yet not childlesse left,
Bewail (as men)
our seed untimely reft.
As Christians, we hope,
and joy, and say;
Heaven is our home,
and thither, Death the way.
By Sea or Land,
it skils not, so we mind
The Faithful Pilgrims
narrow path to find.
Mort. Osbert, Mense December. 1614. Mort. Richard, Mense Ian. 1615.
Then next is Woodstreet, Woodstreet.
by what reason so called, I know not; true it is, that (of old time) according
to a Decree made in the reign of Richard the first, the houses in London were
builded of stone, for defense of fire, which kind of building was used for two
hundred years or more; but of later time, for the winning of ground, taken
down, and houses of timber were set up in place. It seems therefore, that
this street has been of the later building, all of timber, (for not one house
of stone has been known there) and therefore called Woodstreet; otherwise it
might take the name of some builder or owner thereof.

Tho. Wood, one of the Sheriffs, in the year 1491. dwelled there: he was an
especial Benefactor toward the building of S. Peter's Church at Woodstreet
end, which is called Goldsmiths (...), garnished with the likeness of
Wood-men: his predecessors might be the first builders, owners and namers of
this street, after their own name.

On the East side of this street is one of the Prison houses, (...).
pertaining to the Sheriffs of London, and is called the Compter in
Woodstreet, which was prepared to be a prisonhouse, in the year 1555. and on
the Eve of S. Michael the Archangell, the prisoners that lay in the Compter in
Breadstreet, were removed to this Compter in Woodstreet. Beneath this Compter
is Lad Lane, Ladle lane, corruptly called Lad lane.
or Ladle Hall; for so I find it of Record, in the Parish of Saint Michael
Woodstreet, and beneath that is Love Lane, Love lane.
so called of wantons.

By this Lane is the ancient Parish Church of S. Albans. Parish Church of S.
Alban.
One note of the great antiquity of it, is the name: by which it was at first
dedicated to Saint Albane, the first Martyr of England. Another character of
the antiquity of it, is to be seen in the manner of the turning of the Arches
in the windows, and heads of the Pillars. A third note appears in the Roman
bricks, here and there inlayed amongst the stones of the building. Very
probable it is, that this Church is at least of as ancient a standing, as King
Adelstane the Saxon, who, as the Tradition says, had his house at the East end
of this Church. This Kings house having a door also into Adelstreet, in this
Parish, gave name, as it is thought, unto the said Adel-street: which in all
Evidences to this day, is written King-Adelstreet. One great square Tower of
this Kings house seems yet remaining: to be seen at the North corner of Love
Lane, as you come from Alderman-bury: which Tower is of the very same stone and
manner of building with S. Albanes Church. This Church, decayed with mere age,
is this year beginning to be taken down, and to be new builded.

It has the Monuments of Sir Rich. Illingworth, Baron of the Exchequer, Thomas
Catworth, Grocer, Mayor, 1443. John Woodcocke, Mayor, 1405. John Collet and
Alice his wife: Ralph Thomas, Ralph and Richard, sons of Ralph Illingworth,
which was son to Richard Illingworth, Baron of the Exchequer. Thomas, son
of Thomas Fitzwilliams; Thomas Halton, Mercer, Mayor, 1550. Thomas Ostrich,
Haberdasher, 1483. Richard Swetenham Esquire; and William Dunthorne,
Town-Clerke of London, with this Epitaph:

^aelix prima dies
postquam mortalibus aevi,
Cesserit, hic morbus
subit, atq, repent senectus,
Tum mors qua nostrum
Dunthorn cecidisse Wile^mum,
Haud cuiquam latuisse
reor, dignissimus (inquam,)
Artibus hic Doctor,
necnon celeberrimus hujus
Clericus Vrbis erat
primus, nullique secundus,
Moribus, ingenio,
studio, nil dixeris illi,
Quin dederit natura
boni, pius ipse modestus,
Longanimus, solis
patiens, super omnia gratus,
Quique sub immensas
curas variosque labores,
Anxius atteritur vitae,
dum carpserit auras,
Hoc tetro in tumulo,
compostus pace quiescit.
Simon Morsted, Thomas Pikehurst, Esquire, Richard Take, Robert Ashcombe,
Thomas Lovet, Esquire, Sheriff of Northamptonshire, 1491. John Spoore, 1429.
Katharine, daughter to Sir The Mirley, Knight, William Linchlade, Mercer, 1392.
John Penny, Mercer, 1450. John Thomas, Mercer, 1485. Christopher Hawse, Mercer,
one of the Sheriffs, 1503. William Sharborough, Vintner, Simon de Berching.
Sir John Cheke, Knight, Schoolmasters to King Edward the 6. deceased, 1557.
does lie here.

Hunc posuit Tumulum
frater, A Monument in the East end of the Chancell.
superaddidit illi
Triste Nepos Carmen;
dignus utroque fuit.
Cur Tumulum? justo
ne funus honor careret.
Cur Carmen? lauds
ne tegerentur humo.
Vita pia, and foelix mors,
vitam morte prehendunt,
Et pensant-Coeli
munere, damna soli.
Here lies buried M. Albayne Hill, Doctor of Physic, who dyed the 26. day of
December, An. Dom. 1559.

Here also lies buried Mistress Alice Hill, A monument in the South wall of the
Chapel.
sometime wife to the said M. Dr. Hill: who dyed the last day of May, An. Dom.
1508.

Ethelreda White, An ancient plate fixed in the wall of the North Chapel.
quondam uxor Henrici White, Armigeri, and unius filiarum and haeredum Roberti
Frother, Aldermanni London. Quae quidem Ethelreda obiit in vigilia S. Johan.
Baptist. An. Regis Henrici 8. 26. An. Dom. 1534.

The 13. day of September, A fair plated Gravestone in the North Chapel of
the Quire.
1557.
Doctrinae tamen
Chekus uterque Magister,
Aurea naturae
sabrica morre jacer.
Non erat e multis
unus, sed praestitir unus
Omnibus and Patriae
flos erat ille suae:
Gemma Britanna fuit,
tam magnum nulla tulerunt
Tempora Thesaurum,
tempora nulla ferent.
Hic jacet Benedictus Trotter, A gravestone in same Chapel.
nuper Civis, and Grocerus London, Mercator Stapulae villae Caliciae. Qui obiit
ultimo die Mensis Octobris, 1496. Cujus, etc.

Hic jacet Willielmus Hinchlade, A fair plated stone by the Communion Table.
quondam Civis and Mercerus London. Qui obiit 9. die Ianuarii, An. Dom. 1392.
Et Alicia uxor ejus. Quorum, etc.

Of William Wilson, A fair plated stone in the body of the Church.
Ioane his wife,
and Alice their daughter dear,
These lines be left to give report,
these three lie buried here;
And Alice was Henry Decons wife,
which Henry lives on earth,
And is the Sergeant Plummer unto
Queen ELIZABETH.
With whom this Alice left issue here,
her virtuous daughter Jane,
To be his comfort every where,
now joyful Alice is gone.
And for these three departed souls,
gone up to joyful bliss;
The Almighty praise be given to God,
to whom the glory is.
Alice dyed, the eleventh day of March, 1572.

Ad sacros cineres, A small Monument on a pillar in the middle I Will.
and piam memoriam Alleni Downer, Civis London, e liberate Potifica, and
aetate and officio aliquando senioris, and Mariae Vxoris Parentum integritate
quadrata, Thomas Filius unus, and uncus superstes, ultimum hoc pli and filialis
amoris testamentum assert.

Si vere dicunt
monumenta monentia men^^^,
Mill mihi monumenta
pii posue^re parents.
Ingratus ne sim
monumento hoc miile rependo.
Upon the Wall by the North door, a fair Monument in stone, with these
inscriptions:

Misericordiam Dei per Jesum Christum obtinuimus.
Here lie the bodies of Anne, the wife of Laurence Gibson, Gent. and of their
three sons. She was a most faithful and loving wife, and a right-religious,
wise, virtuous and modest woman, and adorned with many other such excellent and
commendable gifts and qualities, that she is worthy of perpetual memory. She
was of the ancient Family of the Bamfords in Lincolnshire: and the 29. day of
December, 1611. she patiently and Christianly ended this mortal life.

Spe resurgendi ad vitam aeternam requiescimus.
Hoc moestissimus ejus maritus, in piam memoriam Vxoris suae, talis, tamque
charissimae construi fecit: eundemque hic cum illa esse sepulturum sperat and
exoptat.

In Christo filii sumus Dei, and haeredes aeternae vicae.
Mentis vis magna.
What, is she dead?
does he survive?
No: both are dead,
and both alive.
She lives, he is dead,
by love, though grieving,
In him, for her,
yet dead, yet living.
Both dead, and living?
then what is gone?
One half of both,
not any one.
One mind, one Faith,
one hope, one Grave,
In life, in death,
they had, and still they have.
Amor conjugalis aeternus.
Hic jacet in requiem
Woodcocke John, An Ancient Tomb in the Chancell, lately intruded on with new
Pewes.
vir Generosus,
Mayor Londiniae,
Mercerus, valde morosus.
Hic jacet Tom Shot-hose,
sine Tomb, sine Sheets, sine Riches,
Qui vixit sine Gown,
sine Cloak, sine Shirt, sine Breeches.
In the Vestrie South Window, there is the figure of Thomas Heritagh, in a red
Mantle: Right before him in another pane is the Mercers Arms, of which Company
(it seems) he was free. This man was the builder of this Vestry-house.

At the East end of the Chancell, on the right hand, is a fair Monument, with
this inscription:

To the sacred Memory of Thomas Shelly, eldest son and heir of Henry Shelly
of Patcham in the Country of Sussex, Esquire, departed this life the second day
of December. 1620. being 23. years of age: by his most sorrowful wife, Mary
Shelly, eldest daughter of Thomas Stephens of the middle Temple, Esquire,
Attorney General to Prince Henry.

If Youth, Religion,
Virtue, and the rest
Of Graces that
in frail Man are the best,
Could have conser'd long life,
this Funeral Verse
Had not so soon
been offered at thy Hearse
By thy sad Widow:
whose Fate did allow
Her only three weeks
happiness, to know
How good thou were:
and what remains of life,
To her yields sorrow:
she was once a wife
To such an husband,
whose like 'twere in vain,
And flattery to her grief,
to hope again.
But thou were flesh,
and that to earth must turn,
Thy pure soul blessed;
she only left to mourn.
Adjoining to this on the right hand, is a fair Marble Monument in Ovall:

Deo Trino and Vno opt. max. sacrum, ac
Aeternae Memoriae ornatissimae and laudatissimae feminae, Annae Walleriae in
Icenis oriundae, unius atque unicae parentum prolis; Ingenio, Genio and Genere
conspicuae: Guilielmi Waadi, Regii Consistorii sanctiorisque Concilii
Serenissimae Heroinae, Dominae Elizabethae, Angliae, etc. Reginae, a secretis.

Conjugis,
Quae annos enata Xix. in puerperio, 10. Calendas Septembris, Anno Salutis Jesus
merito restitutae, M.D.XIC. ex hac peritura ad perennam vitam emigravit.

Cui
Placide in Christo gentis humanae sospitatore obdormienti, hoc mortale
immortalis amoris Monumentum Conjux moestissimus posuit.

On the South side of the Church, on the wall adjoining to the Vestry, is an
ancient Monument, in the memory of Christopher Hawes, Mercer and Alderman of
London, who dyed the 25. of October, 1508. and is interred in a Vault under the
foundation of the Church.

Then is Adle street, Adle street.
in old Evidences written King-Adel-street; and so called from King Adel stane
the Saxon. At this present it is replenished with fair buildings on both
fides: Pinners Hall, now the Plaisterers Hall.
Amongst which, there was sometime the Pinners Hall: but that Company being
decayed, it is now the Plaisterers Hall.

Not far from thence is the Brewers Hall, Brewers Hall.
a fair house: which Company of Brewers was incorporated by King Henry the
sixth, in the 16. of his reign; confirmed by the name of Saint Mary and Saint
Thomas the Martyr, the 19. of Edward the fourth.

From the West end of this Adle street, Little Woodstreet runs down to
Creplegate: and somewhat East (from the Sun Tavern, against the wall of the
City) is the Curriers Hall. Curriers Hall.


Now on the West side of Woodstreet have ye Huggen lane, Huggen lane
so called of one Hugan, that of old time dwelled there. He was called Hugan in
the Lane, as I have read in the 34. of Edward the first. This Lane runs
down by the South side of S. Michaels Church in Woodstreet; and so growing
very narrow by means of late encrochments, to Guthurons lane.

The Parish Church of Saint Michael in Woodstreet is a proper thing, Parish
Church of S. Michael in Woodstreet.
and lately well repaired. John Iue, Parson of this Church, John Forster,
Goldsmith, and Peter Fikeldon, Tailor, gave two Messuages and Shops, with
Sollars, Cellars, and other Edifices, in the same Parish and street, and in
Ladle Lane to the reparations of the Church, Chancell, and other works of
charity, the 16 of Richard the second.

The Monuments here, be of William Bambrough, the son of Henry Bambrough of
Shardborough, 1392.

William Turner, Waxe-Chaundler, 1400.

John Peke, Goldsmith, 1441.

William Taverner, Girdler, 1454.

William Mancer, Ironmonger, 1465.

John Nash, 1466. with an Epitaph.

John Allen, Timber-monger, 1441.

Robert Draper, 1500.

John Lambard, Draper, Alderman, one of the Sheriffs of London, who deceased
1554. and was father to William Lambard, Esquire, well known by sundry learned
Books that he has published.

John Medley, Chamberlain of London.

John Marsh, Esquire, Mercer, and Common Sergeant of London, etc.

Here lies Ioh. Blount, Citizen and Clothworker of Land. eldest son of W.
Blount of Mauggareffield, A comely small Monument in the East end of the North
Quire, in the wall.
in the County of Glocest. Esquire, who had to wife Anne Layton, of whom he had
issue, six sons and eight daughters, and lived together man and wife nine and
twenty years, in worshipful and good reputation, and dyed at the age of
threescore and three years, the first day of May, 1599.

Here lies the body of Nicholas Waren, A smaller Monument in the same I Will and
wall.
Citizen and Grocer of London, borne at Whitby in Yorkshire, who had to wife
Margaret Crome, who lived together married two and twenty years and eleven
months. He dyed in joy and peace of a faithful confession, the tenth day of
April, 1614. being about the age of two and fifty years.

JOB 17. Verse. 5.
My breath is corrupt, my days are cut off, the Grave for me.
The body of William Harvie, A comely Monument in the same wall and I Will.
Citizen and Grocer of London, and Deputy to the Alderman of this Ward of
Creplegate within, was buried the twentieth day of March, Anno Domini, 1597. of
the age of 68. years. Maudlin, his first wife, by whom he had issue, four
sons and one daughter, was buried the 16. day of November, 1581. Margaret,
his second wife, by whom he had issue, one son, was buried the 14. of January,
1593. Joane, his third wife, survived.

Robert Harvie, A Memory on the same Monument.
his eldest son, Citizen and Grocer of London, was buried in his Fathers
Grave the ninth of November, 1608. out of his house in the Old Iewry, being of
the age of 47. years, 5. months, and 10. days; when he had served his
Prince, Comptroller of the Customehouse, and Warden of the Grocers. He had to
wife Sara Audley, of whom he had issue, three sons and three daughters, etc.

There is also (but without any outward Monument) the head of James, James, the
4. King of Scots, his head buried in S. Michaels Church in Woodstreet.
the fourth King of Scots of that name; slain at Flodden field, and buried
here by this occasion: After the Battle, the body of the said King being
found, was closed in Lead, and conveyed from thence to London, and so to the
Monastery of Sheyne in Surrey, where it remained for a time, in what order I am
not certain. But since the dissolution of that house, in the reign of Edward
the sixth, Henry Gray, Duke of Suffolk, being lodged and keeping house there;
I have been showed the same body, so lapped in Lead, close to the head and
body, thrown into a waste room amougst the old Timber, Lead, and other
rubble. Since the which time, workmen there (for their foolish pleasure) hewed
off his head: And Lancelot Young, Master Glasier to Queen Elizabeth, feeling
a sweet savor to come from thence, and seeing the same dried from all
moisture, and yet the form remaining, with the hair of the head and beard
red; brought it to London, to his house in Woodstreet, where (for a time) he
kept it for the sweetness: but in the end, caused the Sexton of that Church to
bury it amongst other bones, taken out of their Charnell, etc.

I read in diverse Records, Black Hall in Woodstreet, in S. Michaels Parish.
of a house in Woodstreet, then called Black Hall; but no man at this day can
tell thereof.

On the North side of this Saint Michaels Church, is Maiden lane, now so
called, Ingene lane, or Maiden lane.
but (of old time) Ingenelane, or Inglane. In this Lane the Wax-Chandlers have
their Common Hall, Wax-Chandlers Hall.
on the South side thereof: and the Haberdashers have their like Hall on the
North side, at Stayning lane end. This Company of the Haberdashers,
Haberdashers Hall.
or Hurrers, of old time so called, were incorporated a Brotherhood of S.
Katharine, Record in the Rolls
the 26. of Henry the 6. and so confirmed by Henry the seventh, the 17. of his
reign; the Cappers and Hat-merchants, or Hurrers, being one Company of
Haberdashers.

Down lower in Woodstreet is Silver street, Silver street
(I think, of Silver-smiths dwelling there) in which be diverse fair houses.

And on the North side thereof is Monkes-well street, Monks-well street.
so called, of a Well at the North end thereof, where the Abbot of Garendon had
an house or Cell, called Saint James in the Wall by Creplegate, and certain
Monks of their house were the Chaplains there; wherefore the Well (belonging
to that Cell or Hermitage) was called Monkes-well, and the street of the Well,
Monkes-well street. The East side of this street, down against London wall, and
the south side thereof to Creplegate, be of Creplegate Ward, as is before
showed.

In this street, Bowyers Hall.
by the corner of Monks-well street, is the Bowyers Hall.

On the said East side of Monks-well street, Alms. houses in Monks-well street.
be proper Almes-houses, twelve in number, founded by Sir Ambrose Nicholas,
Salter, Mayor, 1575. wherein be placed twelve poor and aged people rent-free,
having each of them 7. pence the week, and once the year each of them five
sackes of Charcoales, and one quarter of an hundred of Faggots, of his gift for
ever.

On the North side of the way, turning toward Creplegate, and even upon, or
close to London Wall, (as it were) are certain new-erected Almes-houses, six
in number, of the cost and gift of Mr. Robert Rogers, Leather-seller, and very
good maintenance allowed (for ever) to such people as are appointed to dwell in
them.

Then, in little VVoodstreet, Alms. Chambers in little Woodstreet.
be seven proper Chambers in an Alley on the West side, founded for seven
poor people, therein to dwell rent-free, by Henry Barton, Skinner, Mayor, 1516.

Thus much for the Monuments of this Ward within the Walls.

Now without the Posteme of Creplegate, Parish Church of S. Giles without
Creplegate*
first is the Parish Church of Saint Giles, a very fair and large Church,
lately repaired, after that the same was burned, in the year 1545. the 37. of
Henry the eighth; by which mischance, the Monuments of the dead in this Church
are very few. Notwithstanding, I have read of these following:

Alice, William and John, wife and sons to T. Clarell.

Agnes, daughter to Thomas Niter, Gentleman.

William Atwell.

Felix, daughter to Sir Thomas Gisors, and wife to Thomas Travars.

Thomas Mason, Esquire.

Edmond Wartar, Esquire.

Joan, wife to John Chamberlain, Esquire, daughter to Roger Lewkner, Esquire.

William Friar.

John Hamberger, Esquire.

Hugh Moresbye.

Gilbert Prince, Alderman.

Oliver Cherley, Gentleman.

Sir John Wright, or Writhesley, alias Garter, King at Arms.

Joan, wife to Thomas Writhesley, son to Sir John Writhesley.

Garter, daughter and heir to William Hall, Esquire.

John Writhesley the younger, son to Sir John Writhesley and Eleanor.

Eleanor, second wife to John Writhesley, daughter and heir to Thomas Arnold,
sister and heir to Richard Arnold, Esquire.

John, her son and heir.

Margaret, with her daughter.

John Brigget. Thomas Ruston, Gent.

John Talbot, Esquire, and Katharine his wife.

Thomas Warfle, and Isabel his wife.

Thomas Lucie, Gentleman, 1447.

Ralph Rochford, Knight, 1409.

Edmond Watar, Esquire.

Elizabeth, wife to Richard Barnes, sister and heir to Richard Malgrave
Esquire, of Essex.

Richard Govere, and John Govere, Esquires.

Sir Henry Gray, Knight, son and heir to George Gray, Earl of Kent, 1562.

Reginald Gray, Earl of Kent.

Richard Choppin, Tallow-Chandler, one of the Sheriffs, 1530.

John Hamber, Esquire, 1573.

Thomas Busbie, Cooper, who gave the Queens head Tavern to the relief of the
poor in the Parish, 1575.

John Wheler, Goldsmith, 1575.

Richard Bolene, 1563.

William Bolene, 1575.

W. Bolene, Physician, 1587.

Robert Crowley, Vicar there, all these four under one old stone in the Quire.

The learned John Fox, Writer of the Acts and Monuments of the English Church,
1587.

The skillful Robert Glover, alias Somerset, Herald, 1588.

Iohannis Hambei, An ancient Marble Tomb on the North side of the Chancell.
Armigeri, caro hoc in Tumulo repulverescet, sicut and Ianae charissimae
Conjugis. Qui dum vixit, Edovardo sexto, Mariae and Elizabethae Angliae
Regibus, in variis calculorum and rationum generibus, tam praestitorum and
exterorum, quam decimarum and primitiarum ratiocinator dignissimus extiterat.
Obiit autem Johannes 8. Calend. Aprilis, Anno Salutis a Christo, 1573. Quem
Iana secundo post Mense insequuta est, 16. scilicet Calend. Iunii. Quorum
spiritus ad Coelum reversi reassumptionem carnis expectant.

Francisco Borono, Nobilissimi Mediolanensi, Another fair Marble Tomb close
adjoining.
and Annae Baptistae Boroni uxori, necnon and filio; Quorum ossa hoc clauduntur
Tumulo. Idem Baptista Baronus, Francisci frater, ac Annae maritus, in eorum
memoriam hanc posuit scriptionem. Obiit Franciscus Londinensis, 16. die
Aprilis, Anno Domini, M.D.XXXIII. Aetatis suae, XXXI. Anna vero and filius,
ultimo die Octobris, M.D.XLVI.

Hic jacet Henricus Giffard, filius tertiogenitus Iohannis Giffard, A small
Monument at the South wall of the Chancell.
nuper de Northhall, in Comitatu Middless. Armigeri. Qui cum corporis
castitatem quadraginta trium annorum coelibatu comprobasset, Animam Sponso suo
Jesus Christo piam sanctamque tradidit, 15. die Iulii, Anno Domini, 1602.

Christo S. S.
Iohanni Foxo, A very fair Marble stone set up on end in the same wall.
Ecclesiae Anglicanae Martyrologo fidelissimo, Antiquitatis Historicae
Indagatori sagacissimo, Evangelicae veritatis propugnatori acerrimo,
Thaumaturgo admirabili; Qui Martyrs Marianos, tanquam Phoenices, ex cineribus
redivivos praestitit. Patri suo omni pietatis officio imprimis colendo, Samuel
Foxus illius primogenitus, hoc Monumentum posuit, non sine lachrymis. Obiit die
18. Men's. April. An. Dom. 1587. jam septuagenarius. Vita vitae mortalis est,
Spes vitae immortalis.
Here lies the body of Robert Crowley, A fair plated stone on the ground in
the Chancell.
Clerk, late Vicar of this Parish; who departed this life the 18. day of June,
An. Dom. 1588.

Sacra sub hoc saxo
tria corpora mista quiescunt, A Plate engraven on a fair stone near to the
other.

Gulielmi Bullen
Medici, Fratrisque Richardi,
Ac Johannis Foxi:
qui tres mihi creed fuerunt
Doctrina clari,
rari and pietatis alumni.
Gulielmus Bullen
Medicamina semper habebat,
Aeque pauperibus danda,
ac locupletibus aeque.
Sicque Richardus erat
benefacere and ipse paratus,
Omnibus ex aequo
quibus ipse prodesse valebat.
At Foxus noster
per multas hos parasangas,
Vita praecurrit,
studiisque accedimus omnes.
Extant quae scripsit
tormenta cruenta piorum,
Extant perdocte
permulta volumina scripta,
Quae scripsit Foxus:
nulli fuit ipse secundus.
Obiit An. Dom. 1587. April. 16.
Here lies buried William Bullen, On the same stone.
who dyed the seventh day of January, 1576.

Under this stone sleeps the body of Richard Bullen, a faithful Servant and
Preacher of Jesus Christ: And was buried the sixteenth day of October, Anno
Domini, 1563.

Here lies the body of Richard Western, one of the sons of Richard
Western, Another plated stone in the Chancell.
of London, Grocer, who being aged 25. years, deceased the 15. day of
December, Anno Domini, 1602.

Christus mihi vita, Mors mihi lucrum.
Here lies buried Sir Henry Gray, A fair Tomb in the South I Will of the Quire.
Knight, son and heir to George, Lord Gray, of Ruthen, and Earl of Kent.
The which Sir Henry Gray departed this life the 24. day of September, in the
year of Christ, 1562.

Anna Thomae Tumulo
jacet hoc uxorcula Strangae, A fair plated stone in the same I Will.

Quae quia bella fuit,
placuitque marita marito,
Marmore sic texit,
dulci devictus amore.
Obiit Anno Salutis, 1573. Aetatis suae, 19. Februarii vicessimo quarto.
Tolerandum, Sperandum. A comely Monument in the South wall of the Quire.

Roberto Glovero, alias Somerset, Feciali celeberrimo: Heraldicae Scientiae,
and veritatis antiquae, vindici acerrimo: summam laudem and benevolentiam ob
praeclarum ingenium, per acre judicium; ex multa veterum scriptorum (labor
indefesso) perscrutatione; ob morum facilitatem, vitaeque innocuae
sanctimoniam, apud omnes consecuto; Avunculo chariss. Thomas Milles Nepos,
amoris hoc Monumentum moerens posuit.

Robertus iste, natus Ashsordiae Cantii emporio, parentibus ingenuis,
liberaliter educatus, in multis apprime versatus, Heraldicae unice peritissimus
evasit. Fratrem unicum Gulielmum ex Tho. and Mildreda P. P. Sorores autem 5.
habuit. ex Elizabetha Flower Conjuge, 5. tantum, superstites reliquit liberos,
filios scilicet 3. filiasque 2. Tandem cum jam Patriae orbique post varia
exantlata studia acuminis peritiae, and diligentiae stupendae gustum insignem
praebere, atque Principi Sereniss. suis meritis gratissimus esse ceperit. 10.
April. 1518. aetat. suae 45. vitam erumnosam cum morte pie and placide, in uno
Christo commutavit. Idque omnium cum doctissimorum tum optimorum undique pro
tanto literar. pietatis and virtutis alumno dolor ac gemitu utpote; Quem fata
tantum terris ostendisse videantur, nec amplius esse sinant.

R. G. moriens ut viverat, vixit ut moriturus. In the North I Will of the Quire,
hangs up the Ensigns of Arms belonging to Thomas Hawley, alias
Clarentiaulx, King at Arms, buried 1573. but no other Monument there made for
him.

Roger Mason, of this Parish, Citizen and Vintner of London, gave to the poor
of the freedom of this Parish, 200. pounds, wherewith an yearly rent of 16.
pounds or thereabout, is purchased for ever; to be bestowed on ten Gowns of
black Cloth lined, to be distributed yearly upon ten poor men of the
freedom of this Parish, upon All Saints day, at the discretion of the Vicar,
and Churchwardens for the time being. He died the 3. day of September. 1603.
Aetat-suae, 37. Leaving his wife Jane, by whom he had three sons and three
daughters; whereof one only now lives, named Katharine. Which Jane truly
paid the above mentioned two hundred pounds, and joined the erection of this
Monument, set up, An. Dom. 1606. May the 8. day: John Buckeridge, Doctor of
Divinity, being Vicar; Edward Sikling, Richard May, David Jones, and Roger
Web, then Churchwardens.

William Day, Another small Monument in the wall of the same I Will in the Quire.
Citizen and Vintner of London, the son of Thomas Day of Boseham, in Sussex,
Gentleman, and Elizabeth his wife, gave to the poor of this Parish 80. pounds,
which was paid by his brother George Day, wherewith an yearly rent of six
pounds, or thereabout, is purchased for ever: to be bestowed on twelve Coats of
green Cloth, to be distributed yearly upon twelve poor Orphans, upon All
Saints day; at the discretion of the Vicar and Churchwardens for the time
being. He lies buried in his Parish Church of S. Michael in Cornhill, and
dyed the 22. day of September, 1603. Aetatis suae, 32. Set up Anno Domini,
1606. May the 8. day: John Buckeridge, Doctor of Divinity, being Vicar, and the
fore-remembred Churchwardens.

Here lies the body of Edward Harvist, A very fair Monument in the North wall
of this I Will.
Citizen and Brewer of London, Aldermans Deputy of this Parish, and one of His
Majesty's Gunners; and Anne his beloved wife. They were both very charitable
persons: as in giving Land to this Parish perpetually, for the relief of poor
Widows; as also Land to the Company whereof he was free, for mending of the
high way between Edgeworth and Paddington. He gave great Legacies to his poor
kindred, and departed this life the foureteenth day of March, 1610. She
departed this life the four and twentieth day of May, Anno Domini, 1610.
Expecting both a glorious resurrection in Jesus Christ.

A Remembrance of Tho. Busbie, Citizen and Cooper of London, who departed this
life in the year 1575. and was buried the 11. day of July.
This Busbie, A comely Monument by the other.
willing to relieve the poor,
with fire and with bread,
Did give the house wherein he dwelt,
then called the Queens Head.
Four full Loads of the best Charcoales
he would have bought each year,
And forty dozen of Wheaten Bread,
for poor Householders here.
To see these things distributed,
this Busbie put in trust
The Vicar and Churchwardens,
thinking them to be just.
God grant that poor Householders here,
may thankful be for such;
So God will move the minds of more,
to do for them as much:
And let this good example move
such men as God has blessed,
To do the like, before they go
with Busbie to their rest.
Within this Chapel, Busbies bones,
in dust a while must stay,
Till he that made them, raise them up,
to live with Christ for aye.
A Remembrance of Master Richard Roper, etc.
If you on earth that live, An engraven Plate fixed in the wall.
did know
what rest the dead possess,
You would not wish to wander here,
in Vale of wretchedness.
Good Helen, wife to me that was,
prepare thy self with speed,
That thou and I, with this young Maid,
a Plant of both our Seed,
May rest in one, and rise in three,
by power of Godheads might,
When we with Angels shall assemble,
to everlasting light.
Richard Roper lived 70. years, and dyed the 28. day of September. An. Dom. 1578.

Helen Roper lived 65. years.

Ioane Roper lived the age of two years.

Within this I Will lies buried the body of Charles Langley, sometime of this
Parish, Ale-Brewer, who was buried the eighth day of June, An. Dom. 1602. And
did give bountifully to the poor of this Parish.

If Langleys life you list to know, A comely Monument in the wall beneath the
Quire

read on, and take a view,
Of faith and hope I will not speak,
his works shall show them true:
Who whilst he lived, with counsel grave,
the better sort did guide;
A stay to weak, a staff to poor,
without back-bite or pride:
And when he dyed, he gave his Mite,
all that did him befall,
For ever (once a year) to cloth
S. Giles his poor withal.
All Saints he pointed for the day,
Gowns twenty ready made,
with twenty Shirts, and twenty Smocks,
as they may best be had.
A Sermon eke he has ordained,
that God may have his praise,
And other might be won thereby,
to follow Langleys ways.
On Vicar and Churchwardens then,
his trust he has reposed,
As they will answer him one day,
when all shall be disclosed.
Thus being dead, yet still he lives,
lives, never for to dye,
In Heavens bliss, in Worlds fame;
and so I trust shall I.
Lancelot Andrews, Vicar. John Tailor, Will. Hewet, Edw. Sickling, Rich. May,
Churchwardens.


Charities to the poor in the Parish of Saint Giles without Creplegate.

Master Thomas Busby, Thomas Busby his gift to the poor.
Cooper, gave forty dozen of Wheaten Bread, and four Loads of Charcoales, to
be distributed yearly for ever unto the poor of this Parish, in manner
following: The week before Alhallontide, one load of Char-coales, and ten
dozen of bread; the week before Christmas; the week before the five and
twentieth day of January; and the week before Easter, the foresaid proportion
of bread and Coals.

Mr. Blighton, Mr. Blighton his gift.
Butcher, gave 40. dozen of wheaten bread, and 2. load of Charcoales, to be
distributed at the same time, and in the same proportion.

Master Charles Langley, Brewer, gave twenty Gowns for men and women, Charles
Langley his gift.
to be distributed, and twenty shirts for twenty other men, and twenty smocks
for twenty other women yearly for ever, at the Feast of All Saints: and a
remainder of money to be given amongst the poor people the same day, and forty
shillings also that day allowed for a Sermon.

Master Roger Mason, Vintner, gave two hundred pounds in Money, Roger Mason his
gift.
with the which sum, ten Gowns are likewise to be provided for ten poor
men or women, on the same Feast day of All Saints, for ever.

Master William Day, William Day his gift.
Vintner, gave fourscore pounds: with the which sum are to be provided twelve
Coats, for twelve poor men's Children, for ever yearly, and to be
distributed at the said Feast of All Saints.

Mistress Anne Harvist gave four tenements in Monks-well street, Anne Harvist
her gift.
near Creplegate, amounting to the yearly rent of twenty pounds, to be
distributed quarterly to twenty poor widows, to each of them 5. shillings the
quarter.

Master Robert Smith has given four Bibles in Octavo, Rob. Smith his gift.
well buffed and bossed, to four poor men's children, such as can best deserve
them by reading, to be distributed yearly for ever at Easter. And also two and
fifty dozen of Wheaten bread, every week one dozen for ever.

Master Richard Hanbury, Rich. Hanbury and Richard Budd their gift.
and Master Richard Budd, have given six new Books of Common Prayer in Quarto,
well buffed and bossed, to be given yearly for ever at Easter, to six poor
men's children, such as can best deserve them by reading. And also 52. dozen of
wheaten bread, to be given every week for ever.

Master Roger Bellow, Roger Bellow his gift.
Brewer, has given the Lease of an house in Moore-lane, called the sign of
the Cock, the yearly rent whereof is twenty pounds. Out of the which sum,
ten pounds is yearly to be given to the poor, at the Feast of Christmas:
And the remainder (except twenty shillings, otherwise by his will disposed) is
yearly to be reserved, for the purchasing of some parcel of Land, toward the
relief of the poor.

The circuit of the Parish of S. Giles without Creplegate.
THe Parishioners, in their Perambulation, first strike down the Alley (which
has sometime been part of their Churchyard) close by S. Giles his Well, and
crossing the Towne-ditch, keep along by the City Wall, almost to Aldersgate,
where they should cross the Ditch again, and take in certain Garden-houses,
which stand near the Ditch, and so coming down a little Garden Alley,
(through which sometime has been a way into Aldersgate street) return again
by S. Giles his Well, the same way they went in.

Then walking up the West side of Red-crosse street, and the South side of
Barbican, till they come toward the farther end thereof, over against the sign
of the Bores head, they set up their marks upon a great Post (as it seems set
there for the same purpose) where they should cross over to the North side,
right over against the said bound, through certain Garden Alleys, lying on the
West side of Willoughby House: but by reason of some contention, that course is
of late denied them, so that they pass through Barbican, and turn up Goswell
street, (being part of S. Buttolphs Parish) until they come a little beyond
the Bars, where they enter their own bounds again, and setting up their
marks, pass along the right side of the Kings high way, leading to Islington,
and leaving the Mount Mill upon their right hand, they proceed on, till they
come within three rods of a little Bridge, (at the lower end of the Close
next unto Islington, over which lies a foot-path toward Newington Green,)
where they dig a way over the Ditch, and so keep upon the top of the Ditch
bank, all the breadth of the lower end of the said Close; where they turn
again South-east, and taking in all the Lay-stalles, and low grounds, where
brick has been made, strike over between those low grounds and the
Brick-hils, that now are adjoining to the foot-path, leading from the
Pesthouse to Islington, which they leave on the left side; in the South end of
which Brick-hill, there is a stone set, now almost dug down: From the which
stone, they come straight South, till they come over a Bridge, which is laid
purposely for them, and after removed; which as soon as they have past, they
strike down, by the said Ditch side Eastward, to the farthest Conduit head,
where they give the Children Points.

From whence they keep a straight course into the Kings high way, to Dame Anne
de Clare, upon the right side of which way they keep, till they come to the
Butts, where a planck is purposely laid for them, over which they pass into
Holywell Close, and so keep directly to the farthest of the six Milles, next
unto Holywell, which they leave on their left hand, and so passing over the
high way, keep a straight course over the Walks, to the farthest Wall, South
of the middle Walk, (leaving the Butchers Close, and the lower Gardens, some
three Rods on the left hand) in the which Wall there is a mark or Bound:
From thence (not entering the lowest Walk at all) they turn full West, over
the high way leading from Moregate, and coming into little Morefields, (as we
call it) they keep close to the Pales and Tentors (for they have not passing
eight or ten foot of ground from the Pales) till they come to the Posterne,
where they set up their mark; and so through the Posterne they make their
return, etc.

There was in this Church (of old time) a Fraternity or Brotherhood of our
blessed Lady, Brotherhood in S. Giles Church.
or Corpus Christi and S. Giles, founded by John Belancer, in the reign of
Edward the third, the 35. year of his reign.

Some small distance from the East end of this Church, Water-Conduit without
Creplegate.
is a water-conduit, brought in pipes of lead from Highbery, by John Middleton,
one of the Executors to Sir William East field, and of his goods. The
inhabitants adjoining, castellated it of their own coses and charges, about the
year 148^

There (...) also a Bosse of clear water in the Wall of the Churchyard, Bosse
in the Wall of S. Giles Churchyard.
made at the charges of Richard Whitington, sometimes Mayor, and was like to
that of Belinsgate. Of late the same was turned into an evil Pumpe, and so is
clean decayed.

There was also a fair Poole of clear water, Poole of Spring water.
near unto the Parsonage, on the west side thereof, which was filled up in the
reign of Henry the sixth. The Spring was cooped in, and arched over with hard
stone, and stairs of stone to go down to the Spring, on the bank of the
Town ditch. And this was also done of the goods, and by the Executors of
Richard Whitington.

In Whitecrosse-street, White-crosse-street.
King Henry the fifth builded one fair House, and founded there a Brotherhood
of S. Giles, to be kept: which House had sometime been an Hospital of the
French Order, Hospital of the French Order.
by the name of Saint Giles without Creplegate, in the reign of Edward the
first; the King having the Jurisdiction, and pointing a Custos thereof, for the
precinct of the Parish of Saint Giles, etc. Patent Rich. 2. the 15. year:
Which Hospital being suppressed, the Lands were given to the Brotherhood, for
relief of the poor.

One Alley, of diverse Tenements, over against the North wall of S. Giles
Churchyard, was appointed to be Almes-houses for the poor, wherein they
dwelled rent-free, and otherwise were relieved: but the said Brotherhood was
suppressed by Henry the 8. since which time, Sir John Gresham, Mayor, purchased
the Lands, and gave part thereof to the maintenance of a Free School, which he
had founded at Holt, a Market Town in Norfolk.

In Red cross street, Red-crosse street.
on the West side from S. Giles Churchyard, up to the said Cross, be many
fair houses builded outward, Liber. S. Butto^ph.
with diverse Alleys, turning into a large plot of ground, of old time called
the Jews Garden, The Jews Garden, or place to bury their dead.
as being the only place appointed them in England, wherein to bury their
dead; till the year 1177. the 24. of Henry the second, that it was permitted
them (after long suit to the King and Parliament at Oxford) to have a special
place assigned them in every quarter where they dwelled.

This plot of ground remained to the said Jews, till the time of their final
banishment out of England and is now turned into fair Garden-plots and
Summer-houses for pleasure.

On the East side of this Red-crosse street, be also diverse fair houses, up to
the Cross. And there is Beech lane, Beech lane.
peradventure so called of Nicholas de la Beech, Lieutenant of the Tower of
London, put out of that Office in the 13. of Edward the third. This Lane
stretches from Red-crosse street, to White-crosse street, replenished, not
with Beech trees, but with beautiful houses of stone, brick and timber.
Amongst the which, was (of old time) a great house, pertaining to the Abbot of
Ramsey for his lodging, The Abbot of Ramsey his Inn.
when he repaired to the City: It is now called Drewrie House, of Sir Drew
Drewrie, a worshipful owner thereof.

On the North side of this Beech lane, toward White-crosse street, the Drapers
of London have lately builded 8. Almes-houses of brick and timber,
Almes-houses in Beech lane.
for eight poor Widows of their own Company, whom they have placed there
rent-free, according to the gift of the Lady Askew, Widow to Sir Christopher
Askew, sometime Draper, and Mayor, 1533.

Then in Golding lane, Golding lane.
Richard Gallard, of Islington, Esquire, Citizen and Painter-stainer of London,
Alms people there.
founded 13. Almes-houses, for so many poor people placed in them rent-free.

He gave to the poor of the same Almes-houses, 2. d. the piece weekly, and a
load of Charcoales among the^ yearly for ever; he left fair Lands about
Islington, to maintain his foundation. T. Hayes, sometime Chamberlain of
London, in the latter time of H. the 8. married Elizabeth his daughter and
heir; which Hayes and Elizabeth had a daughter named Elizabeth, married to
John Iron-monger, of London, Mercer, who now has the order of the Almes-people.

On the West side of Red-crosse street is a street called the Barbican,
Burgh-kenning, or Barbican.
because sometime there stood on the North side there of a Burghkenning, or
VVatch-tower of the City, called in some language a Barbican, as a Bikening is
called a Beacon. This Burgh-kenning, by the name of the Manor of Base Court,
was given by Edward the third, to Robert Vfford, Earl of Suffolk, and was
lately pertaining to Peregrine Barty, Lord Willoughby of Ersby.

Next adjoining to this, is one other great house, Garter Place.
called Garter Place, sometime builded by Sir Thomas Writhe, or Writhesley,
Knight, alias, Garter, principal King of Arms, second son of Sir John Writhe,
Knight, alias Garter, and was Uncle to the first Thomas, Earl of Southampton,
Knight of the Garter, and Chancellor of England: He built this house, and in
the top thereof a Chapel, which he dedicated by the name of S. Trinitatis in
Alto. Thus much for that part of Creplegate Ward without the Wall, whereof
more shall be spoken in the Suburb of that part. This Ward has an Alderman
and his Deputy within the gate. Common Council, 8. Constables, 9. Scavengers,
12. for VVardmote Inquest, 15. and a Beadle.

Without the gate, it has also a Deputy, Common Council, 2. Constables, 4.
Scavengers, 4. VVardmote Inquest, 17. and a Beadle. It is taxed in London to
the Fifteen, at 40. pounds.

ALDERSGATE WARD.
THe next is Aldersgate Ward, Aldersgate Ward.
taking name of that North Gate of the City; this Ward also consists of
diverse Streets and Lanes, lying as well within the Gate and Wall, as without;
and first, to speak of that part within the Gate, thus it is. The East part
thereof joyneth unto the West part of Creplegate Ward in Engain lane or Maiden
lane. It begins on the North side of that Lane, at Staining lane end, and
runs up from the Haberdashers Hall, to St. Mary Staining Church: and by the
Church East winding almost to VVoodstreete. Oate lane.
And west through Oate lane, and then by the South side of Bacon house in Noble
street, Noble street
back again by Lilipot lane, which is also of that Ward to Maiden lane, and
so on that North side west to Saint John Zacharies Church, and to Foster lane.

Now on the South side of Engaine or Maiden lane, is the west side of Gutherons
lane, to Kery lane, and Kery lane it self (which is of this Ward) and back
again into Engaine lane, by the North side of the Goldsmiths Hall, to Foster
lane, almost wholly of this Ward, which begins in the South toward Cheap,
on the East side, by the North side of Saint Fosters Church, and runs down
North-west by the west end of Engaine lane by Lilipot lane, Noble street
and Oate lane, to Noble street, and through that by Shelly house, (of old
time so called, Shelleyes house, now Bacon house.
as belonging to the Shellies) Sir Thomas Shelley, Knight, was owner thereof in
the first of Henry the fourth. It is now called Bacon house, because the same
was new builded by Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seal. Down on
that side by Sergeant Fleetwoods house, Recorder of London, who also new
builded it to Saint Olaves Church in Silverstreete, which is by the North-west
end of this Noble street.

Then again in Foster lane, this Ward begins on the west side thereof,
overagainst the South-west corner of Saint Fosters Church, and runs down by
Saint Leonards Church, by Pope lane end, and by Saint Annes lane end, which
Lane is also of this Ward, North to the stone wall, by the wall of the City,
over against Bacon house, which stone wall, and so down North to Creplegate on
that side, is of Faringdon Ward.

Then have ye the maine street of this Ward, S. Martins lane.
which is called Saint Martins lane, including Saint Martin on the East side
thereof, and so down on both the sides to Aldersgate. And these be the bounds
of this Ward within the wall and gate.

Now, before we speak of that part of the wall without, let us say somewhat
of the Gate it self. Aldersgate being very old, ruinous, and in danger of some
further decay; the Lord Mayor and his Brethren, with the advice of the worthy
Commoners, determined to have it taken down, and builded again in beautiful
manner. For the more hastening of which intention, a worthy Citizen, M. William
Parker, Citizen and Mercha^t-Taylor of london, gave three thousand pounds
toward the new building of Aldersgate.
Master William Parker, (of whose Christian and liberal charities, we have
in brief manner spoken before) out of his own bountiful disposition, gave
the sum of three thousand pounds, toward the furtherance of so good a work,
in new re-edifying and building the Gate, requiring and appointing (by his
Will) that it should be new builded, within the space of three years after
his decease. And the money to be paid (by his Executor) to the Lord Mayor of
London, and the Alder men his Brethren (for the time being) for the said use of
new building the said Gate, in manner and form following.

That is to say, The manner and form of paying the said money.
200. pounds thereof at the taking down of the first Tile: Other 200. l.
thereof, at the laying of the first stone, which was laid by the right
Worshipful, The first Tile was taken down the last day of March, 1617.
Sir William Cravon, Knight, and Alderman of the City of London, on Monday, the
26. day of May, 1617. Other 200. l. thereof, when the new building should be a
yard in height above the ground. Other 200. l. thereof, when the new building
should be arched over the Gate. And the other 200. l. in full payment, when the
said building shall be full finished. Master Richard Fox, Citizen and
Clothworker of London (a most painful and industrious Gentleman) having the
oversight, direction, and ordering of the said building.

Without the Gate, Aldersgate street.
the maine street called Aldersgate street, runs up North on the East side,
to the west end of Hounds-ditch, or Barbican street: A part of which street
is also of this Ward. And on the west side to Long lane, a part whereof is
likewise of this Ward. Beyond the which Aldersgate, is Goswell street up to
the Bars. Goswell street.


And on the west side of Aldersgate street, by Saint Buttolphs Church, is
Briton street, Briton street.
which runs west to a Pumpe, and then North to the Gate, which enters the
Churchyard, sometime pertaining to the Priory of Saint Bartholomew on the East
side: and on the west side toward Saint Bartholomewes Spittle, to a pair of
posts there fixed. And these be the bounds of this Aldersgate Ward without.

The Antiquities be these: Staining lane.
First, in Staining lane, of old time so called, as may be supposed, of
Painterstainers dwelling there.

On the East side thereof, adjoining to the Haberdashers Hall, Almes-houses
there.
be ten Almes-houses, pertaining to the Haberdashers, wherein be placed ten
Alms people of that Company, every of them having eight pence the piece every
Friday for ever, by the gift of Thomas Huntlow, Haberdasher, one of the
Sheriffs, in the year, 1539.

More, Sir George Barn gave them ten pounds by the year for ever.

Then is the small Parish Church of Saint Mary, Parish Church of St. Mary
Staining.
called Staining, because it stands at the North end of Staining lane. In the
which Church, being but newly builded, there remain no Monuments worth the
noting, but one lately erected.

Here lies the body of George Smithes, A goodly Monument in South wall of the
Chancell.
Goldsmith and Alderman of London, who took to wife, Sarah, the daughter of
Anthony Wolhouse, Citizen, and Haberdasher of London: by whom he had issue
four sons and five daughters. He departed this life the eleventh day of
July, Anno Domini, 1615. being 52. years of age.

To whose memory, Sarah his wife, being sole Executrix of his last Will and
Testament, at her own proper cost and charges, caused this Monument to be
erected.

Then is Engaine lane, or Maiden lane, and at the North-west corner thereof,
the Parish Church of Saint John Zachary, Parish Church of Saint John Zachary.
a fair Church, with the Monuments well preserved, of Thomas Lichfield, who
founded a Chauntry there, in the foureteenth of Edward the second, of Sir
Nicholas Twiford, Goldsmith, Mayor, 1388. and Dame Margery his wife: of whose
goods the Church was made and new builded, with a Tomb for them, and others of
their race, 1390. Drugo Barentine, Mayor, 1398. He gave fair lands to the
Goldsmiths: he dwelled right against the Goldsmiths Hall. Between the which
Hall and his dwelling house, he builded a Gallory thwarting the street,
whereby he might go from the one to the other, he was buried in this Church,
and Christian his wife, 1427. John Adis, Goldsmith, 1400. and Margaret his
wife. John Francis, Goldsmith, Mayor, 1400. and Elizabeth his wife, 1450. I.
Sutton, Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs, 1413. Bartholomew Seman, Gold-beater,
Master of the Kings Mints, within the Tower of London, and the Town of Calice,
1430. John Hewet, Esquire, 1500. William Breakespeare, Goldsmith, 1461.
Christopher Eliot, Goldsmith, 1505. Bartholomew Read, Goldsmith, Mayor, 1502.
was buried in the Charter House, and gave to this Parish 100. l. His wife was
buried here with a fair Monument, her picture in habit of a widow. Thomas
Keyton, Lorimar, 1522. William Potken, Esquire, 1537. John Cornish with an
Epitaph, 1470. Robert Fenrbuther, Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs in the year,
1512.

Hereunder lies buried sir Nicholas Twiford, These words are engraven on an
ancient place in the Chancell.
Knight, sometime Lord Mayor of this City, and Dame Margery his wife; of whose
goods this Church was made a Tomb for themselves, and for many other more. He
died in Anno Domini, 1390.

Hic jacet Johannes Adys, A fair plated in the South I Will of the Quire.
Civis, and Aurifaber London, and Margareta uxor ejus, Obiit ultimo die
Februarii, 1461. Et Margareta, etc.

Here lies John Hewet, The like stone close by it.
of London, Esquire, the which John deceased the first day of May, in the year
of our Lord God 1510. and in the fifth year of the reign of King Henry the
seventh, etc.

Here lies the body of John Sutton, The like stone and in the same I Will.
Citizen, Goldsmith, and Alderman of London, who died the 6. day of July, 1450.

Here lies buried before this place, A small Plate with his Arms in the South
wall.
the body of John Strelley, Esquire, who deceased the ninth day of December,
1595. being about 86. years of age.

Here lies buried within this I Will, A comely Monument in the East end of the
South I Will.
the bodies of John Greenwood, Citizen, and Painter-Stainer of Land. who
descended of a younger house of Greenwood, of Greenwoodley in Yorekshire: And
Elizabeth his wife, by whom he had many children; but at the time of their
death, left only one son and a daughter, Robert, and Ioane, which Robert,
after many years spent in this Parish, was laid by his father and mother the
23. of June, 1585. In memory of whom this Monument was erected by his sisters
son, Samuel Thompson, the sixth of September, Anno 1602.

Hic jacet Dominus Thomas Randolf, A fair stone within the Chancell door.
Capellanus. Qui obiit 29. die Novembris, Anno Domini, 1459. Cujus animae
propitietur Deus.

Hic jacet Ioannes Frances, A very fair plated stone by the Communion Table.
Civis, and Aurifaber, and quondam Mayor London. Qui obiit 13. die December. An.
Dom. 1405. Cujus, etc.

Hic jacet Elizabeth ux. dict. Joan. Qui obiit 11. Mensis Octobris, An. Dom.
1432. Cujus, etc.

Hic jacet Drugo Barantine, The like fair plated stone close by the other.
Civis and Aurifaber, and quondam Mayor London. Qui obiit 15. die Mensis
December. An. Dom. 1415. Cujus, etc.

Hic jacet Christiana, ux. dict. Drugonis. Quae obiit 11. die Mensis Martii,
An. Dom. 1427. Cujus, etc.

This Monument is erected to the memory of Sir James Pemberton, A very goodly
Monument in the East end in the Chancell.
Knight, who being Sheriff of this City at the coming in of King JAMES,
entertained near 40. Earls and Barons in his house on the day of the Kings
being proclaimed. Afterward, Anno 1612. was elected Mayor of this most
honorable City of London. He erected a Free-schoole in the Parish of
Ecleston in Lancashire, sixteen years before his death, and gave fifty pounds
by the year to the maintaining thereof for ever. He gave also five hundred
pounds to Christ's Hospital, and two hundred pounds to the Company of
Goldsmiths, besides many liberal gifts to the poor of his Kindred, and many
other most charitable uses: He died the eighth day of September, 1613. aged,
68. years.

Marble nor Touch,
nor Alabaster can
Reveal the worth of
the long buried man:
For often (we see) men's goods,
when they are gone,
Do pious deeds, when
they themselves did none.
Mine (while I lived) no
goodness did express,
It Is not Inscriptions make
them more or less:
In Christ I hope to rise
amongst the Just,
Man is but grass, all must
to Worms and Dust.
Virtue and Death being
both enamoured
On worthy PEMBERTON,
in heat of Love,
To be possessed of
that each coveted,
Thus did they dialogue,
and thus they strove.
Virtue. WHat Virtue challenges,
is but her right.

Death. What Death lays claim to,
who can contradict?

Vert. Virtue, whose power
exceeds all other might.

Dea. Where Is Virtues power,
when Death makes all submit?

Vert. I gave him life;
and therefore he is mine.

Dea. That life he held
no longer than I list.

Ver. J made him more than
mortal, mere Divine.

Dea. How hapt he could not
then Deaths stroke resist?

Ver. Because (by Nature)
all are borne to dye.

Dea. Then thine own tongue
yields Death the victory.

Ver. No, Death, thou art deceived,
thy envious stroke
Has given him life
immortal, against thy will:

Dea. What life can be, but
vanishes as smoke?

Vert. A life that all thy darts
can never kill.

Dea. Have I not locked his
body in my grave?

Vert. That was but dust, and
that I pray thee keep.

Dea. That is as much
as I desire to have,
His comely shape in
my eternal sleep.

Vert. But where is his honorable
life, renown, and fame?

Dea. They are but breath,
them I resign to thee.

Ver. Them I most covet.

Dea. I prefer my claim,
His body mine.

Ver. Mine his Eternity.

And so they ceast,
Death triumphs over his grave,
Virtue over that which
Death can never have.
And as fair Trophies,
fit to beautify
His Hearse, Virtue hangs
up these Ornaments:
His Justice, Wisdom,
and Integrity,
His courage, dreadlesse
of what are events,
His upright soul
in that high dignity,
Which London gives
her chiefest Presidents.
Free from compare
with such as went before,
Or should succeed.
It was his sole desire
Truth might report those
actions less or more,
Which honest thoughts
did in his heart inspire.
His care of learning
and his liberal mind
Unto the poor,
love to his Company,
Kindred and Friends, to
whom he was most kind,
And with whom he dealt
truly bounteously:
These graces better do
become his Grave,
Than wastfull words
of fruitless flattery,
And their due merit
(doubtless) he shall have,
Among the blessed
in Eternity.
VVhereto fair Virtue now
has brought her son,
Worthily honored,
Sir James Pemberton.
A. M.

On the East side of this Foster lane, The Goldsmiths Hall.
at Engaine lane end, is the Goldsmiths Hall, a proper house, but not large.
And therefore to say that Bartholomew Read, Goldsmith, Mayor in the year,
1502. kept such a feast in this Hall, R. Grafton.
as some have fabuled, is far incredible, and altogether unpossible,
considering the smalnesse of the Hall, and number of the guests, which as they
say, were more than 100. persons of great estate. For the messes and dishes of
meats to them served, the paled Park in the same Hall, furnished with
fruitful trees, beasts of Venery, and other circumstances of that pretended
feast well weighed, Westminster Hall would hardly have sufficed; and therefore
I will over-passe it, and note somewhat of principal Goldsmiths.

First, J read, that Leofstane, Goldsmith, was Provost of this City, in the
reign of Henry the first. Also, that Henry Fitz Alewin, The first Mayor of
London was a Goldsmith.
Fitz Leafstane, Goldsmith, was Mayor of London, in the first of Richard the
first. Also, that Gregory Rocksly, chief Say-master of all the Kings Mints
within England (and therefore by my conjecture, Principal men of the City,
Goldsmiths.
a Goldsmith) was Mayor in the third of Edward the first, and continued Mayor
seven years together. Then William Faringdon, Goldsmith, Alderman of Faringdon
Ward, one of the Sheriffs, 1281. the ninth of Edward the first, who was a
Goldsmith, as appears in record, and shall be showed in Faringdon Ward. Then
Nicholas Faringdon his son, Goldsmith, Alderman of Faringdon Ward, four times
Mayor in the reign of Edward the second, etc. For the rest of later time are
more manifestly known; and therefore I leave them: the men of this mystery
were incorporated or confirmed in the sixteenth of Richard the second.

Then at the North end of Noble street is the Parish Church of Saint Olave in
Silver street, Parish Church of S. Olave in Silver street
a small thing, and without any note-worthy Monuments, but these following.

Here under this stone lies buried the body of John Darcy, A fair plated
stone in the Chancell.
second son to John, Lord Darcy of Ehie, who died in An. 1593. aged, 33-years.

Here lies Grisseild Windsore, Another stone near to it.
daughter of Henry, Lord Windsore, and Lady Anne his wife, daughter and heir
of Sir Thomas Rivet, Knight, who departed this life the seven and twentieth day
of June, and in the year of our Lord God, 1600.

A Remembrance of Master JOHN BANESTER, Surgeon, and Licentiate in Physic.
GReat men that never did
good in all their days,
But at the very instant
of their death,
Find yet no mean
commenders of their praise,
Although it lasts no
longer than a-breath:
Shall then good men,
though lesser in degree,
Find none to give
them right and equity?
If one shall say, The great
man's life was such,
So good, so full
of hospitality:
When God does know,
he never did half so much,
Though thus he must
be graced with flattery.
Shall mean men, who
such works truly did,
Be nothing spoken of?
Oh God forbid.
Not then, as equalling
with any Great,
My fatherly good
friend, John Banester:
No more but truth of
thee let me repeat,
A Sons Love-teares,
thy body to interre.
That such as knew thee
better same than I:
May say, Thy virtues
did not with thee dye,
Thy Skill and Practice,
that it self commends,
Some of the best have
truly found the same,
Not partially employed
to wealthy friends,
But even the poorest wretch,
the sick and lame
Felt of the best. Some
difference there might be:
The rich paid somewhat,
poor men had it free.
Thy care and cost laid out
for common good,
In greater measure
than came in again:
But that heavens blessing
with thy bounty stood,
Hardly had stretched
so many to sustain.
But it is true: The
liberal heart God loves,
And from him still all
cause of lack removes,
Thy weekly charity
given to the poor
In Bread, beside, in
money from thy Purse:
Even in the hardest years
dealt at thy door,
When some repined that
every day did worse;
Makes poor men say:
Our good relief is gone,
Let them go to thy
find-faults and have none.
Poor maimed Soldiers,
sore-sicke hearted men,
That under miseries
hard Crouch did bow,
Were freely cured, me thinks
they cry: Lord, when,
Where shall we find
our good Physician now?
I doubt not, but some
others will as much:
Yet (in these days) we
find not many such.
Sleep then, thou happy
Soul, in endless rest,
All good men's groans
be powered on thy grave:
Live thou in Abraham's
bosom with blessed;
Where Faith and Works
due recompense shall have,
My sight grows dim,
sighing my heart makes sore:
Tears blot my paper,
I can write no more.
On the west side of Foster lane is the small Parish Church of S. Leonards,
Parish Church of St. Leonard in Foster lane.
for them of St. Martins le graund. A number of Tenements being lately builded
in place of the great Collegiate Church of Saint Martin, that Parish is
mightily increased.

In this Church remain these Monuments: First, without the Church is graven in
stone on the East end, John Broke it well, an especial re-edifier or new
builder thereof.

In the Quire graven in brass, To. Purfet, Grocer, 1507.

Robert Traps, Goldsmith, 1526. with this Epitaph:

When the Bells be merrily rung,
And the Mass devoutly sung:
And the meat merrily eaten,
Then shall Robert Traps his wife
and children be forgotten.
Sub hoc Marmore requiescit corpus Humfred. Barret, A stone at the entering into
the Quire
filli Iohannis Barret, Generosus. Qui obiit, An. Domini 1501.

Live to Dye.
All flesh is grass, A fair stone in the Chancel, namelesse.
and needs must fade,
To earth again, whereof it was made.
Felici, piae, and munificentissimae feminae, A fair Monument in the North
wall of the Chancell.
Iodocae Franckland viduatae, siliae Roberti and Ioannae Trappes Londinensium:
Gratitudinis hoc officii and pietatis Monumentum adoptione filii Principalis
and Scholares Collegii de Brasennose apud Oxoniensee exhibuure.

Dilecti cineres, non sic
requiescitis urna
In tenui, ut vobis sola haec
monumenta parantur,
Quae tandem vel sera
dies pessundare possit:
Aenea vos monumenta tegunt,
vivumque Trophaeum
(Aeternum meruistis enim
vivumque Trophaeum)
Vobis vestra dedit Iodoca,
perennius aere,
Nes etenim aeternumqne omnes,
quos postera nobis
Secla dabunt vobis sumus
immortale Sepulchrum.
Then in Pope lane, so called of one Pope that was owner thereof, Pope lane.
on the North side is the Parish Church of Saint Anne in the willowes, Parish
Church of S. Anne in the willowes.
so called, I know not upon what occasion: but some say, of willowes growing
thereabouts: but now there is no such void place for willowes to grow, more
than the Churchyard, wherein do grow some high Ash trees.

This Church by causualty of fire, in the year 1548. was burnt, so far as it
was combustible; but since being newly repaired, there remain a few Monuments
of antiquity, of Thomas Lekhimpton, Clarke of the Pipe, who was buried there,
1499. Ralph Caldwell, Gentleman of Greyes Inn, 1527. John, Lord Sheffeld, John
Herenden, Mercer, Esquire, 1572. And these Verses are on an ancient Table,
hanging in the Quire.

Vt tibi praeceptis men's
conformetur honestis,
Sex animo semper,
sunt repetenda tuo.
Principio Deus est, Deus.
noster
servator and Author,
Hostis in opposita
stat regione Satan. Diabolus.

Tertia res praesens est, Vita.

vita simillima ventis,
Mors sequitur nobis, Mors.

quae prope semper adest.
Ordine sunt quinto, Coelum.

Coeli palatia summis,
Tartara sunt sexto, Inferuum.

constituenda loco.
Haec animo tacit secum,
qui saepe revolvit,
Miror in hoc vitij,
siquid inesse potest.
Gualterus Haddonus.

A table in the North I Will of the Chancell.
Qu os an guis Tris ti de iro c um vul nere stra uit
h os san guis Chris ti mi to T um mu nere la uit
Corda, manus, oculos,
aures, animosque levemus,
Et Domino, voces, sua sunt,
and ei sua demus.
Quos amor aeterno vivos
in foedere junxit,
Concordes tumulo mors
sic conjunxit in uno.
Non sors unanimes, nec
mors disjungit amantes,
Sed post fata vides
inviolata amant.
Here lies buried the body of Edward Herenden, A handsome small Monument in the
North wall of the Quire.
Esquire, Citizen and Mercer of London, and Millescent his wife, daughter of
Richard Samond, of Ansley Woodhouse, in the County of Nottingham, Esquire: who
had issue then living, Edmund, Henry, and Seymore their sons; Frances,
Martha, Magdalene, and Judith, their daughters: which Edward Herenden was son
and heir of Richard Herenden of West Farleige, in the County of Kent, Esquire,
An. 1572.

Memorare novissima, and in aeternum non peccabis. Eccles. 7.
Here lies the bodies of Edmund Herenden, A smaller Monument by the other.
Gentleman, son and heir of Edward Herenden, Esquire, whose Monument next
adjoyneth. Which Edmund had to his first wife, Helen, daughter of William
Dunkeyn, Citizen, and Merchant-Taylor of London: And he had issue by her nine
sons, and four daughters. He had to his second wife, Helen, daughter of
John Bird, Citizen and Draper of London. Obiit 10. die Aprilis, 1590.

Here-under this stone lies the body of Stephen Brakynbury, A fair plated
stone under the Communion table.
Gent. Usher to King Henry the 8. Edward the 6. Queen Mary, and Queen
Elizabeth, and Joan his wife: which Stephen died the 2. day of Febru. An. 1563.
and Ioane died, etc.

Orate devote pro anima Magistri Ioannis Pemberton, Another stone by the
Communion Table.
utriusque Juris Baccalaurii, quond. Residentiar. Eccles. Cath. de Rippon,
Ebor. Diocesis, hujusque alius Eccles. Rectoris. Qui obiit 12. die September. An.
Dom. 1499. Cujus, etc.

William Gregory, Skinner, Mayor of London in the year 1451. was there buried,
and founded a Chauntry, but no Monument of him remains.

Then in St. Martins lane was (of old time) a fair and large College, of a
Deane and secular Canons or Priests, College of Saint Martins le graund.
and was called Saint Martins le graund, founded by Ingelricus, and Edwardus
his brother, in the year of Christ, 1056. and confirmed by William the
Conqueror, as appears by his Charter dated 1068. This College claimed great
privileges of Sanctuary, Lib. S. Martin.
and otherwise, as appears in a book written by a Notary of that house,
about the year 1442. the nineteenth of Henry the sixth, wherein amongst other
things, is set down and declared, that on the first of September, in the year
aforesaid, a Soldier, prisoner in Newgate, as he was led by an Officer
toward the Guild hall of London, there came out of Panyer Alley five of his
fellowship, and took him from the Officer, brought him into Sanctuary, at the
West door of Saint Martins Church, and took grithe of that place. But the
same day Philip Malpas, and Robert Marshall, then Sheriffs of London, with
many other entered the said Church, and forcibly took out with them the said
five men thither fled; led them fettred to the Compter, and from thence chained
by the necks to Newgate: of which violent taking, the Deane and Chapter in
large manner complained to the King, and required him as their Patron, to
defend their privileges, like as his Predecessors had done, etc. All which
complaint and suit, the Citizens by their council, Markam, Sergeant at the
Law, John Carpenter, Argument against privilege challenged by the Deane of S.
Martins.
late Common Clarke of the City, and other, learnedly answered, offering to
prove, that the said place of Saint Martin had no such immunity or liberty as
was pretended; namely, Carpenter offered to lose his live-lode, if that Church
had more immunity than the least Church in London: notwithstanding, after long
debating of this controversy, by the Kings commandment, and assent of his
Council in the Star Chamber, the Chancellor and Treasurer sent a Writ unto
the Sheriffs of London, charging them to bring the said five persons, with the
cause of their taking, and withholding before the King in his Chancery, on the
Vigill of Allhallowes. On which day, the said Sheriffs, with the Recorder and
Council of the City, brought and delivered them accordingly, before the said
Lords, whereas the Chancellor, after he had declared the Kings commandment,
sent them to Saint Martins, there to abide freely, as in a place having
franchises, whiles them liked, etc.

Thus much out of that Book have I noted concerning the Privilege of that
place, challenged in those days; since the which time, to wit, in the year
1457. the 36. of the said Henry the sixth, an Ordinance was made by the King
and his Council, concerning the said Sanctuary men in S. Martins le graund,
whereof the Articles are set down in the Book of K. within the Chamber of the
Guild hall, in the leaf 299.

Henricus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hyberniae: Omnibus
ad quos presents literae perventium, salutem. Inspeximus tenorem quondam
ordinationis, concessionis, and stabilimenti certorum Articulorum infra
Sanctuarin liberae Capellae nostrae, S. Martini infra Civitatem nostram London
observandam and custodiendam, coram Nobis and Concilio nostro, 5. die Februarii
ultimo praeterito, apud Westmon. in Camera Stellata, ordinatorum and
stabilitorum, Nobis in Cancellar. nostram de mandato nostro missum factu^ in
haec verba:
THe fifth of Feverer, Set down according to the English then used, and as it
stands in the Record.
the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, King Henry the 6. thirty
fifth: at Westminster, in the Sterred Chamber, our said Sovereign Lord,
calling to his high remembrance, the good and blessed intent that his full
Noble Pregenitours have at all times had, to the honor, worship, conservation
and well of the Free Chapel of Saint Martins, within the City of London, of
the which the King our said Sovereign Lord is founder and Patron: desiring to
do all that may serve to the ease and restful roll of the same; and
conservation of the Sanctuary, Immunity, Privileges and Liberties, as
appertain to the said Chapel and place, willing that hereafter none occasion
be yeven, to the breach or hurting of them. Offense taken by the City, against
the indirect courses used in the Sanctuary.
Remembering also the great complaints, grudging, and displeasure that his
subjects have taken, and specially the Citizens and Commonalty of the said City
of London, of the demeaning of misruled persons coming and abiding in the said
place, under umbre and color of the Sanctuary there, the which have at diverse
times issued out of the said Sanctuary, and committed many ryots, robberies,
man-slaughters, and other mischiefs; where-through the said Sanctuary has be
greatly dislaundered, and (over that) great inconvenience like to ensue.

After great deliberation and communication had as well with Doctors of
Divinity, as of Law Civil and Canonical, called also thereto the Judges of
this our Land, and their advices had in that behalf, other men also of great
wisdom and experience for the weal and conservation of the said Sanctuary,
and to eschew the said misgovernance and mischief, called also before our said
Sovereign Lord and his Council the Mayor and the Aldermen of the said City,
and Master Richard Cawdre, Deane of the said place of Saint Martins. Order from
the King and his Council to the Deane of the Sanctuary.
Our said Sovereign Lord (by the advice of his Council above said) Ordained,
granted, and established certain Articles under written, to be kept and
observed within the said Sanctuary, from this time forth, without any
interruption of them. VVilling and ordaining, that the said Deane that now is
promit by his oath the observance of the same for the time that he shall be
Deane there. And that every Deane after him in his admission to the said
Deanary, be sworn to keep the said Articles in semblable wise, and make them
to be kept within the said Sanctuary: the which Articles been such as follow:

1. First, For fugitives claiming benefit of the Sanctuary, and the causes
moving th^^^ thereto.
That every person fugitive coming unto the said Sanctuary for tuition, and
challenge to enjoy the immunities and privileges thereof, at his entree, as
soon as he commodiously and reasonably shall now present himself unto the
said Deane, his Commissarie, or Depute in that behalf, and before him declare
the cause of the fear moving him to come to the said Sanctuary, be it for
treason, felony, surmised upon him, or for other causes, and that the said
declaration and cause be registered in the common Register, ordained therefore
in the said Sanctuary, and the name of the said fugitive.

2. Item, That he at his first entree present and deliver unto the said Deane,
Commissary, or Depute, all manner of weapon and armor that he brings with
him as well invasive as defensive, Against armor and weapons in the Sanctuary
and that he be not suffered to wear or use any such weapon or armor, or it
to have in his keeping within the said Sanctuary in any wise, Except a
reasonable knife, to kerve withal his meat, and that the said knife be
pointlesse.

3. Item, That every ervaunt and open Thief, For thieves, felons, murderers,
and infamous persons.
Robber, Murderer, and Felon, notoriously noised by the common fame of the
people, or if the said Deane, Commissary, or Depute be credibly informed, or
due proof be yoven or made, that he is such one repairing to the said
Sanctuary, to the intent that he shall not (under color of the said
Sanctuary) intend to do further mischief, find sufficient seurte to be made
unto the King, as well by his own obligation, as by the obligations of other,
of his good bearing for the time of his abode (within the said Sanctuary, and
for a quarter of a year after his departing out of the same. And that he be
kept in ward into the time he have found and made the said seurte: And if it
so be, that it be complained or showed unto the Kings Highness, Concerning
security for good behavior to be given.
that the said seurte be not sufficient, that then at the commandment of the
said Council (if it be thought necessary) the said Deane, Commissary, or
Depute shall take other and better securte, or else commit them to ward unto
the time better securte be sound. Foreseen always that if the said fugitive
will depart out of the said Sanctuary, that he may so do when he will.

4. Item, That all the out gates, as well posternes, doors, as all other
issues outward whatsoever they be of the said Sanctuary, For close keeping the
gates and posternes of the Sanctuary nightly.
be surely closed and shut nightly at nine of the clock. And so remain shut
from the same hour, unto six of the clock in the morning, from the Feast of
Alhallowes, unto the Feast of Candlemasse. And the remanent of the year
nightly from the said hour of nine unto four of the clock in the morning, or
unto the time that the first Mass begins within the said place: And that
all those that been fled to the said Sanctuary for treason or felony, be
within the closure on nights time.

5. Item, For bringing stolen goods into the Sanctuary*
If any such thief, murderer, or felon resort to the said Sanctuary for
tuition of the same, with any manner robbery, or stolen goods, if the party
robbed make fresh suit therefore, and prove by open evidence, that the same
felon has brought into the said Sanctuary the said goods so stolen thence, the
said Deane, Commissary, or Depute, shall put in true devoire, withouten any
dissimulation, fraud, or malengyne, to make full restitution unto the party so
grieved of the same stolen goods, if they can be had. And semblably, if any
Fugitive come to the said Sanctuary with other men's goods, merchandise, or
things, intending there to live with the same: And the owner of the said goods,
merchandise, or things, make proof that they be his, and verify that they
be brought into the said Sanctuary, the said Deane, Commissary, or Depute
shall put him in full devoire, to make restitution, to the party so proving,
that the same goods, merchandises, or things were his. And no Fugitive, nor
none dwelling within the said Sanctuary shall receive, conceal, nor buy any
such goods; but that they be brought to the said Deane, Commissary, For
restitution or amends making to the owners.
or Depute, to the intent the owners may have the sooner knowledge of them. And
if the said goods so stolen and brought to the said Sanctuary, be concealed
from the said Deane, Commissary, or Depute, and bought by any dwelling in the
said Sanctuary: that then the ouyer (abiding there) make restitution or
satisfaction to the party grieved, proving the said goods so stolen to be his,
and so sold in the same Sanctuary.

6. Item, For offenses committed by Sanctuary persons.
If any person having tuition of the said Sanctuary, from thence issue out by
day or by night, and commit or do any robbery, murder, treason, felony, or
battery, without the said Sanctuary. And thereupon resort again to the said
Sanctuary for tuition; the said Deane, Commissary, or Depure, shall upon
credible information given unto him of the said robbery, murder, treason,
felony, or battery so done (withoutensorth) commit the same misdoer to ward,
there to remain as long as he will abide in the said Sanctuary. And if so be
he will depart from thence, he shall depart at an hour to be assigned unto
him by day betwixt sun and sun.

7. Item, For Picklockes, counterfeiters of diverse notorious crimes.
That subtle pickers of Locks, counterfeitours of Keys, contrivers of Sealx,
forgers of false evidences, workers of counterfeit Chains, Beads, Brouches,
Ouches, Rings, Cups, Spoones silvered, and plates of Copper gilt, uttered for
Gold, unto the common hurt of the people, be not suffered in the said
Sanctuary. And if any being within the said Sanctuary be holden suspect of the
things abovesaid, let him be committed to ward, till he find sufficient surety,
as in the third Article abovesaid.

8. Item, For strumpets, bawdes, and other foul livers.
That common Putuers, Strumpers, and Bawdes be not supported in the said
Sanctuary: And if they claim the tuition of the said Sanctuary, that they be
set in open ward on day times, till shame cause them to depart, or to amend
their vicious living.

9. Item, Against unlawful games.
That deceitful games, as plays at hazard, the Dice, the Guek, the Kayelles,
the Cloysh, and other such unleefull and reprovable games be not used,
supported, nor cherished within the said Sanctuary.

10. Item, For Artificers dwelling in the Sanctuary.
That all Artificers dwelling within the said Sanctuary (as well Barbours as
other) keep holy the Sundays and other great Festival days without breach,
or exercising of their craft, in such wise as done the Inhabitants of the said
City of London. And if they do the contrary, to be committed to ward, till
they find sufficient surety, as in the third Article abovesaid, to use their
crafts in manner and form as do the Inhabitants of the said City, and
according to the ordinances of the same City.

11. Item, For such as come to live in the Sanctuary, to take an oath.
That every person coming to the said Sanctuary for immunity and tuition of
the same, that he at his admission to the said Sanctuary, be sworn on a
book, to obey, keep, and observe the Articles abovesaid, and every each of
them with their pains and rules appertaining to the same. And the King by the
advice abovesaid would, granted and ordained, that this Act be exemplified
under his great Seal, and be enrolled in his Chancellary, to the intent that
the ordinance abovesaid remain of Record, and that his subjects may have
knowledge thereof.

Nos autem tenore praecedentium ad requisitinem dilecti and fidelis nostri
Galfridi Baleyne, Maioris Civitatis nostrae London, and Aldemannorum ejusdem
Civitatis, duximus exemplificandum per praesentes: In cujus rei testimonium has
literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes, Test meipso apud Westmon. 24. die
Novembris, Anno Regni nostri, 36.

Examinatur per Clericos.
Iohannem Fankes, and Thomam Ive.

By the means and friendly help of Master William Williams, clarke of the
Chamber of London, I prevailed to have the true copy of the said Articles: and
therefore in this manner have here inserted them.
This College was surrendered to King Edward the sixth, the second of his
reign, the year of Christ, 1548. And the same year, the College Church
being pulled down, in the East part thereof a large VVine-Taverne was builded;
and withal, down to the west, and throughout the whole precinct of that
College, many other houses were builded, and highly priced, letten to
strangers, borne, and other such as there claimed benefit of privileges,
granted to the Canons, serving God day and night (for so be the words in the
Charter of William the Conqueror) which may hardly be wrested to artificers,
buyers, and sellers, otherwise than is mentioned in the 21. of S. Matthewes
Gospel. Matthew. 21.


Lower down, on the west side of Saint Martins lane, in the Parish of St.
Anne, almost by Aldersgate, is one great house, commonly called Northumberland
house: it belonged to Henry Percy. King Henry the fourth, in the seventh of his
reign gave this house, with the tenements thereunto appertaining, to Queen
Jane his wife, and then it was called her VVardrope: it was afterward a
Printing House; but now a Tavern.

Without Aldersgate, on the East side of Aldersgate street, Cooks Hall.
is the Cooks Hall: Which Cooks (or Pastelars) were admitted to be a Company,
and to have a Master and Wardens, in the two and twentienth of Edward the
fourth. From thence, along unto Hounsditch, or Barbican street, be many fair
houses. On the west side also be the like fair buildings, till ye come to
Long lane, and so to Goswell street.

In Britain street, Britain street.
which took that name of the Dukes of Britain lodging there, Parish Church of
S. Buttolph.
is one proper Parish Church of Saint Buttolph: In which Church was sometime a
Brotherhood of Saint Fabian and Sebastian, founded in the year 1377. the 51.
of Edward the third, and confirmed by Henry the fourth, in the sixth of his
reign. Then Henry the sixth, in the 24. of his reign, to the honor of the
Trinity, gave license to Dame Ioane Astley, sometime his Nurse, to R. Cawood
and T. Smith, to found the same a Fraternity, perpetually to have a Master and
two Custos, with Brethren and Sisters, etc. This Brotherhood was endowed with
Lands, more than thirty pounds by the year, and was suppressed by Edward the
sixth.

There lie buried, John de Bath, Weaver, 1390.

Philip at Vine, Capper, 1396.

Benet Gerard, Brewer, 1403.

Thomas Bilsington founded a Chauntry there, and gave to that Church an house,
called the Helmet upon Cornhill.

John Bradmote, Surgeon, Margaret and Katharine his wives, 1411.

John Michael Sergeant at Arms, 1415.

Allen Bret, Carpenter, 1425.

Robert Malton, 1426.

John Trigilion, Brewer, 1417.

John Mason, Brewer, 1431.

Rob. Cawood, Clerk of the Pope in the Kings Exchequer, 1466.

Rich. Emmesey, John Walpole.

I. Hartshorne, Esquire, servant to the King, 1400. And other of that Family,
great Benefactors to that Church.

W. Marrow, Grocer, Mayor, and Katharine his wife, were buried there, about
1468.

The Lady Anne Packington, widow, late wife to John Packington, Knight,
Chirographer of the Court of Common Pleas: she founded Alms houses near unto
the white Friars Church in Fleetstreet, the Clothworkers in London have
oversight thereof.

Here lie buried the bodies of Richard Downis, An ancient Tomb in the South
I Will of the Quire.
and Joane his wife. which Richard deceased the day of 1500. And the said Joane
dyed the 13. day of January, 1519.

Hic jacet Johannes Rukeby, In the South I Will a plated Gravestone.
nuper Civis and Atturnatus London, and Elizabetha uxor ejus. Qui quidem Ioh.
obiit 1 die Mensis Septembris, 1427.

The Corpse of John Milsam lies here, A gravestone in the South I Will of the
Quire.

Who lived fourscore and one year.
Free of the Notaries he was,
a friendly Citizen;
And eke a long time in Guild Hall,
an Attorney has been:
Who willingly this mortal life
did yield with constant mind,
Inperfect hope through Christ his blood,
the immortal life to find:
And now is gone the way before,
that we also must wend;
For Death is due to every man,
by it all things must end.
January the 18. day, 1567.
Out of this life he took the way.
Domina Margareta and Lichtervelde filia Iohannis supremi Flandriae Praetoris,
In the same I Will upon a painted Table.
nuptum primum Nobili viro Johanni Wits, Topatchae Bouchardiriae, and
Franconatus apud Flandros, Burghi Magistro: Peperit ei Ferdinandum, Jacobum,
and Margaretam, D. Domino Adolpho a Meetkerck Equiti Aurato, and summo
Flandriae, ex quo Matter facta est Edovardi, Elizabethae and Salomes. Matrona
excellentissimo ingenio, ornatissimis moribus, insigni pietate, aliisque summis
praedita virtutibus. Marito in utraque fortuna assidua comes, Exiliiq, postremi
fida socia. Vixit Ann. 45. Men's. 7. dies 14. Pie in Deo obdormivit, Idus
Novembris, M.D.XC.IIII. Londini Anglorum. His additus est tumulus Nobilis viri
Pauli Knibbii, i. Ser. Daniae Regis, Consiliarii generei supradicti Adolphi a
Meetkerck, qui dum apud Ser. Aug. Reginam dicti Regis Legatum agit Land. Pie
defunct. est, 8. Id. October. M.D.XII.

Cinibus hosce suis
posuit Van Heilus honores
Digna horum meritis
alii Monumenta reponent.
Patience Vaincra.
DEO.
Here rests the body of William Purde, A gravestone in the same South I Will.
Esquire, late Clerk of the Pipe and Privy Seal, which paid the general
tribute of Nature, divided from the mundane vexations by natural death, the 15
day of August, the 31. year, in the reign of King Henry the eighth.

Hic jacet Petrus Swift, de London, A gravestone in the same I Will:
Generos. dum vixit Auditor Eccles. Cathedrali D. Pauli London. Qui obiit 2.
die September. An. Dom. 1562. Cujus, etc.

Pars Terrestris.
Joannis Coston, A small Monument on a pillar in the same I Will.
Registrarii sedis Archiepiscopalis Cantuar. Principalis, Almaeque Curiae Cant.
de Arcubus Land. Procuratorum generalium unius. Sexaginta annos cum multa
pietate and probitate sub Polo praetergressus, 3. Iulii, 1614. animam efflavit.
Relictis Simone and Anna, flio and filia unicis in sacros cineres redact. sub
pedibus diem novum expectat.

Here lies Robert Green, Gentleman, who departed this world on Thursday, the
twelfth of November, and was buried in this Church, upon Saturday, the
foureteenth day of the same Month, 1590.

Here under this Tomb lies the body of Dame Anne Packington, An ancient Tomb
in the East end of the Chancell.
widow, late wife of Sir John Packington, Knight, late Chirographer in the
Court of Common Pleas: which Dame Anne deceased the 22. day of August, in the
year of our Lord God, 1563.

Johannes Sotherton, A small Monument in the East end of the Chancell.
Baro Scaccarii, sincera fretus in Deum pietate, studiosa in Principem
fidelitate, spectata in omnes humanitate and benevolentia, annum aetatis
ingress. octogesimum, placide in Christo obdormivit, 26. October. Anno Domini,
1605. and una cum duabus conjugibus, Francisca and Maria castiss. feminis hic
sepultus.

Francisca, filia and haeres de Johannes Smith de Cromer, Norff. Per quam
habuit unum filium Christopherum, obiit October. 1563.

Maria, filia Edovardi Woton, Medicinae Doctoris, per quam habuit alterum
filium Iohannem, and unicam filiam Mariam. Obiit 10. Iunii.

Johan. primogenitus Franciscae, unigenitus Mariae privignus, non ingratus
Christopherus Sotherton posuit.

An. Dom. 1604. Martii 31. Obiit.
Michael Crud, A small Monument in the East end of the Chancell.
Divini Verbi Concionator, atque hujus Ecclesiae Past or fidelis, post vitam
pie gestam, tam in partibus transmarinis, quam in natali solo, in Anno aetatis
suae quinquagesimo, pacifice dormivit in Christo, atque juxta tumulatur
impensis Margaretae ejus relictae, quae hoc fieri in foelicem Marici memoriam
curavit.

D. O. M.
Gulielmo Mill, A comely Monument in the End of the Chancell.
Armigero, fide, charitate, and in arduis constantia celeberrimo, Marito
charissimo conjunx amantissima, in honoris perpetui tesseram Monumentum hoc
lugubre moerens posuit.

Gulielmus iste Croydoniae (Surriae Comitatus emporio) natus, Gulielmi Mill,
and Hawisiae Harwell secundo genitus, ex antiqua Millorum de Horscombe (Agri
Governiensis) familia oriundus, liberaliter educatus, Graiensis Hospitii
Alumnus, in literis foeliciter versatus, Consilii Sanctioris in Camera quam
Stellatam dictitant amanuensis prius per annos quinquaginta, deinde Clericus,
and Actuarius summus, viginti plus minus ibidem suis meritis evasit. Fratres
duos Nicholaum and Iohannem innuptos, Elizabetham, Franciscam, Milicentam,
Margaretam atque Annam, uterinas, and Margaretam sororem habuit. Margaretam,
Thomae Greek, Fisci Regii Baronis, filiam, (Gulielmi Butleri viduam) in uxore^
grandaevus duxit. Tandem Londini in Carthusianis 16. die Iulii, Anno Verbi
incarnati, 1608. Aetatis suae 71. (nulla suscepta prole) vitam erumnosam ut
Christo viveret, pie sed placide commutavit.

Non temere sepimur,
nec nos Fortuna gubernat,
Sed Deus es vitae,
Dux es and ipse via.
Fraternae Pietatis Symbolum.
Iohannis Mill, A small Monument on a pillar in the Chancell.
Gulielmi Patris Armigeri, de Croydon, filius secundo genitus, vita integerrima
defunctus hic coelebs requiescit, corpore autem sub Marmore istic
pulverescente; Animus in Coelis secundam per Christum Iesum, repurgatae carnis
assumptionem expectat. Obiit 27. die Mensis Augusti, An. Domini, 1595. Aetatis
suae 57. Gulielmo Fratre primaevo atque unico (sanctioris in Camera Stellata
Consilii Clerico) superstite.

What Epitaph
shall we afford this Shrine?
Words cannot-grace
this Pyramid of thine: A fair Pyramides erected against a pillar.

Thy sweet perfections,
all summed up, were such,
As Heavens (I think)
for faith did think too much.
Religious zeal
did thy pure heart command,
Pity thine eye,
and Charity thy hand:
These Graces, joined
with more of like degree,
Make each man's word
an Epitaph for thee.
Calm was thy death,
well-ordered was thy life,
A careful Mother,
and a loving wife.
Ask any, how
these Virtues in thee grew?
Thou wast a Spencer,
and a Mountague.
Katharina Mountague obiit 7. die Decembris, Anno Domini, 1612.
Mortua Tamworthi
spectas Monumenta viator? A fair Tomb of white stone in the Chancell.

Quin potius vivus,
disce quis ille fuit.
Si proavos quaeras,
Generoso sanguine ductus,
Vsque per innumeros
invenietur Avos.
Si mores, dicam mores?
nec amantior aequi,
Nec Patriae quisquam,
nec probitatis erat.
Si quae conditio,
(si quid sit laudis in illa)
Vita sub illustri
Principe clara fuit.
Et si Principibus
laus est placuisse probatis,
Laudibus haec pars est
annumeranda suis.
Iam volucris sua Iustra
novem transegerat aetas,
Quum Mors hunc saeva
falce cruenta metat.
Haec satis hospes, abi,
nec vivere differ in horas,
Quae sua pars hodie,
cras tua forsan erit.
Obiit 19. die Aprilis, 1569.
Iohanni Morlcio Armigero, Another beautiful Pitamides directly opposite to
the other.
and Elizabethae Wotton Conjugi, parentibus charissimis, Johannes Morleius de
Halnaker, in Comitatu Sussexiae, Miles, and Edwardus filii, pietatis and
memoriae ergo hoc posuerunt.

Vixerunt Conjuges annos 16. Ille obiit die 20. Novembris, 1587. Illa die 7.
Novembris, 1603. Tres filios totidemque filias superstites reliquerunt:
Iohannem, Edwardum, Willielmum Mariam, Elizabetham, and Magdalenam.

Hereunder lies buried in the mercy of God, A fair plated stone under the
Communion Table.
the body of Thomas Goodwin, Esquire, who married Anne the daughter of Thomas
Peacocke, by whom he had issue, one daughter, named Anne. which Thomas
deceased the 27. day of january, An. Dom. 1565.

Hoc latet in Tumulo
praestanti corpore Nympha
Margareta quidem
repsque parente sata. A fair Gravestone by the said Table.

Censor erat genitor,
Sponsus venerabilis extat,
Woodhouse; bis decies
quinaque arista tulit.
Siste pedes igitur
sternis qui busta prophanus,
Nam Christi cupiens,
sic bonitatis erat.
Vixit and illa pie,
moriens and sancta vocatur,
Exemplo simili
vivere disce pie.
Here lies buried the body of Frances, Another stone, by the said Table.
late wife of John Sotherton, foreign Apposer of the Queens Majesty's
Exchequer; who departed this present life, in the true faith of Christ, the 20.
of October. 1563.

Barbara Bradburii
simul and Marianna Someri, Another.

Progenies pariter
Tumulo conduntur in isto,
Vtraque Conjugio
Thomae conjuncta Pagetto,
Vna virum moriens
septena in prole reliquit,
Altera fuit sterilis
parili quoque tempore conjux;
Ambarum pia vita fuit,
pia morsque secuta est.
Primae 24. Februarii, An. Dom. 1583.

Alterae Decembris ultimo, Anno, 1598.

Here lies buried the body of Thomas Greek, A gravestone in the North I Will of
the Quire.
one of the Barons of the Queens Majesty's Court of Exchequer; who dyed the 18.
day of November, in the 20. year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady, Queen
Elizabeth. He lived 63. years.

Here under lies buried the body of Thomas Neale, Another in the same I Will.
the son of Francis Neale Esquire, one of her Majesty's Auditors of the
Exchequer; who deceased the 8. day of December, 1597. Aetatis suae, 99.

Here lies the body of Anne, A fair Garvestone in the same North I Will.
daughter of John Branche, Citizen and Draper of London, by Ioane his wife,
daughter and heir of John Wilkinson, sometime Alderman of this City. She was
married first to Robert Dunne, and (after his death) to Richard Stoneley,
Esquire. By Dunne she had three sons; Sir Daniel Dunne, Knight, and Doctor of
Law, her eldest; Samuel Dunne, and William Dunne, the youngest, Doctor of
Physic. And by Stoneley she had diverse children, whereof two lived to be
married, Dorothie, to William Dantrey, of Sussex; Anne, to William Higham of
Essex, Esquire. Her life was virtuous and godly, and so dyed the eleventh day
of January, An. Dom. 1611. being of the age of fourscore and six years, having
seen her childrens children, to the fourth generation: and lies here buried
between her husbands, and among some other of her children, according to her
desire.

Hic jacet Susanna, A small Monument in the South wall in the body of the
Church.
Andreae Lionis Patria Garnseyensis, unica filia, uxor Roberti Creswell, alias
Blew-mantle, Prosecutoris ad Arma Serenissimae Elizabethae, Angliae Reginae.

Quae modo fida Deo,
quae vixit chara marito,
Non invita animam
Christo moribunda reliquit.
-- 23. December. Anno
Domini, 1590.
And thus and end of this Ward, which has an Alderman, his Deputy; Common
Counselors, five; Constables, eight; Scavengers, nine; for the Wardmote
inquest, fourereene, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteen in London, seven
pounds, and in the Exchequer, six pounds, nineteen shillings.

FARINGDON WARD Infra, or within.
ON the South side of Aldersgate Ward, Faringdon Ward within.
lies Faringdon Ward, called infra, or within, for a difference from another
ward of that name, which lies without the walls of the City, Faringdon extra.
and Faringdon infra, all one Ward, and then divided into 2 by Parliament.
and is therefore called Faringdon extra. These two Wards (of old time) were
but one, and had also but one Alderman, till the 17. of Richard the second, at
which time, the said Ward (for the greatness thereof) was divided into twain,
and by Parliament ordered to have two Aldermen, and so it continues till this
day. The whole great Ward of Faringdon, both infra and extra, Faringdon Ward
took that name of W. Farendon.
took name of W. Farendon, Goldsmith, Alderman of that Ward, and one of the
Sheriffs of London, in the year 1281. the 9. of Edward the first: He
purchased the Aldermanrie of this Ward, as by the abstract of Deeds which I
have read thereof, may appear.

Thomas de Arderne, Sir Ralph Arderne, Knight, Alderman of that ward, now
called Faringdon, in the reign of Hen. 3.
son and heir to Sir Ralph Arderne, Knight, granted to Ralph le Feure,
Citizen of London, one of the Sheriffs in the year 1277. all the Aldermanrie,
with the appurtenances, within the City of London, and the Suburbs of the
same, between Ludgate and Newgate, and also without the same Gates: which
Aldermanrie, Ankerinus de Averne held during his life, by the Grant of the said
Thomas de Arderne, to have and to hold to the said Ralph, and to his heirs,
freely without all challenge, yielding therefore yearly to the said Thomas and
his heirs, one Clove or Slip of Gilli flowers, at the Feast of Easter, for all
secular service and customs, with warrantie unto the said Ralphle Feure, and
his heirs, against all people, Christians and Jews, in consideration of
twenty Marks, which the said Ralph de Feure did give beforehand, in name of a
Gersum, or Fine, to the said Thomas, etc. Dated the fifth of Edward the first.
Witness, G. de Rokesley, Mayor, R. Arrar, one of the Shriffes. H. Wales, P. le
Tailor, T. de Basing, I. Horn, N. Blackthorn, Aldermen of London.

After this, John le Feure, Alderman.
John le Feure, son and heir to the said Ralph le Feure, granted to William
Farendon, W. Farendon Alderman and one of the Sheriffs of London.
Citizen and Goldsmith of London, and to his heirs, the said Aldermanry, with
the appurtenances, for the service thereunto belonging, in the seventh of
Edward the first, in the year of Christ, 1279. Nicholas Farendon Alderman and
Mayor.
This Aldermanry descended to Nicholas Farendon, son to the said William, and
to his heirs: which Nicholas Farendon, also a Goldsmith, was four times
Mayor, and lived many years after; for I have read diverse Deeds, whereunto he
was a witness, dated the year 1360. He made his Testament, 1361. Nicholas
Farendon lived 53. years after he had bin once Mayor.
which was fifty three years after his first being Mayor, and was buried in
Saint Peter's Church in Cheap. So this Ward continued under the government of
William Farendon the father, and Nicholas his son, by the space of fourscore
and two years, and retains their name until this present day.

Whereas Master Stowe says, Either Mr. Stowe was much wronged in information,
or else it was no true Deed which he saw at that time.
That Thomas de Arderne, son and heir to Sir Ralph Arderne, Knight, granted
to Ralph le Feure, Citizen of London, and one of the Sheriffs of the same
City, in the year 1277. all the Aldermanrie, with the appurtenances within
the City of London, and Suburbs of the same, between Ludgate and Newgate, and
also without the same gates. Which Aldermanrie, Ankerinus de Averne held,
during his life, by the Grant of Thomas de Arderne, to have and to hold to the
said Ralph, and to his heirs, freely without all challenge, yielding therefore
yearly to the said Thomas and his heirs, one Clove or Slip of Gilliflowers,
at the Feast of Easter, for all secular service and customs, with warrantie to
the said Ralph le Feure, and his heirs against all people, Christians and
Jews, in consideration of 20. marks, which the said Ralph de Feure did give
beforehand in name of a Gersum or Fine, to the said Thomas, etc. Dated the
fifth of Edward the first. Witness, G. de Rokesley, Mayor, R. Arrar, one of
the Sheriffs, H. Wales, P. le Tailor, T. de Basing, I. Horn, and N.
Blackthorn, Aldermen.

I find (to the contrary) by an especial Deed (yet to be seen) delivered me
by that worthy favourer of Antiquities, M. John Speed can testify this to be
true ^ for I brought the sealed Deed to him, and to diverse other beside, who
can bear me witness, that herein I do no way deprave Mr. Stowe, but set
down the truth, as I received it.
Master John Williams, Goldsmith, all the former Deed, verbatim, to be granted
by William de Farndon, Citizen and Alderman of London, (of whom the Ward, both
within and without the Gates forenamed, being then but one, and governed by
one Alderman only, took name) to Nicholas, the son of Ralph de Feure,
Citizen of London, in the very same manner and form as has been recited, for
a Clove or Slip of Gilliflowers, twenty pounds, and not Marks, given for a
Gersum, or Fine, and the very same warrantie or defense against all people for
ever.

To which Deed, sealed with his own Seal, as he calls it, being the very
same of the Goldsmiths Arms, yet engraved about in this manner: Sigilli Willi.
de Farndon; he names as witnesses, Domino Ioh. le Bretonn, Milite, tune
Custode London, Elia Russel, and Henry le Bole, tunc Vicecom. London; Steph.
Assewy, Ioh. de Bachkewelle, Roberts de Basing, Will. de Bettune, Rad. le
Blund, Walt. de Finchingfeld, Ioh. de Blund, Thoma de Estanes, Richardo Assewy,
and multis aliis.

Anno Reg. Ed. fill. R. Hen. xxj.
This Ward of Faringdon within the walls, is bounded thus: Beginning in the
East, at the great Cross in West Cheap, from whence it runs West, On the
North side, from the Parish Church of Saint Peter, which is at the South-west
corner of Woodstreet, unto Guthurons lane, and down that Lane, to Hugon lane
on the East side, and to Kery lane on the West.

Then again into Cheap and to Foster lane, and down that Lane on the East
side, to the North side of Saint Fosters Church, and on the west, till over
against the South-west corner of the said Church, from whence, down Foster
lane, and Noble street, is all of Aldersgate street Ward, till ye come to the
stone wall in the west side of Noble street, as is before showed. Which said
wall, down to Nevils Inn, or Windsore House, and down Monkes-well street, on
that west side, then by London wall, to Creplegate, and the west side of that
same Gate, is all of Faringdon Ward.

Then back again into Cheap, and from Foster lane end to Saint Martins lane
end, and from thence through S. Nicholas Shambles, by Pentecost lane, and
Butchers Alley, and by Stinking lane, through Newgate Market to Newgate: All
which is in the North side of Faringdon Ward.

On the South, from against the said great Cross in Cheap, west to Fridaies
street, and down that street on the East side, till over against the
Northeast corner of Saint Matthews Church, and on the west side, till the South
corner of the said Church.

Then again along Cheap to the Old Exchange, and down that Lane, (on the
East side) to the Parish Church of S. Augustine, which Church and one house
next adjoining in Watheling street, be of this Ward; and on the west side of
this Lane, to the East Arch or Gate by S. Augustines Church, which enters the
South Churchyard of Saint Paul's, which Arch or Gate was builded by Nicholas
Farendon, about the year 1361. and within that Gate on the said north side, to
the Gate that enters the north Churchyard, and all the north Churchyard is
of this Faringdon ward.

Then again into Cheap, and from the North end of the Old Exchange, west by
the north gate of Paul's Churchyard up Pater noster Row, by the two lanes out
of Paul's Church, and to the sign of the Golden Lion, which is some twelve
houses short of Ave Mary lane, the West side of which lane is of this Ward.

Then at the South end of Ave Mary Lane, is Creed lane, the West side whereof is
also of this Ward.

Now betwixt the South end of Ave Mary lane, and the North end of Creed lane,
is the coming out of Paul's Churchyard, on the East, and the high street,
called Bowyer Row, to Ludgate, on the West, which way to Ludgate is of this
Ward. On the north side whereof is S. Martins Church: and on the South side a
turning into the Black Friars.

Now to turn up again to the north end of Ave Marie lane, there is a short
lane, which runs West some small distance, and is there closed up with a
gate into a great house: and this is called Amen lane. Amen lane.


Then on the North side of Pater noster Row, beginning at the Conduit over
against the Old Exchange lane end, and going west by Saint Michaels Church: at
the West end of which Church, is a small passage through toward the north. And
beyond this Church some small distance, is another passage, which is called
Panier Alley, Panier lane.
and comes out against S. Martins lane end.

Then further West in Pater noster Row, Ivy Lane.
is Ivy lane, which runs North to the West end of S. Nicholas Shambles: and
then West Pater noster Row, till over against the Golden Lion, where the Ward
ends for that street.

Then about some dozen houses, which is of Baynards Castle Ward, to Warwick
lane end: which Warwick lane stretches North to the high street of Newgate
Market. And the West side of Warwick lane is of this Foringdon Ward: For the
East side of Warwick lane, of Ave Mary lane, and of Creed lane, with the west
end of Pater noster Row, are all of Baynards Castle Ward.

Yet to begin again at the said Conduit by the old Exchange, on the North side
thereof is a large street, that runs up to Newgate, as is aforesaid. The
first part, or South-west side thereof, from the Conduit to the Shambles, is
called Bladder street. Bladder street.
Then on the back side of the Shambles be diverse slaughter-houses, and such
like, pertaining to the Shambles: and this is called Mount Godard street. Mount
Godard street.
Then is the Shambles it self, and then Newgate Market. And so the whole
street on both sides up to Newgate, is of this Ward: and thus it is wholly
bounded.

Monuments in this Ward be these: First, the great Cross in West Cheap
street, but in the Ward of Faringdon, the which Cross was first erected in
that place by Edward the first, as before is showed in West Cheap street.

At the South-west corner of Woodstreet, Parish Church of S. Peter in Cheap.
is the Parish Church of S. Peter the Apostle, by the said Cross, a proper
Church, lately new builded. John Sha, Goldsmith, Mayor, deceased 1503.
appointed by his Testament, the said Church and Steeple to be new builded of
his goods, with a flat roof. Notwithstanding, Tho. Wood, Goldsmith, one of the
Sheriffs, 1491. is accounted a principal benefactor, because the roof of the
middle I Will is supported by Images of VVoodmen.

I find to have been buried in this Church, Nicholas Farendon, Mayor, Richard
Hadley, Grocer, 1592.

John Palmer, Fishmonger, 1500.

Will. Rous, Goldsmith, Sheriff, 1429.

Thomas Atkins, Esquire, 1400.

John Butler, Sheriff, 1420.

Henry Warley, Alderman, 1524.

Sir John Mund, Goldsmith, Mayor, deceased, 1537.

Augustine Hind, Clothworker, one of the Sheriffs, in the year 1550. whose
Monument does yet remain, with this inscription here-under, etc. the other
being gone.

Sir Alexander Avenon, Mayor, 1579.

Here-under this Stone lies buried the body of Augustine Hind, Clothworker,
Alderman, and late Sheriff of London: who deceased the tenth day of August,
Anno Domini, 1554. Here also lies Dame Elizabeth his wife, by whom he had
issue four sons and two daughters: which Dame Elizabeth deceased the 12. day
of July, An. Dom. 1569.

God grant us all such race to run:
To end in Christ as they have done.
The long Shop or Shed, incroching on the high street before this Church wall,
Long shop in Cheap.
was licensed to be made in the year 1401. yielding to the Chamber of London,
30. s. 4. d. yearly for the time. Also the same Shop was letten by the Parish,
for three pounds at the most, many years since.

Then is Guthuruns lane, Guthuruns Lane.
so called of Guthurun, sometime owner thereoof: the inahbitants of this lane
(of old time) were Goldbeaters. as does appear by Records in the Exchequer.
For the Easterling money was appointed to be made of fine silver, such as men
made into foil, and was commonly called silver of Guthuruns lane, Imbroiderers
Hall.
etc. The Imbroiderers Hall is in this Lane. John Trowstone Imbroiderer, then
Goldsmith, Sheriff, deceased 1519. gave 40. l. toward the purchase of this
Hall. Hugon lane.
Hugon lane, on the East side, Kery lane.
and Kery lane (called of one Kery) on the West.

Then in the high street on the same North side, Sadlers Hall.
is the Sadlers Hall: and then Foster lane, Foster lane.
so called, of Saint Fosters, a fair Church, Parish Church of S. Fosters.
lately new builded. Henry Coote, Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs, deceased,
1509. builded S. Dunstanes Chapel there. John Throwstone, one of the
Sheriffs, gave to the building thereof 100. pounds by his Testament. John
Brown, Sergeant-Painter, Alderman, deceased 1532. was a great Benefactor, and
was there buried. William Trist, Selerar to the King, 1425. John Standelfe,
Goldsmiths, lie buried there. Richard Galder, 1544. Agnes, wife to William
Milborne, Chamberlain of London, 1500.

Hic jacet Dominus Thomas Baby, A fair Stone in the Chancell.
quondam Capellanus Aurifabrorum London. Qui obiit 3. die Men's. November. An.
Dom. 1452. Cujus, etc.

Here lies buried the body of John Lonyson, A fair stone by the Communion
Table.
Esquire, Master of the Mint of England, Citizen and Goldsmith of London: who
most joyfully changed this miserable and wearisome life, with the felicity and
happiness of Gods Kingdom, in good Religion and godly charity, in true fear
and steadfast faith, with a full persuasion of remission in the blood of Jesus
Christ, the one and twentieth day of May, An. Dom. 1583. being about the 59.
year of his age.

Here lies interred the body of Christopher Wase, A Monument in the wall,
South of the Quire.
late Citizen and Godsmith of London, aged 66. years, and dyed the 22. of
September, 1605. who had to wife Anne the daughter of William Prettyman, and
had by her three sons and three daughters.

Reader, stay,
and thou shall know
What he was
that here does sleep:
Lodged amidst
the stones below,
Stones that often
are seen to weep.
Gentile was his
birth and breed,
His carriage gentle,
much contenting:
His word accorded
with his deed,
Sweet his nature,
soon relenting.
From above
he seemed protected,
Father dead
before his birth,
An Orphane, only
but neglected,
Yet his branches
spread on earth,
Earth, that must
his bones contain,
Sleeping till Christ's
Trumpe shall wake them,
Joining them
to soul again,
And to bliss
eternal take them.
It is not this rude
and little heap of stones,
Can hold the fame,
although't contains the bones.
Light be the earth,
and hallowed for thy sake,
Resting in peace,
peace that so often did make.
Under the Stone right against this Monument, A small Monument in the wall with
a gilt plate.
lie buried the bodies of Robert Marsh, Citizen and Grocer of London, and
Florence his first wife, by whom he had issue seven Sons. By Elizabeth, his
second wife, (left living) he had issue three sons and a daughter. He
departed this life the 7. day of October, Anno Dom. 1602. after he had lived
65. years and three days.

Here-under lies buried the body of Mistress Martha Prescot, A fair plated
stone under the Communion Table.
the wife of Alexander Prescot, Citizen and Alderman of London: whose soul the
Lord took to his mercy the 26. day of November. 1616. when she had lived a
married wife just 23. years that day, and 40. years, 2. months, 3. weeks,
and odd days, from the time of her birth. She had issue by her said Husband,
6. Sons, and 5. daughters, and her youngest of all, being a daughter, named
Elizabeth, lies hereunder interred, in the same Grave, on the same day of
burial with her said mother.

Lord, A fair plated Gravestone in the middle I Will.
of thine infinite
grave and pity,
Have mercy on me
Agnes, sometime the wife
Of William Milborne,
Chamberlain of this City,
Which took my passage
fro this wretched life,
The year of Grace,
one thousand, one hundred and five,
The twelfth day of July,
no longer was my space,
It pleased then my Lord
to call me to his grace.
Now ye that are living,
and see this picture,
Pray for me here
while ye have time and space,
That God of his goodness
would me assure,
In his everlasting mansion
to have a place.
Then down Foster Lane, and Noble street, both of Aldersgate street Ward, till
ye come to the stone wall, which incloseth a Garden-plot before the wall of the
City, on the West side of Noble street, and is of this Faringdon Ward. This
Garden-plot, containing 95. Else in length, 9. Else and an half in breadth,
was by Adam de Bury, Mayor, the Aldermen, and Citizens of London, letten to
John de Nevell, Lord of Raby, Radulph and Thomas, his sons, for threescore
years, paying 6. s. 8. d. the year. Dated the 48. of Edw. 3. having in a
seal pendant on the one side, Barons of London their seal.
the figure of a walled City, and of S. Paul, a Sword in his right hand, and
in the left a Banner; 3. Leopards, about that Seal, on the same side written,
Sigillum Baronium Londoniarum. On the other side, the like figure of a City, a
Bishop sitting on an Arch, the inscription, Me: quae: ^e: peperi: ne: Cesses:
Thoma: tueri.

Thus much for the Barons of London, their common seal at that time.

At the North end of this Gardenplot, is one great house builded of stone and
timber, now called the Lord Winsors house, of old time belonging to the Nevels,
as in the 19. of Rich. 2. it was found by inquisition of a Jury, that
Elizabeth Nevell dyed, seized of a great Message in the Parish of S. Olave in
Monkes-well street in London, holden of the King in free Burgage, which she
held of the gift of John Nevell of Raby, her husband, and that John Latimer was
next son and heir to the said Elizabeth.

In this West side is the Barber Surgeons Hall. Barber Surgeons their
Hall.
This Company was incorporated by means of Thomas Morestede, Esquire, one of
the Sheriffs of London, 1436. Surgeon to the Kings of England, Henry the
fourth, fifth, and sixth. He deceased 1450. Then Jacques Fries, Physician to
Edw. the fourth, and William Hobbs, Physician and Surgeon for the same Kings
body, continuing the suit the full time of twenty years, Edward the fourth, in
the second of his reign, and Richard Duke of Gloucester, became Founders of the
same Corporation, in the Parish of Saint Cosme and Damiane. The first
assembling of that Mystery was by Roger Strippe, William Hobbs, Thomas
Goddard, and Richard Kent, since the which time they builded their Hall in that
street, etc.

At the North corner of this street, Hermitage of S. James in the wall.
on the same side, was sometime an Hermitage or Chapel of Saint James, called
in the wall, near Creplegate: it belonged to the Abbey and Covent of Garadon,
as appears by a Record, the seven and twentieth of Edward the first: And also
the 16. of Edward the third, William de Lions was Hermit there, and the Abbot
and Covent of Garadon found two Chaplains, Cestercian Monks of their house:
in this Hermitage one of them, for Aymor de Valence, Earl of Pembrooke, and
Mary de Saint Paul, his Countess.

Of these Monks, and of a Well pertaining to them, the street took that name,
and is called Monkes-well street. This Hermitage with the appurtenances, was in
the reign of Edw. the 6. purchased from the said King, by W. Lamb, one of the
Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel, Citizen and Cloth-worker of London: He
deceased in the year 1577. and then gave it to the Cloth-workers of London,
with other Tenements, to the value of fifty pounds the year, to the intent
they shall hire a Minister to say divine Service there.

Again, to the high street of Cheap, from Foster Lane end to S. Martins, and
by that Lane to the Shambles or Flesh-market, on the North side whereof is
Pentecost lane, Pentecost Lane.
containing diverse slaughter-houses for the Butchers.

Then was there of old time a proper Parish Church of S. Nicholas, Parish
Church of S. Nicholas.
whereof the said Flesh-market took the name, and was called S. Nicholas
Shambles.

This Church, with the Tenements and Ornaments, was by Henry the eight given to
the Mayor and Communalty of the City, toward the maintenance of the new
Parish Church, then to be erected in the late dissolved Church of the Gray
Friars: so was this Church dissolved and pulled down: in place whereof, and of
the Churchyard, many fair houses are now builded, in a Court with a Well, in
the midst whereof the Church stood.

Then is Stinking lane, Stinking Lane, or Chicke lane.
formerly so called, or Chick lane, at the East end of the Gray Friars Church:
it is now kept clean and free from annoyance, and called by the name of
Butchers-Hall Lane; and there is the Butchers Hall.

In the third of Richard the second, motion was made, that no Butcher should
kill any flesh within London, but at Knightsbridge, or such like distant place
from the walls of the City.

Then the late dissolved Church of Gray Friars, Gray Friars Church.
the original whereof was thus:

In the year 1224. being the 8. year of the reign of King Henry the third,
How the Gray Friars house became first to a Friery, collected out of an ancient
Manuscript delivered to me by a friend.
there came out of Italy nine Friars of the Order of the Franciscans, or Friar
Minors, five whereof were Priests, and the other four Laymen. The Priests
placed themselves at Canturbury in Kent: but the other four came to London,
and were lodged (for some short while) among the preaching Friars, who lived
then in Oldborne. Afterward, they obtained to be placed in Cornehill, London,
in an house belonging to one John Travars, who was then one of the Sheriffs of
London, in the same year 1224. In which house they made themselves Celles, and
inhabited there for a certain time; till their number so increased, and the
Citizens devotion grew to be so great, that (within few years after) they were
thence removed, by the means of one John Ewin, Mercer, who purchased a void
plot of ground, near to Saint Nicholas Shambles, where to erect an House for
the said Friars.

Diverse Citizens seemed herein to join with the said John Ewin, and erected
there very beautiful buildings, upon the same ground so formerly purchased by
John Ewin, and a great part builded at his own charge, which he appropriated
to the Communalty of London, and then entered into the same Order of Friars, as
a Lay Brother.

William Ioyner, The building of a Chapel for them.
Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1239. builded them a Chapel, which cost
him two hundred pounds Sterling, which Chapel made part of the Chancell, as
it now stands.

Henry Walleis, The body of a Church.
who was likewise Lord Mayor of London, builded them a body of a Church, which
afterward was pulled down, and made as now it is.

Mr. Walter Porter, Their Chapter House builded.
Alderman of London, builded a Chapter House for them, and gave diverse vessels
of Brass for the Kitchen service; building places also for sick persons, and
other Offices beside.

Thomas Felcham builded the Vestry house. The Vestry house.


Gregory Rokesley, The Dorters and Chambers.
Lord Mayor of London, builded their Dorters and Chambers, and gave Beds to
them.

M. Bartholomew of the Castle, The Hall or Refectory.
builded a fair house or Refectory for them.

Mr. Peter de Helyland builded the Infirmitory, and diverse places for diseased
persons.

Mr. Bevis Bond, Herald, and King at Arms, builded the studies.

Margaret, Queen, second wife to Edward the first, began the Quire of their
new Church, in the year 1306. to the building whereof, in her life time she
gave 2000. marks, and 100. marks by her Testament.

John Britain, Earl of Richmond, builded the body of the Church, to the
charges of 300. pounds, and gave many rich Jewels and ornaments to be used in
the same.

Mary, Countess of Pembrooke 70. l.

Gilbart de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, and bestowed 20. great beams out of his
Forest of Tunbridge, 20. l. starlings.

Lady Helianor le Spencer, Lady Elizabeth de Burgh, Sister to Gilbert de Clare,
gave sums of money, and so did diverse Citizens, as Arnold de Tolinea, one
hundred pounds.

Robert Picae Lisle, who became a Friar there, 300. pounds.

Bartholomew de Almaine, 50. pounds.

Also Philippe, Queen, wife to Edward the third, gave 62. pounds.

Isabel, Queen, Mother to Edward the third, gave threescore and ten pounds.
And so the work was done within the space of 21. years, 1537.

This Church, thus furnished with windows, made at the charges of diverse
persons; the Lady Margaret Segrave, Countess of Norfolk, bare the charges of
making the Stalles in the Quire, to the value of 350. marks, about the year
1380. Richard Whitington, Library of the Gray Friars.
in the year 1429. founded the Library, which was in length, one hundred
twenty and nine foot, and in breadth, thirty one; all seeled with Wainscot,
having 28. Desks, and eight double Settles of Wainscot. Which (in the next
year following) was altogether finished in building, and within three years
after, furnished with Books, to the charges of five hundred fifty six pounds,
ten shillings, whereof Richard Whitington bare 400. pounds, the rest was
borne by Doctor Thomas Winchelsey, a Friar there: and for the writing out of D.
Nicholas de Lira his Works, in two Volumes to be chained there, 100. Marks,
etc.

The ^eeling of the Quire at diverse men's charges, 200. marks, and the painting
at 50. marks: their Conduit head and watercourse was given them by William
Tailor, Tailor to Hen. 3.

This whole Church contained in length 300. foot, Length and breadth of Gray
Friars Church.
of the feet of S. Paul, in breadth eighty nine foot, and in height from the
ground to the roof, 64. foot, and 2. inches, etc. It was consecrated, 1325.
and at the general suppression, was valued at 32. pound, 19. shillings,
surrendered the 12. of November, 1533. the 30. of Hen. 8. the ornaments and
goods being taken to the Kings use: the Church was shut up for a time, and used
as a Storehouse of goods taken prizes from the French: But in the year 1546.
on the third of January, it was again set open. On the which day preached at
Paul's Cross the Bishop of Rochester, where he declared the Kings gift thereof
to the City, for the relieving of the poor, which gift was by Patents.

S. Bartholomews Spittle in Smithfield, lately valued at 305. pounds, Gray
Friars Church made a Parish Church.
6. shillings, 7. Pence, and surrendered to the King; of the said Church of the
Gray Friars, and of two Parish Churches, the one of Saint Nicholas in the
Shambles, and the other of Saint Ewins in Newgate Market, they were to be made
one Parish Church in the said Friars Church. In Lands he gave for maintenance
of the said Church, with divine service, reparations, etc. 500. marks by year
for ever.

The 13. of January, The Mayor and Communalty of London Parsons of Christ's
Church, the Vicar to be at their appointment.
the 38. of Henry the 8. an agreement was made betwixt the King and the Mayor,
and Communalty of London, dated the 27. of December: by which the said gift of
the Gray Friars Church, with all the Edifices and ground, the Fratrie, the
Library, the Dortar, and Chapter House, the great Cloistrie and the lesser;
Tenements, Gardens and vacant grounds, Lead, Stone, Iron, etc. The Hospital of
Saint Bartholomew in West Smithfield, the Church of the same, the Lead, Bells,
and Ornaments of the same Hospital, with all the Messuages, Tenements and
appurtenances.

The Parishes of S. Nicholas and of S. Ewin, and so much of S. Pulchers Parish
as is within Newgate, were made one Parish Church in the Gray Friars Church, ^
and called Christ's Church, founded by King H. the 8.

The Vicar of Christ's Church was to have 26. l. 13. s. 4. pence the year. The
Vicar of S. Bartholomew 13. l. 6. s. 8. pence. The Visiter of Newgate (being a
Priest) ten pounds. And other 5. Priests in Christ's Church, all to be helping
in divine Service, ministering the Sacraments and Sacramentals, the five Priests
to have 8. pounds the piece. Two Clerks, 6. pounds to each. A Sexton, 4.
pounds. Moreover, he gave them the Hospital of Bethlem, with the Laver of
Brass in the Cloister, by estimation eighteen foot in length, and two foot
and an half in depth, and the watercourse of Lead to the said Frier-house
belonging, containing by estimation in length, 18. Acres.

In the year 1552. began the repairing of the Gray Friars House, Christ's
Hospital.
for the poor fatherless children. And in the month of November the children
were taken into the same, to the number of almost 400. On Christmas day in the
afternoon, while the Lord Mayor and Aldermen rode to Paul's, the children of
Christ's Hospital stood, from Saint Laurence lane end in Cheap, toward Paul's,
all in one Livery of Russet Cotton, three hundred and forty in number; and at
Easter next they were in Blue at the Spittle, and so have continued ever since.

What further I have read and understood, concerning the first beginning and
erection of this famous Hospital, follows, Ex R. Grafton.
according to the original Copy, set down by M. Richard Grafton.

Mr. Doctor Ridley, Doct Ridley preached before King Edw. 6. Mercy and Charity.
then Bishop of London, came and preached before the Kings Majesty at
Westminster. In which Sermon, he made a fruitful and godly Exhortation to the
rich, to be merciful unto the poor: and also to move such as were in
authority, to travail by some charitable way and means, to comfort and
relieve them. Whereupon, the Kings Majesty (being a Prince of such towardness
and virtue for his years, as England before never brought forth, and being
also so well retained and brought up in all godly knowledge, as well by his
dear Uncle the late Edw. S^imer Duke of Somerset
Protector, as also by his virtuous and learned Schoolmasters) was so careful
of the good government of the Realm, and chiefly to do and prefer such
things as most especially touched the honor of Almighty God. And
understanding, that a great number of poor people did swarm in this Realm,
and chiefly in the City of London, and that no good order was taken for them,
did suddenly (and of himself) send to the said Bishop, as soon as his Sermon
was ended, willing him not to depart, until that he had spoken with him. And
this that I now write, was the very report of the said Bishop Ridley, who
(according to the Kings command) gave his attendance. And so soon as the Kings
Majesty was at leisure he called for him, and caused him to come unto him in a
great Gallery at Westminster, where (to his knowledge, and the King likewise
told him so) there was present no more persons than they two; and therefore
made him sit down in one Chair, and he himself in another, which (as it
seemed) were before the coming of the Bishop there purposely set, and caused
the Bishop, maugre his teeth) to be covered, and then entered communication with
him in this manner:

First, giving him hearty thanks for his Sermon and good Exhortation: he
therein rehearsed such special things as he had noted, and that so many, that
the Bishop said:

Truly, truly (for that commonly was his Oath) I could never have thought
that excellency to have been in his Grace, but that I beheld, and heard it in
him.

At the last the Kings Majesty much commended him for his Exhortation, for the
relief of the poor.

But my Lord (quoth he) you willed such as are in authority to be careful
thereof, A most virtuous and noble saying of King Edw. to Bishop Ridley.
and to devise some good order for their relief: Wherein, I think you mean
me, for I am in highest place; and therefore am the first that must make
answer unto God for my negligence, if I should not be careful therein,
knowing it to be the express Commandment of Almighty God, to have compassion
of his poor and needy members, for whom we must make an account unto him. And
truly, my Lord, I am (before all things else) most willing to travail that
way, and I doubting nothing of your long and approved wisdom and learning,
who having such good zeal, as wishes help unto them; but also that you have
had some conference with others, what ways are best to be taken therein, the
which I am desirous to understand: and therefore I pray you to say your mind.

The Bishop thinking least of that matter, and being amazed, to hear the
wisdom and earnest zeal of the King, was (as he said himself) so astonished,
that he could not well tell what to say. But, after some pause, said, That he
thought (at this present) for some entrance to be had, it were good to
practice with the City of London, The Citizens of London moved to be assistants
in this charitable action.
because the number of the poor there are very great, and the Citizens also
are many and wise; and he doubted not but that they were also both pitiful
and merciful; as the Mayor and his Brethren, and other the Worshipful of the
said City. And that if it would please the Kings Majesty to direct his gracious
Letters unto the Mayor of London, willing him to call unto him such assistants
as he should think meet, to consult of this matter, for some order to be
taken therein; he doubted not but good would follow thereon. And he himself
promised the King to be one himself that should earnestly travail therein.

The King (forthwith) not only granted his Letter, The kings letter sent by
the Bishop to the Lord, Mayor of London.
but made the Bishop tarry until the same was written, and his hand and Signet
set thereto: And commanded the Bishop not only to deliver the said Letter
himself; but also to signify unto the Mayor, that it was the Kings especial
request and express commandment, that the Mayor should therein travel; and
so soon as he might conveniently, give him knowledge how far he had proceeded
therein. The Bishop was so joyous of the having of this Letter, and that now
he had an occasion to travel in so good a matter, wherein he was mavelous
zealous, that nothing could have more pleased and delighted him: wherefore the
same night he came to the Lord Mayor of London, who was the Sir Richard Dobbs,
Knight, and delivered the Kings Letter, and showed his message with effect.

The Lord Mayor not only joyously received this Letter: The readiness of the
Lord Mayor to prefer this good deed.
but with all speed agreed to set forward the matter; for he also favored it
very much. And the next day, being Monday, he desired the Bishop of London to
dine with him, and against that time the Mayor promised to send for such men,
as he thought meetest to talk of this matter, and so he did. He sent first for
2. Aldermen and 6. Commoners, and afterward more were appointed, to the number
of 24. In the end, after sundry meetings (for by the means and good diligence
of the Bishop, it was well followed) they agreed upon a Book that they had
devised, wherein first they considered on nine special kinds and sorts of
poor people, 9. Sorts of poor people distinguished into 3. degrees.
and those they brought into these three Degrees: Three degrees of Poor.
1. The poor by impotency. 2. Poor by casualty. 3. Thriftlesse poor.


1. The Poor by Impotency are also divided into three kinds; that is to say:
1. The fatherless poor man's child. 2. The aged, blind, and lame. 3. The
diseased person by Leprosy, Dropsy, etc.


2. The Poor by Casualty are likewise of three kinds; that is to say: 1. The
wounded Soldier. 2. The decayed Hous-holder. 3. The visited with any grievous
disease.


3. The Thristlesse Poor are 3. kinds in like manner; that is to say: 1. The
Riotour, that consumes all. 2. The Vagabond, that will abide in no place. 3.
The Idle person, as Strumpets and others.


For these sorts of Poor, The first beginning of Hospitals.
three several houses were provided: First, for the Innocent and Fatherless,
which is the Beggars child, and is (indeed) the seed and breeder of beggary,
they provided the house that was the late Gray Friars in London, and called it
by the name of Christ's Hospital, where poor children are trained up in the
knowledge of God, and some virtuous exercises, to the overthrow of beggary.

For the second degree was provided the Hospitals of Saint Thomas in
Southwarke, The first beginning of S. Thom. and S. Bartholm. Hospitals.
and Saint Bartholomew in West Smithfield, where are continually (at least)
200. diseased persons, which are not only there lodged and cured, but also sed
and nourished.

For the third degree they provided Bridewell, The first beginning of Bridewell,
where the vagabond and idle Strumpet is chastifed, and compelled to labor, to
the overthrow of the vicious life of idleness.

They provided also for the honest decayed House-holder, Relief for decayed
house-holders and Lazers.
that he should be relieved at home at his house, and in the Parish where he
dwelled, by a weekly relief and pension. And in like manner they provided for
the Lazer, to keep him out of the City, from clapping of dishes and ringing of
Bells, to the great trouble of the Citizens, and also to the dangerous infection
of maney; that they should be relieved at home at their houses, by several
pensions.

Now after this good order taken, The king acquainted with the Cities
furtherance.
and the Citizens (by such means as were devised) willing to further the same:
the report thereof was made to the Kings Majesty, and his Grace (for the
advancement thereof) was not only willing to grant such as should be Overseers
and Governors of the said houses, a Corporation and authority for the
government of them: but also required, that he might be accounted as the
chief Founder and Patron thereof.

And for the furtherance of the said work, K. Edward. the sixth Founder of the
Hospitals in London.
and continual maintenance of the same; he of his me^^ mercy and goodness
granted, that whereas (before) certain land^ were given, to the maintaining of
the ho^^ of the Savoy, founded by King (...) ^^eventh, for the loding of (...)
and Strangers, and that the same (...) now made but a loding for Loy^^re^,
Vagabonds, and Strumpets, that lay all day in the fields, and at night were
harbored there, The (...) land for rendered to the King, and given to the City
of London.
the which was rather the maintenance of beggary, than any relief to the
poor: gave the same lands, being first surrendered by the Master and Fellows
there (which lands were of the yearly value of 600. pounds) unto the City of
London, for the maintenance of the foundation aforesaid.

And for a further relief, a Petition being made to the Kings Majesty, for a
license to take in Mortmaine, or otherwise without license, lands to a certain
yearly value, and a space left in the Patent, for his Grace to put in what
sum it would please him: He looking on the void place, called for pen and
ink, and with his own hand wrote this sum, in these words, 4000. Marks by
the year, and then said in the hearing of his Council, The words of a blessed
King.
Lord, I yield thee most hearty thanks, that thouhast given me life thus long,
to finish this work to the glory of thy Name. After which foundation
established, he lived not above two days: whose life would have been wished
equal to the Patriarchs, if it had pleased GOD so to have prolonged it.

By example of the charitable act of this virtuous young King, Sir William
Chester, and Io. Calthrop, Draper.
Sir W. Chester, Knight, and Alderman of London, and Io. Calthrop, Citizen and
Draper of the same City, at their own proper costs and charges, made the
brick walls and way on the back side, which leads from the said new
Hospital, unto the Hospital of Saint Bartholomew, and also covered and
vaulted the Town-ditch, from Aldersgate to Newgate, which (before) was very
noisome, and contagious to the said Hospital.

This Hospital being thus erected, Rich. Castle, Shoemaker, The Cock of
Westminster
and put into good order, there was one Richard Castle, alias Casteller,
Shoemaker, dwelling in Westminster, a man of great travail and labor in his
faculty with his own hands, and such a one as was named, The Cock of
Westminster, because both Winter and Summer he was at his work before four
of the clock in the morning. This man thus truly and painfully laboring for
his living, God blessed and increased his labors so abundantly, that he
purchased lands and tenements in Westminster, to the yearly value of forty and
four pounds. And having no child, with the consent of his wife (who survived
him, and was a virtuous good woman) gave the same lands wholly to Christ's
Hospital aforesaid, to the relief of the Innocent and Fatherless Children,
and for the succor of the miserable, sore and sick, harbored in the other
Hospitals about London.

Saint Bartholomews Hospital is incorporated by the name of the Mayor, The
incorporation of St. Bartholomews Hospital in West Smithfield.
Communalty, and Citizens of the City of London, Governors of the Hospital
for the poor, called Little Saint Bartholomews, near to West Smithfield, of
the Foundation of King Henry the 8.

Christ's Hospital, The incorporation of the Hospitals of King Edward the sixth.
Bridewell, and Saint Thomas the Apostle in Southwarke, are incorporated by the
names of the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, Governors
of the Possessions, Revenues, and Goods of the Hospitals of Edward King of
England, the sixth, of Christ, Bridewell, and Saint Thomas the Apostle, etc.

The defaced Monuments in this Church were these: Monuments in Christ's Church.
First, in the Quire, of the Lady Margaret, daughter to Philip, King of France,
and wife to Edward the first, Foundress of this new Church, 1317.

Of Isabel, 4. Queens buried In this Church.
Queen, wife to Edward the second, daughter to Philip, King of France, 1358.

Ioane of the Tower, Queen of Scots, wife to David Bruise, daughter to Edward
the second, dyed in Hartford Castle, and was buried by Isabel her mother, 1362.

William Fitzwaren, Baron, and Isabel his wife, sometime Queen of the Isle of
Man.

Isabel, daughter to Edward the third, wedded to Lord Couse, of France, after
created Earl of Bedford.

Eleanor, wife to John, Duke of Britain.

Beatrix, Duchess of Britain, daughter to Henry the third.

Sir Robert Lisle, Baron, the Lady Lisle, and Margaret de Rivers, Countess of
Devon, all under one Stone.

Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, beheaded, 1329.

Patar, Bishop of Carbon in Hungary, 1331.

Gregory Rocksley, Mayor, 1282.

Sir John Devereux, Knight, 1385.

John Hastings, Earl of Pembroke, 1389.

Margaret, daughter to Thomas Brotharton, Earl Marshall, she was Duchess of
Northfolke, and Countess Marshall, and Lady Segrave, 1389.

Richard Havering, Knight, 1388.

Robert Trisilian, Knight, Chief Justice, 1308.

Geffrey Lucy, son to Geffrey Lucy.

John Aubry, son to John Mayor of Norwich, 1361.

John Philpot, Knight, Mayor of London, and the Lady Lane Stamford his wife,
1384.

John, Duke of Burbon, and Angue, Earl of Claremond, Mountpencier, and Baron
Beangen, who was taken prisoner at Agencourt, kept prisoner eighteen years,
and deceased 1433.

Robert Chalons, Knight, 1439.

John Chalons.

Margaret, daughter to Sir John Philpot, first married to T. Santlor, Esquire,
and after, to John Neyband, Esquire.

Sir Nicholas Brembar, Mayor of London, buried 1386.

Elizabeth Nevil, wife to John, son and heir to Ralph, Earl of Westmerland,
and mother to Ralph Earl of Westmerland, and daughter to Thomas Holland, Earl
of Kent, 1423.

Edward Burnel, son to the Lord Burnel.

In Alhallowes Chapel; James Fines, Lord Say, 1450. and Helenor his wife,
1452.

John Smith, Bishop of Landaffe, 1478.

John, Baron Hilton.

John, Baron Clinton.

Richard Hastings, Knight, Lord of Willoughby and Wells.

Thomas Burder, Esquire, beheaded, 1477.

Robert Lisle, son and heir to the Lord Lisle.

In our Lady Chapel: John Gisors of London, Knight, and Lord Mayor.

Humfrey Stafford, Esquire, of Worcestershire, 1486.

Robert Bartram, Baron of Bothell.

Ralph Barons, Knight.

William Apleton, Knight.

Reynold de Cambrey, Knight.

Thomas Beaumond, son and heir to Henry Lord Beaumond.

John Butler, Knight.

Adam de Howton, Knight, 1417.

Bartholomew Caster, Knight of London.

Reinfredo Arundel, Knight, 1460.

Thomas Covil, Esquire, 1422.

In the Apostles Chapel; Walter Blunt, Knight of the Garter, and Lord
Mountjoy, Treasure of England, son and heir to T. Blunt, knight, Treasurer
of Normandy, 1474.

E. Blunt, Lord Mountjoy, 1475.

Alice Blunt, Mountjoy, sometime wife to Will. Brown, Mayor of London, and
daughter to H. Kebel, Mayor, 1521.

Anne Blunt, daughter to I. Blunt, knight, Lord Mountjoy, 1480.

Sir Allen Cheiny, knight, and Sir T. Green, knight.

William Blunt, Esquire, son and heir to Walter Blunt, Captain of Gwynes,
1492.

Elizabeth Blunt, wife to Robert Curson, Knight, 1494.

Bartholomew Burwash, and John Burwash, his son,

John Blunt, Lord Mountjoy, Captain of Gwynes and Hames, 1485.

John Dinham, Baron, sometime Treasurer of England, knight of the Garter, 1501.

Eleanor, Duchess of Buckingham, 1530.

John Blunt, knight, 1531.

Roll. Blunt, Esquire, 1509.

Robert Bradbury, 1489.

Nicholas Clifton, knight.

Francis Chape.

Two sons of Allayne, Lord Cheiny, and John, son and heir to the same Lord
Allayne Cheiny; knight.

John Robsart, knight of the Garter, 1450.

Allayne Cheiny, knight.

Thomas Malory, knight, 1470.

Thomas Young, a Justice of the Bench, 1476.

John Baldwin, Fellow of Grayes Inn, and Common Sergeant of London, 1469.

Walter Wrotsley, knight, of Warwickshire, 1473.

Sir Stephen Iennings, Mayor, 1523.

Thomas a Par, and John Wiltwater, slain at Barnet field, 1471.

Nicholas Poynes, Esquire, 1512.

Robert Elkenton, knight, 1460.

John Water, alias York, Herald, 1520.

John More, alias Nory, King of Arms, 1491.

George Hopton, knight, 1489.

Between the Quire and the Altar, Ralph Spiganel, knight.

John Moyle, Gentleman of Grayes Inn, 1495.

William Huddy, knight, 1501.

John Cobham, a Baron of Kent.

John Mortaine, knight.

John Deyncort, knight.

John Norbery, Esquire, high Treasurer of England.

Henry Norbery his son, Esquire.

John Southlee, knight.

Tho. Sakvile.

Tho. Lucy, knight, 1525.

Robert de la Rivar, son to Mauricius de la Rivar, Lord of Tormerton, 1457.

Io. Malmaynas, Esquire, and Tho. Malmaynas, knight.

Hugh Acton, Tailor, 1530.

Nicholas Malmaynas.

Hugh Parsal knight, 1490.

Alexander Kirketon, knight, etc.

In the body of the Church; William Paulet, Esquire, of Somersetshire, 1482.

John Moyle, Gentleman, 1530.

Peter Champion, Esquire, 1511.

Io. Heart, Gentleman, 1449.

Alice Lat. Hungerford, hanged at Tyborne for murdering her husband, 1523.

Edward Hall, Gentleman of Grayes June, 1470.

Ri. Churchyard, Gentleman, Fellow of Grayes Inn, 1498.

John Bramre, Gentleman of Grayes Inn, 1498.

John Mortimer, knight, beheaded, 1423.

Henry Frowike, Alderman.

Reynold Frowike.

Philip Pats, 1518.

William Porter, Sergeant at Arms, 1515.

Tho. Grantham, Gentleman, 1511.

Edmond Rotheley, Gentleman, 1470.

Henry Roston, Gentleman of Grayes Inn, 1485.

Nicholas Mountgomery, Gentleman, son to Io. Mountgomery of Northamptonshire,
1485.

Sir Bartholomew Emfield, knight.

Sir Barnard S. Peter, knight.

Sir Ralph Sandwich, knight, Custos of London.

Sir Andrew Sakevile, knight.

John Treszawall, Gentleman, and Tailor of London, 1520.

All these, and five times so many more have been buried there, whose
Monuments are wholly defaced: for there were nine Tombs of Alabaster and
Marble, environed with strikes of Iron, in the Quire, and one Tomb in the body
of the Church, also coped with Iron, all pulled down, besides sevenscore
Grave-stones of Marble, all sold for fifty pounds, or thereabouts by Sir Martin
Bows, Goldsmith and Alderman of London, of late time buried there.

These two, A fair Monument in the South wall of the Quire.
Sir Christopher Edmonds, and, Dame Dorothy his wife, lived together 44.
years, in perfect love and society: both servants to one Prince; and in great
credit both in the Court and Country where they lived, both for their Religion,
fidelity to their Sovereign, and liberality to the Poor.

This is the Monument of Sir Christopher Edmonds, Knight, who was a domestical
servant to the most sacred Queen ELIZABETH, both before her Coronation, and
after, so long as he lived. He was of great credit and estimation in his
Country, for his integrity of life, uprightness in justice, and hospitality,
and gave to this Hospital of Christ's Church three hundred pounds, toward the
maintenance of the poor children. He lived seventy and two years, and died
Anno Domini, 1596.

This is the interrement of Dame Dorothy Edmonds, wife to the said Sir
Christopher, and daughter to Christopher Litcot, Esquire; who also served the
most gracious Mayden-Queene, ELIZABETH, being (ever since her Coronation, and
before) of her most Honorable Privy Chamber: who joined with the said Sir
Christopher, her husband, in the said gift of three hundred pounds to this
Hospital, being a Legacy (only spoken of by him) and performed by her.

Times Triumph on the death of Master Robert Rogers, who deceased Anno. 1601.
in the manner of a Dialogue, between Time, Death, and Rogers.
Death.
STand fairly encountered both, A fair Monument close by, in the same wall.

Grave, Sovereign Time;
Borne of Eternity,
Ages Father:
Prince of all Power; all
Powers on earth are thine,
That do my Ruins
truest Records gather;
Lend thy consent, thy
helping hand to mine;
And Death will make Times
Sovereignty as great
As the three Sisters,
Ladies of stern Fate.
Time.
Impartial Death, Honors
respectlesse foe,
Grim, meager Caytife,
wherefore do thou come?
Must Virtues children
to the slaughter go,
In thy bloud-yawning
Cell to fill a room?
Can none but they, quench
thy bloody thirst? Death. No;
Rogers I come for: Time,
thou can not save him,
This Dart must strike him,
and grim Death will have him.
Rogers.
Death, welcome; all by thee
(I know) must end;
Nor do I care for
for longer life than this;
I thank thee, thou have stayed
so long; (kind friend.)
Sweere Time, be patient,
pardon mine amiss,
If I have time misspent;
alas, we all offend.
If, said I? yes, it is
certain, sure I have;
For which offense (dear
Time) I pardon crave.
Time.
Death, grant me this (sweet)
do not kill him
Till I return but
from the Destinies.
Dea. I cannot stay a moment.
Reg. Oh will him
(Grave Time) to strike me then:
I Death despise.
Dea. There lie thou dead.
Time. Thou can not spill him:
Time shall erect a Trophee
of such fame,
That while Time lives,
dye shall not Rogers name.
TIMES Epitaph.
Give me an Adamantine Pen,
and Leaf of Brass,
To character his name,
whose like nere was.
A single life he led,
loving to all,
The poor man's succor,
the relief of thrall:
Virtues example, guide
to eternal life;
In carriage courteous,
all devoid of strife.
Here lies he interred,
Rogers his name,
Times only Son,
eternized by Fame.
Ougly Detraction, fly,
and black Oblivion, hence;
Whilst Rogers dust lies here,
Time will his fame commence.
Behold the Works of God, Upon a Monument on a Pillar by the Tomb. First, on
the one Table.
done by his Servant, Dame MARY RAMSEY.
SHe has given a yearly maintenance for two Fellows, and four Schoolers in
Cambridge.

More, two Livings of good value, when they shall become fit to supply them.

More, toward certain Sermons to be preached in this Church yearly.

More, in Christ's Hospital a free Writing-Schoole for poor men's children.

More, in the Country a free Grammar-Schoole for the poorer sort.

All which several gifts before remembered, are to continue yearly for ever.

Forma, Decus, Mores,
Sapientia, Res and Honores,
Morte ruunt subita;
vivit post funera Fama.
The rest of the godly Works done by this good Lady.
SHe has given a worthy maintenance to the poor of Christ's Hospital.
Secondly, on the other Table.


More, a bountiful gift for the healing of poor wounded Soldiers.

More, a liberal maintenance for ten poor maimed Soldiers.

More, a liberal maintenance for ten poor aged Widows.

More, a bountiful gift to release poor men out of prison.

More, a bountiful gift to relieve poor men in prison.

More, a yearly Stipend to poor Maids Marriages.

More, to the relief of the Poor of four several Parishes.

All which several gifts are for ever.

Her faith has wrought, her Tree was not barren. And yet an unprofitable
Servant. 1596.

Gamaliel Pie, A fair plated stone in the Quire*
under this Stone
does lie in peace and rest,
Whose service to his Prince and Realm,
well known not to be least:
At Bullen, Muttrel, and each place else,
where then the King had wars,
Not any one that served in Camp,
less feared wounds and scarres.
In age he lived in peace and love,
abhorring worlds inconstancy,
And chosen was eleven times
the Warden of his Company.
The poor, sick, lame, abroad, at
home, his bounty ever felt,
But chiefly his own Parishioners,
where threescore years he dwelt.
He held disdain to brawle, or seek
what others had to do;
And with his wife he lived
full forty years and two,
He lived devout, and died devout,
the chiefest way to Heaven;
The complete date of this his life,
was fourscore years and seven.
Mole sub hac, si forte roges
quis (Candide Lector)
Vel qualis recubat?
Gamaliel Pius est.
Vita pium, nomenque pium,
mors sancta piumque
Exhibet, and vita est,
nomine, morte Pius.
S. Memoriae.
Gualtero Haddono, A fair Monument in the wall, at the upper end of the
Chancell.
Equestri loco nato Iurisconsulto, Oratori, Poetae celeberrimo, Graecae,
Latinaeque eloquentiae sui temporis facile principi, sapientia and sanctitate
vitae, in id evecto, ut Reginae Elizabethae a supplicum libellis Magister
esset: Destinareturque majoribus nisi fato immaturius cessisset: Interim in
omni gradu viro long eminentissimo, Coniugi suo optimo meritissimoque Anna
Suttona, uxor eius 2. flens, moerens desiderii sui signum posuit. Obiit Anno
Salut. hum. 1572. Aetatis 56.

Within this Grave enclosed here,
Anne Beaumont now does rest, A fair plated stone by the Communion Table.

A loving and a faithful wife,
with many children blessed.
She served God with zeal of truth,
and learned to fly from sin;
And as she learned his holy will,
so lived and died therein.
A friend to such as virtue sought,
a foe unto no wight;
A help to those that feared God,
with all her power and might.
The poor shall often bewail her want,
by whom they found relief;
Whose mind with earnest care was bent,
to ease them of their grief.
Thus happy she, that now is gone
from hence, reward to find;
Unhappy yet for such her friends,
as she has left behind:
But thrice unhappy for his loss,
that does her praise rehearse;
A woeful praise unto her Son,
who wrote this doleful Verse.
Anne, wife unto Nicholas Beaumont, of Coleoverton, in Leicesteshire, Esquire,
and daughter unto William Saunders, of Welforde, in Northhamptonshire,
Esquire, and half sister unto Walter Haddon, Master of the Requests, departed
this life the 7. day of September, An. Dom. 1581. leaving behind her six
children.

Hic jacent corpora Will. Drew, Armig. fill. Joh. Drew, de Ken, in Com. Devon.
Another plated stone on the other side of the Table.
Armig. and Eliz. ux. ejus. fill. and haered. Will. Cecil. ac consang. and
haered. Tho. Cecil. Armig. Quae quidem Elizab. obiit 10. die November. Anno Dom.
1586. Et praedict.Will. Drew obiit, etc.

We dye to live, that lived to dye,
Through Jesus Christ, and so did I:
Which Christ, as I have loved best,
Among his Saints I trust to rest.
Under this Stone lies buried the body of Robert Smith, A fair plated stone
in the South fide of the Quire.
Gentleman: who had to his first wife, Elizabeth Reycroft, by whom he had
issue three daughters, viz. Margaret, Julian, and Ioane. And he had to his
second wife, Margaret Larkin, by whom he had no issue. The which Robert dyed
the eighth day of December, Anno Domini 1581. whose soul rests with God.

Here lies buried Margaret, A fair plated stone in the South I Will.
the wife of Lawrence Hussie, Doctor of Law, and daughter of sir John White,
Knight, for her virtuous life, worthy of memory: who dyed the third day of
August, 1569.

D. Opt. Max. Laus.
Gulielmo Herberto, naturali F. Georgii Herberti de Swansey, A plated stone at
entering into the Quire.
Militis, Ioannes eiusdem Georgii ex filio Nepos, ac Sereniss. Elizabethae
Angliae Reginae a supp. libellis. H. S. moesto animo P. K. Ianuar. 1590.

Here lies the body of John Tredwey, of Easton, A Gravestone in the North
Chapel of the Quire.
in the County of Northampton, Gentleman; who dyed the 10. day of May, An. Dom.
1610.

Rodolpho Waddingtono, huius scholae per annos 48. Moderatori digniss. Qui
postquam una cum uxore sine prole, A small Monument erected in the School wall,
in the Cloister, where (according to his desire) he lies buried.
anno 47. suavissime degisset, An. aetatis 84. An. Dom. 1614. Aug. 24. in
Domino placide obdormivit.

Ioanna uxor ejus moestiss. posuit.
Hic Waddingtonus tenui
requiescit in urna,
Nestor vere annis,
and gravitate Cato.
Tullius eloquio, Damon
sincerus amico,
Et par praeceptis
(Quintiliane) tibi.
Dulcis, amoenus, amans,
cultis, praestante, probata,
Vir, Vates, Coniux,
Moribus, Art, Fide.
Tales secla puto paucos
antiqua dedissnet:
Postera non multos
secla datura pares.
Vita.
Angligenae hunc peperit
Londinum gloria gentis,
Aetona huic Artis
semina prima dedit.
Granta tulit segetem
fructumque tumescere fecit,
Londini Messes
Orphana turba tulit.
From this Church, West to Newgate, is of this Ward.

Now for the South side of this Ward, beginning again at the Cross in Cheap,
from thence to Friday street, and down that street, on the West side, till
overagainst the North-west corner of Saint Matthewes Church. Parish Church of
S. Matthew in Friday street.
And on the West side, to the South corner of the said Church, which is wholly
in the Ward of Faringdon. This Church has these few Monuments:

Thomas Pole, Goldsmith, 1395.

Rob Johnson, Goldsmith, Alderman,

John Twiselton, Goldsmith, Alderman, 1525.

Ralph Allen, Grocer, one of the Sheriffs, deceased 1546.

Anthony Gamage, Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffs, deceased 1579.

John Mabbe, Chamberlain of London, etc.

Allen at Condit, and Thomas Warlingworth founded a Chauntry there.

Sir Nicholas Twiford, Goldsmith, Mayor, gave to that Church an House, with the
appurtenances, called the Griffon on the Hope, in the same street.

Anthony Cage entombed
here, A comely Monument in the wall, on the Chancels South side.
does rest,
Whose wisdom still
prevailed the Commonweal:
A man with Gods good
gifts so amply blessed,
That few, or none,
his doings may impleale.
A man unto the widow
and the poor,
A comfort and
a succor evermore.
Three wives he had,
of credit and of fame:
The first of them,
Elizabeth, that hight;
Who buried here, brought
to this Cage by name,
Seventeene young Plants,
to give his Table light.
The second wife (for her
part) brought him none;
The third and last,
no more but only one.
He deceased the 24. day of June, Anno Domini, 1583.
In the midst of this Quire lies the body of Gaius Newman, A fair Monument in
the North wall of the Chancell.
Citizen and Goldsmith of London, of the age of 66. years. He had issue by his
wife Anne, the daughter of Nicholas Cullum, of London, Merchant-Taylor, 7.
sons and 5. daughters, Gabriel, Gaius, Robert, Nicholas, Francis, Thomas, and
Hugh; Elizabeth, Mary, Anne, Sarah, and Judith. He deceased the third day of
March, 1613.

Here lies buried the body of John Perte, Another Monument in the same wall.
Citizen and Fishmonger of London; who took to wife Elizabeth Air, the
daughter of Henry Air, Citizen and Skinner of Land. by whom he had issue one
only daughter, named Mary. The said John deceased the tenth day of October,
Anno Domini 1604. being aged 51. years.

As Man lives, A Plate in the South wall of the Chancell.
so he dies;
As Tree falls, so it lies:
Anne Middleton, thy life well past,
Does argue restfull bliss at last.
Obiit Anno a partu Virginis Mariae, 1596. Men's. Ianuar. die 11.

Anno Reg. Reginae Elizabethae, 39. Aetatis suae, 54.

From this Friday street; Old Change.
West to the Old Exchange, a street so called, of the Kings Exchange there
kept, which was for the receipt of Bullion, to be coined. For Henry the third,
in the sixth year of his reign, wrote to the Scabines and men of Ipre, that
he and his Council had given prohibition, that none, Englishmen, or other,
should make change of Plate, or other Mass of Silver, but only in his Exchange
at London, or at Canturbury. Andrew Bukerell then had to farm the Exchange of
England, and was Mayor of London in the reign of Henry the third. John
Somercote had the keeping of the Kings Exchange over all England. In the eighth
of Edward the first, Gregory Rocksly was keeper of the said Exchange for the
King. In the fifth of Edward the second, William Hausted was keeper thereof.
And in the 18. Roger de Frowicke, etc.

These received the old Stamps, or Coyning-Irons, from time to time, as the
same were worn, and delivered new to all the Mints in England, as more at
large in another place I have noted.

This street begins by West Cheap in the North, and runs down South to
Knight-Rider street; that part thereof which is called Old Fish-streete: But
the very Housing and Office of the Exchange and coynage, was about the midst
thereof, South from the East gate that enters Paul's Churchyard, and on the
West side, in Baynards Castle Ward.

On the East side of this Lane, betwixt West Cheap and the Church of St.
Augustine, Henry Walleis, Mayor, (by license of Edward the first) builded one
row of houses, the profits rising of them, to be employed on London Bridge.

The Parish Church of St. Augustine, Parish Church of S. Augustine*
and one house next adjoining, in Watheling street, is of this Ward called
Faringdon. This is a fair Church, and lately well repaired, wherein be
Monuments remaining, of H. Read, Armourer, one of the Sheriffs, 1450.

Robert Bellesdon, Haberdasher, Mayor, 1491.

Sir Townley.

Will. Dear, one of the Sheriffs, 1450.

Robert Raven, Haberdasher, 1500.

Thomas Apleyard, Gentleman, 1515.

William Moncaster, Merchant-Tailor, 1524.

Will. Holt, Merchant-Taylor, 1544.

Hic jacet Magister Robertus Bursted, Baccalaurius Iuris civilis, A plated
stone under the Communion Table.
and hujus Ecclesiae quondam Rector. Qui obiit 16. die men's. Augusti, An. Dom.
1417. Cujus, etc.

Hic jacet Magister Johannes Battaill, quondam Rector huius Ecclesiae. The like
stone by the other.
Qui obiit Anno Domini, 1426. sexto die Mensis Augusti, Cuius, etc.

Ecce ut defuncti
cineres mirere beats,
Ecce in tantillo
temporis quantus honor.
Dudum vita mihi fuerat,
quae patria mundus,
Sed mihi jam Coelum
Patria, vita Deus.
Dudum mortis eram
peccato victima, sed jam
Iustiae Christo victima;
quantus honor?
Hic requiescit in pace corpus Roberti Brett, A small Monument in the East end
of the Quires South I Will.
Civis and Mercatoris-Scissoris London, filii and haeredis Roberti Brett, de
Whitstanton, in Com. Somerset, Armig. Qui uxorem duxit Elizabeth, filiam
Reginaldi Highgati, Armig. Ex ea genuit 11. filios, and 3. filias, e quibus 4.
filii and 1. silia superstites sunt. Idem Robertus and Elizabetha in sancto
conjugii statu 31. An. vixerunt. Et obiit 9. Aprilis, An. Domini, 1586. Aetatis
63.

Hunc Tumulum propriis sumptibus fieri fecit Elizabeth uxor ejus, 10. die
September. Anno Domini, 1596. Cum jam post obitum marti praedicti, december annos
viduam vixisset, atque hic etiam sepeliri decrevit, quando. cunque Deo
placuerit ex hac naturali vita tollere.

Here rests the body of Edward Wiat, A fair plated stone at the entrance
into the Quire.
late of Tillingham, in the County of Essex, Esquire, who deceased the 24. of
August 1571. He had one only wife, Mary, the daughter of Sir William
Waldegrave, of Smalbridge, in the County of Suffolk, Knight, by whom he had
issue three sons and four daughters; but all his said children dyed young,
except one son, named Edward, whom he left behind him alive, about the age
of eleven years. His said wife, his Executrix, caused this Monument to be made.

Hic jacet Richardus Warner, dum vixit, Cives Civitatis London, ac quondam
Magister Fraternitatis Sancti Joannis Baptistae, Scissor, in Civit. praedict.
and Margareta uxor ejus. Qui quidem Richardus obiit 18. die Men's. Januarii, One
fair stone for both these, in the body of the Church.
Anno Domini, 1476.

Here lies Richard Coxe, sometime Citizen and Skinner of London, which
deceased the eight day of March, Anno Domini, 1467. And Agnes his wife; the
which deceased the 13. day of April, Anno Dom. 1472.

Then in the North Churchyard of Paul's, Cathedral Church of S. Paul.
in the which stands the Cathedral Church, first founded by Ethelbert King
of Kent, about the year of Christ, 610. He gave thereto lands, as appears:
Aethelbertus, Rex, Deo inspirante, pro animae suae remedio, dedit Episcopo
Melito terram quae appell^tur Tillingeham, ad Monasterii sui solatium,
scilicet, Doctoris Gentium.
S. Pauli: and ego Rex Aethelbertus ita firmiter concedo tibi praesuli Melito
potestatem ejus habendi and possidendi, ut in perpetuum in Monasterii utilitate
permaneat; etc. Athelstan, Edgar, Edward the Confessor, and others also, gave
lands thereunto. William the Conqueror gave to the Church of Saint Paul, and
to Mauricius, then Bishop, and his successors, the Castle of Stortford, with
the appurtenances, etc. He also confirmed the gifts of his Predecessors, in
these words: Omne 1. Rex Angl. Clamo quietas in perpetuum, 24. Hidas quas Rex
Aethelbert dedit S. Paulo juxta murum London, etc. The Charter of King William
the Conqueror, exemplified in the Tower, Englished thus:

William, by the grace of God, King of Englishmen, to all his well beloved
French and English people, greeting. Know ye, that I do give unto God and the
Church of Saint Paul of London, and to the Rectors and Servitors of the same,
in all their Lands which the Church has, or shall have, within Borough, and
without, Sack and Sock, Thole and The, Infangtheefe, and Grithbriche, and all
free, Ships by Sea, and by Land, on Tide, and off Tide, and all the Rights that
into them Christendom by rad and more speak, and on Buright hamed, and on
Buright work, before all the Bishoprics in mine Land, and on each other man's
Land. For I will, that the Church in all things be as free, as I would my Soul
to be in the day of Judgment. Witnesses, Osmond our Chancellor, Lanfrank the
Archbishop of Canturbury, and T. Archbishop of York, Roger, Earl of
Shrewsbury, Alane the County, Geffrey de Magna villa, and Ralph Peverel.

In the year 1087. this Church of S. Paul was burnt with fire, S. Paul's Church
burnt.
and therewith the most part of the City: which fire began at the entry of
the West gate, and consumed the East gate. Mauricius, Foundation of the new
Church of S. Paul builded.
then Bishop, began therefore the foundation of a new Church of S. Paul; a
work, that men (of that time) judged would never have been finished, it was
to them so wonderful, for length and breadth; and also the same was builded
upon Arches (or Vaults) of stone, for defense of fire; which was a manner of
work (before that time) unknown to the people of this Nation, and then
brought in by the French: Stone brought from Cane in Normandy.
and the stone was fetched from Cane in Normandy. This Mauricius deceased in the
year, 1107.

Richard Beaumor succeeded him in the Bishopric, who did wonderfully increase
the said Church, purchasing (of his own cost) the large Streets and Lanes about
it, wherein were wont to dwell many Law-people; which ground he began to
compass about with a strong wall of stone, Wall about Paul's Churchyard.
and gates. King Henry the first gave to the said Richard so much of the Mote
(or Wall) of the Castle, on the Thames side, to the South, as should be
needful to make the said Wall of the Church, and so much as should suffice to
make a Wall without the way on the North side, etc.

It should seem, that this Richard enclosed but two sides of the said Church
or Cemitory of Saint Paul, to wit, the South and North side: for King Edw. the
second, in the 10. of his reign, granted, that the said Churchyard should be
enclosed with a wall, where it wanted, for the Murders and Robberies that were
there committed. The common Bell in Paul's Churchyard, rung for the calling
together of the Citizens to their Folke-motes.
But the Citizens then claimed the East part of the Churchyard, to be the
place of assembly to their Folke-motes; and that the great Steeple, there
situate, was to that use, their common Bell, which being there rung, all the
Inhabitants of the City might hear and come together. They also claimed the
West side, that they might there assemble themselves together, with the Lord of
Baynards Castle, for view of their Armor, in defense of the City. This matter
was in the Tower of London referred to Harvius de Stanton, and his fellow
Justices Itenerantes: but I find not the decision or judgment of that
controversy.

True it is, that Edward the third, in the 17. of his reign, gave commandment
for the finishing of that Wall: which was then performed, and to this day it
continues; although now on both the sides (to wit, within and without) it be
hidden with dwelling houses.

Richard Beaumor deceased in the year 1127. and his successors (in process of
time) performed the work begun.

The Steeple of this Church was builded and finished in the year 1222. Paul's
steeple.
The Cross on the said Steeple fell down, and a new was set up in the year
1314.

The new work of Paul's (so called) at the East end above the Quire, The new
work of Paul in the East.
was begun in the year 1251. Henry Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, Constable of
Chester, and Custos of England, in his time was a great Benefactor to this
work, and was there buried, in the year 1310. Also Ralph Baldocke, Bishop of
London, in his life time gave 200. Marks to the building of the said new
work, and left much by his Testament toward the finishing thereof: he
deceased in the year 1313. and was buried in the Lady Chapel. Also the new
work of Paul's, to wit, the cross Isles, were begun to be new builded in the
year 1256.

The first of February, Paul's steeple fired by Lightning.
in the year 1444. about two of the clock in the afternoon, the Steeple of
Paul's was fired by Lightning, in the midst of the Shaft or Spire, both on the
West side, and on the South: but by labor of many well disposed people, the
same (to appearance) quenched with Vinegar; so that all men withdrew themselves
to their houses, praising God. But between 8. and 9. of the clock in the same
night, the fire burst out again more fervently than before, and did much hurt
to the Lead and Timber, till by the great labor of the Mayor and people that
came thither, it was thoroughly quenched.

This Steeple was repaired in the year 1462. and the Weather-cocke again
erected: Paul's steeple repaired.
Robert Godwin winding it up, the rope brake, and he was destroyed on the
Pinacles, and the Cock was sore bruised. But Burchwood (the Kings Plummer) set
it up again. Weather-cocke of Paul's steeple.
Since the which time, needing reparation, it was both taken down, and set up
in the year 1553. At which time it was found to be of Copper, gilt over, and
the length, from the bill to the tail, being 4. foot, and the breadth over
the wings 3. foot and a half, it weighed 40. l. the Cross, from the Bole, to
the Eagle (or Cock) was 15. foot and 6. inches of assise; the length thereof,
overthwart, was 5. foot and 10. inches, and the compass of the Bole was 9.
foot and 1. inch. The inner body of this Cross was Oak, the next cover was
Lead, and the outermost was of Copper, red varnished. The Bole and Eagle, or
Cock, were of Copper, and gilt also. Height of the steeple.
The height of the Steeple was 520. foot, whereof the stone-worke was 260.
foot, and the Spire was likewise 260. foot. Length of Paul's Church.
The length of the whole Church, is 240. Tailors yards, which make 720. foot.
The breadth thereof is 130. foot: And the height of the body of that Churc, is
150. foot.

This Church has a Bishop, Governors of this Church.
a Deane, a Presentor, Chancellor, Treasurer, and five Archdeacons, to wit, of
London, Middlesex, Essex, Colchester, and Saint Albans: It has Prebendaries
thirty, Canons twelve, Vicars Coral six, etc.

The College of Petty Canons there, Petty Canons of Paul's.
was founded by King Richard the second, in honor of Queen Anne his wife, and
of her Progenitors, in the seventeenth of his reign. Their Hall and Lands was
then given unto them, as appears by the Patent, Master Robert Dokesworth then
being Master thereof. In the year 1408. the Petty Canons then building their
College, the Mayor and Communalty granted them their Watercourse, and other
easements.

There was also one great Cloister, Great Cloystry of Paul's.
on the North side of this Church, invironing a plot of ground, of old time
called Pardon Churchyard; whereof Thomas More, Deane of Paul's, was either the
first Builder, or a most especial Benefactor, and was buried there.

About this Cloister, was artificially and richly painted the Dance of
Machabray, Dance of Paul's.
or Dance of Death, commonly called the Dance of Paul's; the like whereof was
painted about S. Innocents Cloister at Paris in France: the Meeters or Poesy
of this Dance were translated out of French into English by John Lidgate, Monk
of Bury, the Picture of Death leading all estates; at the dispense of Ienken
Carpenter, in the reign of Henry the sixth. In this Cloister were buried many
persons, some of Worship, and others of Honor: The Monuments of whom, in
number and curious workmanship, passed all other that were in that Church.

Over the East Quadrant of this Cloister, Library of Paul's.
was a fair Library, builded at the costs and charges of Walter Sherington,
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, in the reign of Henry the sixth: which
has been well furnished with fair written books in Vellam; but few of them
now do remain there.

In the midst of this Pardon Churchyard, Chapel in Pardon Churchyard
was also a fair Chapel, first founded by Gilbert Becket, Portgrave, and
principal Magistrate of this City, in the reign of King Stephen, who was
there buried. Thomas More, Deane of Paul's, before named, re-edified or new
builded this Chapel, and founded three Chaplains there, in the reign of
Henry the fifth.

In the year 1549. on the tenth of April, the said Chapel, by commandment
of the Duke of Somerset, was begun to be pulled down, with the whole
Cloystrie, the Dance of Death, the Tombs and Monuments: so that nothing
thereof was left, but the bare Plot of ground, which is since converted into a
Garden for the Petty Canons.

There was also a Chapel at the North door of Paul's, Chapel at the North
door of Paul's.
founded by the same Walter Sherington, by license of Henry the sixth, for two,
three, or four Chaplains, endowed with 40. l. by the year. This Chapel
also was pulled down in the reign of Edw. the sixth, and in place thereof a
fair house builded.

There was furthermore a fair Chapel of the holy Ghost in Paul's Church, on
the North side, founded in the year 1400. by Roger Holmes, Chancellor and
Prebendary of Paul's, for Adam Bery, Alderman and Mayor of London, 1364. John
Wingham and others, for seven Chaplains, Holmes College.
and called Holmes his College. Their common Hall was in Paul's Churchyard on
the South side, near unto a Carpenters yard. This College was with others
suppressed in the reign of Edward the sixth. Then under the Quire of Paul's is
a large Chapel, first dedicated to the name of IESV, Jesus chapel.
founded, or rather confirmed the 37. of Hen. the 6. as appears by his Patent
thereof, dated at Crowdowne to this effect:

Many Liege-men and Christian people, having begun a Fraternity and Guila to
the honor of the most glorious name of Jesus Christ our Savior, in a place
called the Crowds of the Cathedral Church of Paul's in London, which has
continued long time peaceably, till now of late: whereupon they have made
request, and we have taken upon us the name and charge of the foundation, to
the laud of Almighty God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and
especially to the honor of Jesus, in whose honor the Fraternity was begun, etc.

The King ordained William Say, then Deane of Paul's, to be the Rector, and
Richard Ford (a Remembrancer in the Exchequer) and Henry Bennis (Clarke of his
Privy Seal) the Gardians of these Brothers and Sisters; they and their
successors to have a common seal, license to purchase lands or tenements, to
the value of 40. l. by the year, etc.

This foundation was confirmed by Henry the seventh, the 22. of his reign, to
Doctor Collet, then Deane of Paul's, Rector there, etc. And by Henry the 8. the
27. of his reign, to Richard Pace, then Deane of Paul's, etc.

At the West end of this Jesus Chapel, under the Quire of Paul's, also was and
is a Parish Church of S. Faith, Parish Church of S. Faith.
commonly called Saint Faith under Paul's, which served (as still it does) for
the Stationers, and others dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, Pater noster Row, and
the places near adjoining.

The said Chapel of Jesus, being suppressed in the reign of Edward the 6.
the Parishioners of S. Faiths Church were removed into the same, as to a place
more sufficient for largeness and lightsomnesse, in the year 1551. and so it
remains.

The Monuments there are these:

Here buried is Elizabeth, A fair plated stone over a Vault in the East end of
the Church.

of honor worthy Dame,
Her Husband erst Lord Shandoys was,
her Son has now like name:
Her Father was of Wilton Lord,
a Gray of puissant fame,
Her Brother left with us behind,
now Lord is of the same.
Her virtuous life yet still does live,
her honor shall remain,
Her corpse, though it be grown to dust,
her Soul the heavens contain,
Quae obiit 29. die Decembris, Ann. Dom. 1559.
Lo, A fair plated stone near to the former
Thomas Mond, Esquire by birth,
does under buried lie,
To show, that men (by Natures Law)
are borne to live and dye:
In Shropshire at the Mindtowne borne,
the time we here prefixe,
And dyed the seventh of February,
in Anno, seventy six.
Threescore and seven years he saw,
though body lie in Tomb:
His soul (immortal) lives in heaven,
by Gods eternal doom.
Natus octavo Mensis Julii, 1510. Obiit septimo Februarii, 1576.
Here under this stone rests, in the mercy of God, Another stone close
adjoining
the body of M. Thomas Dockwray, Notary, late one of the Proctors of the
Arches, Citizen and Stationer of London, and Anne his wife. The which Thomas
deceased the 23. day of June, An. Dom. 1559. etc.

Cur Sacerdos eram,
jam factus vile cadaver?
Et cito pulvis erit: This stone is covered with a Pew, that nothing can be
seen but these verses.

Quaeso memento mei.
Siste gradum qui me
teris hic, and funde precatus
Me Deus ut levet hinc,
ducat ad usque Polum.
William Babham, and Alice Butcon his wife, In the middle I Will a fair plated
stone.
An. Dom. 1577.
Lo here the certain end
of every mortal one,
Behold, alive to day,
to morrow dead and gone.
Live well, so endless life
(by death) you shall obtain,
Naught lose the good by death,
since life thereby they gain.
Dum mihi persuasi
me quaesivique A fair plated stone in the Chancell.
salutem,
En morior dixit,
nam Deus esse diem:
Non equidem invideo,
peccati debita merces,
Cum sit mors nostri,
cum reus omnis homo,
Cumque operum requires,
and sit mihi vita perennis,
In Christo morior,
mors mihi gratus adest,
Quem mors sic raputi;
Cujus sunt ista sepulchra
Si quaeras, subsunt
quae tibi cuncta notant.
Lodovicus Nicols, Civis London, fililius tertius Thomae Nicols,
Northhamptoniensis hic sepelitur. Obiit 22. Aprilis, 1592. Anno Aetatis suae,
28.

Ad vocem Tubae resurgent mortui.

Here lies the body of George Whitgift, Another stone in the Chancell.
Esquire, one of the natural brothers of John Whitgift, late Lord Archbishop
of Canturbury: which George deceased the 19. day of April, An. Dom. 1611.

William Lamb,
so sometime was my name, Upon a brass plate fixed on a Pill^ by the Tomb in
the open Church beneath

Whiles I alive
did run my mortal race,
Serving a Prince
of most immortal fame,
Henry the eighth,
who of his Princely grace,
In his Chapel
allowed me a place.
By whose favor,
from Gentleman t'Esquire,
I was preferred,
with worship for my hire.
With wives three
I joined wedlock band,
Which (all alive)
true lovers were to me:
Ioane, Alice and Ioane,
for so they came to hand,
What needs praise,
regarding their degrees?
In wively truth
none steadfast more could be.
Who though in earth
death's force did once dissever,
Heaven yet (I trust)
shall join us all together.
O Lamb of God,
which sin did take away,
And (as a Lamb)
wast offered up for sin;
Where I (poor Lamb)
went from thy flock astray,
Yet thou (good Lord)
vouchfafe thy Lamb to win
Home to thy Fold,
and hold thy Lamb therein?
That at the Day, when
Lambs and Goats shall sever,
Of thy choice Lambs,
Lamb may be one for ever.
Under which remembrance there are two Verses more added, The benevolence is
given every Friday ordinarily through-out the year.
containing both a petition, and an injunction of duty to the poor, who
weekly receive their allowance, at the hands or appointment of the Worshipful
Company of Sationers: To whom he bearing great affection, and having also no
small affiance in them, made them his disposers and Stewards in that behalf.
The Verses are these:

I pray you all
that receive bread and pence,
To say the Lords Prayer
before you go hence.
As for the Verses engraven upon the upper stone of the Tomb, they are these:

As I was, so are ye,
As I am, you shall be.
That I had, that I gave,
That I gave, that I have.
Thus I end all my cost,
That I left, that I lost.
Then was there on the North side of this Churchyard, Charnell-house with a
Chapel*
a large Charnell-house for the bones of the dead, and over it a Chapel of an
old foundation, such as follows:

In the year 1282. the 10. of Edward the first, it was agreed, that Henry
Walleis, Mayor, and the Citizens, for the cause of shops by them builded,
without the wall of the Churchyard, should assign to God, and to the Church
of S. Paul, ten Marks of rent by the year for ever, toward the new
building of a Chapel of the blessed Virgin Mary, and also to assign five
Marks of yearly rent to a Chaplain to celebrate there.

Moreover, in the year 1430. the 8. of Henry the sixth, license was granted to
Ienken Carpenter (Executor to Richard Whitington) to establish upon the said
Charnell, a Chaplain, to have eight Marks by the year. Then was also in this
Chapel two Brotherhoods. Robert Barton, Henry Barton, Mayor, and Thomas
Mirfin, Mayor, all Skinners, were intombed, with their Images of Alabaster over
them, grated or cooped about with iron, before the said Chapel; all which was
pulled down in the year 1549. The bones of the dead, couched up in a Charnell,
under the Chapel, were conveyed from thence into Finsbury field, (by report
of him who paid for the carriage) amounting to more than one thousand Cart
loads, Reyne Wolf.
and there laid on a moorish ground, in short space after raised by soylage of
the City upon them, to bear three Milles. The Chapel and Charnell were
converted into dwelling houses, warehouses, and Sheds before them, for
Stationers in place of the Tombs.

In the East part of this Churchyard stands Paul's School, Paul's School.
lately new builded, and endowed in the year 1512. by John Collet, Doctor of
Divinity, and Deane of Paul's, for 153. poor men's children to be taught free in
the same School, for which he appointed a Master, a Surmaster or Usher, and a
Chaplain, with large stipends for ever, committing the oversight thereof to
the Masters, Wardens and Assistants of the Mercers in London, because he was
son to Henry Collet, Mercer, sometime Mayor. He left to these Mercers Lands,
to the yearly value of 120. l. or better.

Near unto this School, on the North side thereof, Clochier in Paul's
Churchyard.
was (of old time) a great and high Clochier, or Bell-house, four square,
builded of stone, and in the same a most strong frame of timber, with four
Bells, the greatest that I have heard; these were called Jesus Bells, and
belonged to Jesus Chapel, but I know not by whose gift. The same had a great
spire of timber, covered with Lead, with the Image of Saint Paul on the top,
but was pulled down by Sir Miles Partridge, Knight, in the reign of Henry the
eighth. The common speech then was, that he did set one hundred pounds, upon a
cast at Dice against it, and so won the said Clochier and Bells of the King:
and then causing the Bells to be broken as they hung, the rest was pulled down.
This man was afterward executed on the Tower hill, for matters concerning the
Duke of Summerset, the fifth of Edward the sixth.

In place of this Clochier, of old time, the common Bell of the City was used
to be rung, Common Bell of the City.
for the assembly of the Citizens to their Folke-motes, as I have before showed.

About the midst of this Churchyard, Pulpit-crosse in Paul's Churchyard.
is a Pulpit-crosse of timber, mounted upon steps of stone, and covered with
Lead, in which are Sermons preached by learned Divines, every Sunday in the
fore-noone. The very antiquity of which Cross is to me unknown.

I read, that in the year 1259. King Henry the third commanded a general
Assembly to be made at this Cross, where he in proper person commanded the
Mayor, that on the next day following, he should cause to be sworn before the
Aldermen, every Stripling, of 12. years of age, or upward, to be true to the
King and his heirs, Kings of England.

Also, in the year 1262. the same King caused to be read at Paul's Cross, a
Bull, obtained from Pope Urban the fourth, as an absolution for him, and for
all that were sworn to maintain the Articles made in Parliament at Oxford.

Also, in the year 1299. the Deane of Paul's accursed, at Paul's Cross, all
those which had searched in the Church of S. Martin in the field, for an hoord
of gold, etc.

This Pulpit-crosse was by tempest of lightning and thunder, defaced. Thomas
Kempe, Bishop of London, new builded it, in form as it now stands.

In the year 1561. the fourth of June, betwixt the hours of three and four
of the clock in the afternoon, Paul's steeple and Church newly burn.
the great spire of the steeple of S. Paul's Church, was fired by lightning,
which brake forth (as it seemed) two or three yards beneath the foot of the
Cross, and from thence it burnt downward the spire to the battlements,
stone-worke, and Bells, so furiously, that within the space of 4* hours, the
same steeple, with all the roofes of the Church, were consumed, to the great
sorrow and perpetual remembrance of the beholders. After this mischance, the
Queens Majesty directed her Letters to the Mayor, Speedy repairing of Paul's
Church.
willing him to take order for speedy repairing of the same: And she, of her
gracious disposition, for the furtherance thereof, did presently give and
deliver in gold, The Queens gift.
one thousand Marks; with a warrant for a thousand Loads of Timber, to be
taken out of her Woods, or elsewhere.

The Citizens also gave first a great benevolence, and after that three
Fifteenes to be speedily paid.

The Clergy of England, within the Province of Canturbury, Benevolence.
granted the fortieth part of the value of their Benefices, charged with first
fruits; the thirtieth part of such as were not so charged; but the Clergy of
London Dioces, granted the thirtieth part of all that paid first fruits, and
the twentieth part of such as had paid their fruits.

Six Citizens of London, and two Petie Canons of Paul's Church, had charge to
further and oversee the work, wherein such expedition was used, that within one
Month next following the burning thereof, the Church was covered with boords
and lead, in manner of a false roof against the weather, and before the end of
the said year, all the said Isles of the Church were framed out of new timber,
covered with lead, and fully finised.

The same year also, the great roofes of the West and East ends were framed
out of great timber in Yorkshire, brought thence to London by Sea, and set up,
and covered with lead, the North and South ends were framed of timber, and
covered with lead, before April, 1566.

Concerning the Steeple, diverse models were devised and made, but little else
was done, through whose default God knows: it was said, that the money
appointed for the new building of the Steeple, was collected.

Monuments in this Church, be these:

First, Monuments in Paul's
as I read of Erkenwalde, Bishop of London, buried in the old Church, about the
year of Christ, 700. whose body was translated into the new work, in the year
1140. being richly shrined, above the Quire, behind the high Altar.

Sebba, or Seba, King of the East Saxons, was first buried in the old Church,
afterward removed into the new, and laid in a coffin of stone, or gray Marble,
having this Inscription hanging by it:

Hic jacet Sebba, Church. At the entrance of the north side or I Will of the Quire.
Rex orientalium Saxonu^, qui conversus fuit ad fidem per Erkenwaldum,
Londonens. Episcopum, Anno Christi, 677. Vir multum Deo devotus, actibus
religiosis, crebris precibus, and piis Eleemosynarum fructibus plurimum
intentus, vitam privatam and Monasticam cunctis Regni divitiis and honoribus
praeferens. Qui cum regnasset Ann. 30. habitum Religiosum accepit, per
benedictionem Waltheri Londinensis Antistitis, qui praefato Erkenwaldo
successit. De quo Venerabilis Beda, in Historia Gentis Anglorum, etc. Ethelred,
King of the West Saxons, was like wise buried in the old Church, and after
removed, lying next unto King Sebba, and this Inscription fastened by him:

Hic jacet Ethelredus, Anglorum Rex, filius Edgari Regis, In another coffin of
gray Marble by the other.
cui in die consecrationis hic post impositam Coronam, Etbelred, surnamed the
unready.
fertur S. Dunstanus Cantuar. Archiepiscopus dira praedixisse his verbis:
Quoniam aspirasti ad Regnum per mortem fratris tui, in cujus sanguine
conspiraverunt Angli, cum ignominiosa Matre tui: Non deficiet Gladius de domo
tua, saeviens in te omnibus vitae tuae, interficiens de semine tuo, quousque
Regnum tuum transferatur in Regnum alienum, cujus ritum and linguam, gens cui
praesides non novit; nec expiabitur, nisi longa vindicta peccatum tuum, and
peccatum Matris tuae, and peccata virorum, qui interfuere consilio illius
nequam. Quae sicut a viro sancto praedicta erant, evenerunt: Nam Ethelredus
variis praeliis per Suanu^ Danorum Regem, filiumque suum Canutu^ fatigatus and
fugatus, ac tandem Londini arcta obsidione conclusus, misere diem obiit, Anno
Dominicae Incarnationis, 1017. postquam Annis 36. in magna tribulatione
regnasset. William Norman, Bishop of London, in the reigns of the Kings,
Edward the Confessor, and William the Conqueror, deceased Anno 1070. and was
after newly buried in the body of the Church, with this Epitaph or Memory:

Gulielmo, viro sapientia and vitae sanctitate claro, Being first buried in the
Quire, and afterward removed into the body of the Church, at the Citizens
earnest suit, and upon good oc^casion.
qui primum Edwardo Regi and Confessori familiaris, nuper in Episcopum
Londinensem erectus; nec multo post apud invictissimum Principem Guilielmu^
Angliae Regem ejus nominis primum: Ob prudentiam, fidemque singularem, in
Concilium adhibitus; Amplissima tunc urbi celeberrimae privilegia ab eodem
impetravit: Senatus populusque Londinensis been merenti posuit. Sedit Episcopus
Annos 20. Decessit Anno a Christo nato, 1070.

Haec tibi (clare Pater)
posuerunt Marmora Cives,
Praemia non meritis
aequiparanda tuis.
Namque sibi populus
te Londoniensis amicum
Sensit, and huic urbi
non leve praesidium.
Reddita libertas duce
te, donataque multis:
Te duce, res fuerat
publica muneribus.
Divitias, genus, and formam
brevis opprimat hora,
Haec tua sed pietas
and benefacta manent.
To Wiliam, a man famous in wisdom and holiness of life, who first with S.
Edward the King and Confessor being familiar, of late preferred to be Bishop of
London, and not long after (for his prudencie and sincere fidelity) admitted to
be of Council with the most victorious Prince, William, King of England, of
that name the first, who obtained of the same, great and large privileges to
this famous City. The Senate and Citizens of London, to him, having well
deserved, have made this. He continued Bishop twenty years, and dyed in the
year after Christ's Nativity, 1070.

These Marble Monuments to thee
thy Citizens assign,
Rewards (O Father) far unfit
to those deserts of thine.
Thee unto them a faithful friend
thy London people found,
And to this Town, of no small weight,
a stay both sure and sound.
Their Liberties restored to them,
by means of thee have been,
Their Public weal by means of thee,
large gifts have felt and found.
The Riches, Stock, and beauty brave,
one hour has them suppressed:
Yet these thy virtues and good deeds,
with us (for ever) rest.
The Lord Mayor of London, This man is termed by some Richard de Gravesend.
and the Aldermen his brethren, upon those solemn days of their resort to
Paul's, have long time used to walk to the Gravestone, where this Bishop lies
buried, in remembrance of their former privileges by him obtained.

And now of late years, there is an Inscription fastened to that Pillar which
is next his Grave; Right against the little South doorein the lower Church.
termed, The revivali of a most worthy Prela^es remembrance: There erected at
the sole cost and charges of the Right Honorable and worthily affected, Sir
Edward Barkham, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of London, Anno 1622. speaking
thus to the walkers in Paul's:

Walkers,
whosoere ye be, Set up at the Lord Majors cost and charges.

If it prove
you chance to see
Upon a solemn
Scarlet day,
The Citie-Senate
pass this way,
Their grateful Memory
for to show
Which they the
reverend ashes owe
Of Bishop Norman,
here inhum'd,
By whom this City
has assumed
Large proviledges:
Those obtained
By him, when
Conqueror William reigned:
This being by thankful
Barkham's mind renu'd,
Call it The Monument
of Gratitude.
Hic jacet Magister Fulco Lovell, An inscription in the wall.
quondam Archidiaconus Colcestriae. Floruit sub Henrico 3. Rege.

Hic requiescit in Domino Rogerus cognonomento Niger, In the midst of Quire,
near to the place where they stand to hear Sermons.
quondam Canonicus hujus Ecclesiae S. Pauli: Ac deinde in Londinens. Episcopum
consecratus Anno Salutis, 1228. vir in literatura profundus, moribus honestus
ac per omnia laudabilis, Christianae Religionis amator, ac defensor strenuus.
Qui cum pastorale Officium vigilanter and studiose rexisset Annis 14. diem suum
clausit extremum, apud Manerium suum de Stebunheath, 3. Calend. October. An.
Christi, 1241. Regnante Rege Henrico 3.

Contigit his diebus, dum Episcopus iste Rogerus in hac Ecclesia ante majus
Altar staret infulatus ad celebrandum divina, quod tanta in aere facta est
nubium densitas, ut vix alterum discernere possit, quam confestim secuta est
tonitrui horribilis concussio, cum tanta fulminis coruscatione, ac faetore
intolerabili, ut omnes qui aderunt rapide fugientes, nihil verius quam mortem
expectarent. Solus Episcopus cum uno Diacono remansit intrepidus. Aere tandem
purgato, Episcopus residuum rei divinae explevit.

Epitaphium ejus super Tumulo.
Ecclesiae quondam
Praesul praesentis, in Anno
M. bis C. quater X.
jacet hic Rogerus humatus.
Hujus erat manibus
Domino locus iste dicatus:
Christ suis precibus
veniam des, toll reatus.
Hic infra jacet corpus Magistri Thomae de Evre, At the entering the middle
door of the Quire, a fair plated stone.
Legum Doctoris, istius Ecclesiae S. Pauli quondam Decani, qui die nono Mensis
Octobris, Anno Domino Millesimo, quadringentesimo, and sui Decanatus Anno 12.
diem suum clausit extremum. Cuius animae propitietur Deus, Amen.

Hic in Domino obdormivit Johannes Gandavensis, A very goodly Tomb, curiously
framed of white stone, having his Lance and Target hanging by it.
vulgo de Gaunt, a Gandavo Plandriae urbe loco natali, ita denominatus, Edwardi
3. Regis Angliae filius, a patre Comitis Richmondiae titulo ornatus. Tres sibi
uxores in Matrimonio daxit: Primam, Blancham, filiam and haeredem Henrici,
Ducis Lancastriae, per quem amplissimam adiit haereditatem: Nec solum Dux
Lancastriae, sed etiam Leicestriae, Lincolniae, and Derbiae Comes effectus:
E^cuius sobole Imperatores, Reges, Principes, and Proceres propagati sunt
plurini. Alteram habuit uxorem Constantiam (quae hic contumelatur) filiam and
haeredem Petri, Regis Castiliae and Legionis, cuius iure optimo titulo Regis
Castiliae and Legionis usus est. Haec unicam illi peperit filiam Katharinam, ex
qua ab Henrico Reges Hispaniae sunt propagati. Tertiam vero uxorem duxit
Katharina^, ex Equestri Familia, and eximia pulchritudine foeminam, ex qua
numerosam suscepit prolem: unde genus ex Matre duxit Henricus 7. Rex Angliae
prudentissimus, cuius foe licissimo coniugio cum Edwardi 4. filia, e stirpe
Eboracensi, Regiae illae Lancastriensium and Eboracensium Familiae, ad
exoptatissimam Angliae pacem coaluerunt.

Illustrissimus hic Princeps, cognomento Plantagenet, Rex Castiliae and
Legionis, Dux Lancastriae, Comes Richmondiae, Leicestriae, Lincolniae and
Derbiae, Locumtenens Aquitaniae, Magnus Senescallus Angliae, Obiit Anno 22.
Regni Regis Richardi 2. Annoque Domini, 1399.

Hic requiescit Simon Burley, Under a fair Monument in the North Walk against
the Quire.
Banerettus, Quinque Portuum Praefectus, Ordinis Garterii Miles, and Richardo
2. Consiliarius long charissimus. Connubio sibi coniunctas habuit ex
amplissimis Familiis duas uxores: alteram Staffordiae, alteram Baronis de Roos
filiam. Ver^ difficilimo illo tempore, cum inter Angliae proceres omnia sub
iuvene Principe simultatibus agitarentur, in tantu^ no^nulloru^ odium incurrit,
ut Parliamentaria authoritate capite plect^^etur, Anno Domini, 1388. Posteri
autem eadem postea authoritate sub Rege Henrico quarto sunt restituti. Obiit
Anno Salutis, 1398.

Per versus patet hos,
Anglorum qui jacet hic flos, Within the North wall buried.

Legum qui tuta
dictavit vera statuta:
Ex Hengham dictus,
Radulphus vir benedictus.
Anno 1308.
In the North Walk, against the Quire, lie all these buried:

Sir John Poultney, Citizen, Draper, and Lord Mayor of London, in the year
1348. lies buried in a fair Chapel, builded by himself, on the North side
of Paul's Quire, wherein he founded 3. Chaplains.

Hamond Chickwell, six times L. Mayor of London, 1328.

Henry Guildford, Clarke, at the Altar of the Apostles, 1313.

Richard Newport, Bishop of London, 1318.

William Chatesleshunt, Canon in the New Work, who had a Chauntrie there.

Sir Nicholas Wokendon, Knight, at the Altar of S. Thomas, in the new Work,
1323.

John Cheshul, Bishop of London, 1279.

Robert Monden, and John Monden, his brother, both Canons, in the New Work,
1332.

Richard de Plesseys lies in the North Walk, just before S. Georges Chapel,
Anno 1361.

William Melford, and Richard de Placito, both Archdeacons of Colchester, 1345.
lie buried before Saint Thomas Chapel.

Adam de Bury, Holmes College.
Lord Mayor of London in the year 1364. lies buried in a Chapel of S. Mary
Magdalen, or the Holy Ghost, called Holmes College, because Roger Holmes,
Chancellor and Prebend of Paul's, was there buried, in the year 1400.

The Duchess of Bedford, Sister to Philip, Duke of Burgundy, Anno Dom. 1433.

Robert Fitzhugh, In the Quire.
Bishop of London, Anno, 1435.

Perpetuae pietati Sacrum.
Guil. Herberto, Pembrochiae Comiti, Equiti Aurato, A very beautiful Tomb,
wherein he lies buried with his wife.
praenobilis ordinis Anglici. Hen. 8. a Cubiculis: Edwardi 6. R. Equitum
Magistro: Walliae Praesidi: Tumultu Occidentali cum Russello and Grayo
Baronibus paribus auspiciis summae rerum praeposito: Maria Reginae contra
perduelles ac expeditione ad Augustam Veromanduorum bis totius exercitus duci:
bis summo in agro Caletum limitum Praefecto: Elizabethae Reginae Officiorum seu
magno Regiae Magistro. Pariter and Dominae Annae ex vetustae Parorum gente
oriundae, Sorori Katharinae Reginae, Hen. 8. R. sexto matrimonio conjunctae, ac
Marchionis Northhamptionii, prudentissimae Feminae, pietatis, religionis,
probitatis, omnisque Avitae virtutis retinentissimae fidis Comitis conjugi.
Secunda conjuge superstite, Georgio Salopiae Comite genita, insigni praeter
antiquum Nobilitatis Decus, uirtute femina.

Liberis relictis ex prima Henrico Pembr Comiti. Edwardo Equiti Aurato. Domina
Anna, Bar. Talbot nupta.


Henr. F. ac Comes P. P. Chatis. sibi ac suis P.

Obiit Aetatis, Salutis, Anno 63. 1569.




Si quis erat prude^s
unquam fidusque Senator, Right over against the F^^le of Pembrokes Tomb, in
the same I Will.

Si quis erat Patriae
charus amansque suae,
Si quis ad externas
Legatus idoneus oras,
Si cui justitiae
cura bonique suit,
Is Masonus erat,
sit tota Britannia testis,
Testis amor Procerum,
sit populique favor,
Tempore quinque suo,
reguantes ordine vidit,
Ho^^^ a Consiliis
quacuor ille fuit.
Tres and sex decies
vixit non amplius annos;
Hic tegitur corpus,
spiritus astra tenet.
Hunc Tumulum Conjux
posuit dilecta marito,
Quemque viro posuit,
destinat ipsa sibi.
Triste Nepos Carmen,
quem fecit adoptio natum,
Tum Patris inscripsit,
tum Patrui Tumulo.
Obiit Anno, 1566.
Alexandro Nowello, A fair Monument in the wall above John of Caunts Tomb.
Lancastriensi, prisca Nowellorum gente oriundo, Theologiae Doctori, Aedis S.
Pauli Decano, ad exemplum hospitali, Rob. Nowelli, cujus hic cum suis miscentur
cineres, Fratri, and opum quae sibi jure testamentario cesserunt, diribitori
pientissimo. Marianis temporibus propter Christum exulanti: Reducum^. verae
Religionis, contra Angliae Papistas duobus Libris assertori primae and ultimae
quadragesimalis Concionis per an. 30. p. m. continuos ad S. Elizabetham, summa
liberate Praeconi; Scholae Middletonianae Patrono; Coll. Aenei Nasi Oxonii,
ubi ab anno aetatis 13. Annos 13. studuit, 13. studiosis and 200. Libris annuis
opera, and impensis suis ampliati: Praesidi Scholae Paulinae plurimorum bonorum
auctori: Pietatis frequentissimis Concionibus and triplici Catechismo
propagatori: qui publicum se in utriusque Academiae, and Ecclesiarum exterarum
testimonium, atque aeternorum Principum Edwardi 6. and Elizabethae judicum
procerumque provocavit: Pauperum (Literatorum praecipue) nutritori: afflictorum
morbis corporis vel animi consolatori.

Hoc Sepulchrum ob munificentiam and merita erga Remp. and optimum statum
Ecclesiae suae ab eo pervigili administrat. redditum, Exec. O. D. S. M. Posuit.

Quam speciosa Vestigia
Evangelizantium pacem!
Exul quae amisit
primaevo flore Nowellus,
Foenore centena
repperit aucta redux
Dat Christus, reddit
danti longaevus honores,
Reddenti aeternos
gratia dantis habet,
Praeco, Auctor, Condus,
Christo, Colit, Ampliat, ornat,
Voce, Libris, Opibus,
Sabbatha, Templa, Schola;
Dans, meditans, orans,
Christi expiravit in ulnis,
Sic oritur, floret,
demoriturque Deo.
Sedit B. R. P. and Ecclesiae P. M. 42. Nonagenarius, cum nec animi nec
corporis occuli caligarent. Obiit, Anno Domini, 1601. Feb. 13.

Virtuti and Honori Sacrum.
Franciscus Walsinghamus, There is neither Tomb, or any other Monument, but
only this Inscription.
ortus Familia multis seculis illustri, claritatem generis Nobilitate, ingenii
praestantibusque animi dotibus superavit. Puer, ingenue domi educatus,
generosis moribus artibusque optimis animum excoluit. Adolescens, peregrinatus
in exteras Regiones, earum Instituta, Linguas, Policiam, ad civilem scientiam
reique publicae usum didicit. Iuvenis, exilium Maria regnante subiit
voluntarium Religionis ergo. Serenissimae Reginae Elizabethae, matura jam
aetate, Orator fuit apud Gallum, turbulentissimo tempore, annis co^pluribus:
rursum bis in Gallia^, semel in Scotiam, semel in Belgiam, super gravissimis
Principis negotiis Legatione functus est: eique annis sedecim ab intimis
Conciliis and secretis fuit, ac triennium Cantellarius Ducatus Lancastriae.
Quibus in muneribus tanta cum prudentia, abstinentia, munificentia,
moderatione, pietate, industria and sollicitudine versatus est; ut a multis
periculis Patriam liberarit, servarit Rempublicam, conformarit pacem, juvare
cunctos studuerit, imprimis quos doctrina aut bellica virtus commendarit,
seipsum denique neglexerit, quo prodisset aliis, eosque valetudinis and
facultatum suarum dispendio sublevaret.

In Matrimonio habuit lectissima^ feminam Vrsulam, e stirpe S. Barborum,
antiquae Nobilivatis: E quq unicam filiam suscepit, Franciscam, Philippo
Sydneio primum nuptam: deinde honoratissimo Comiti Essexiae

Obiit Apr. 6. 1590.
Shall Honor, These Verses, called Acrosticks are also there hanged up.
Fame,
and Titles of renown
In clods of clay
be thus enclosed still?
Rather will I,
though wiser wits may frown,
For to enlarge his fame,
extend my skill.
Right gentle Reader,
be it known to thee,
A famous Knight
does here interred lie,
Noble by birth,
renowned for policy,
Confounding foes,
which wrought our jeopardy.
In foreign Countries
their intents he knew,
Such was his zeal
to do his Country good,
When dangers would
by enemies ensue,
As well as they themselves
he understood.
Lanch forth ye Muses
into streams of praise,
Sing and sound forth
praiseworthy harmony;
In England Death
cut off his dismal days,
Not wronged by death,
but by false treachery.
Grudge not at this
unperfect Epitaph,
Herein I have
expressed my simple skill,
As the first fruits
proceeding from a graffe,
Make then a better
whosoever will.
Disce quid es, quid eris,
Memor esto quod morieris
E. W.
England, A Table hung upon the same Pillar by the other of Sir Francis
Walsongham, without any other Monument for each of them.
Netherland, the
Heavens and the Arts,
The Soldiers and the
World have made six parts
Of the Noble Sidney,
for none will suppose,
That a small heap of
stones can Sidney enclose.
His body has England,
for she it bred.
Netherland his blood,
in her defense shed.
The Heavens have his Soul,
the Arts have his Fame;
All Soldiers the grief:
the World his good Name.
Hic jacet Robertus Benn, de Newport Cranley, in Comitatu Surrey, Generosus.
Qui obiit decimo die mensis Februarii, Anno Verbi Incarnati, 1606. Cum ante
annos triginta, in vigore scilicet aetatis suae, mortis non immemor, Sepulturae
sibi locum in hac Ecclesia a Decano and Capitulo impetraverat. hanc novissimam
and ultimam suam voluntatem, Elizabetha Benn, dilecta Conjux ejus executa est.
Veniet iterum qui me in lucem reponet dies.
Ioannes Wolleius, Eques Auratus, Reginae Elizabethae a Secretioribus
Conciliis, Secretarius Linguae Latinae, Cancellarius Ordinis Periscelidis:
Doctrina, Pietate, Fide, Gravitate clarissimus. Obiit Anno 1595.
Wolleii, A very goodly Tomb, erected between the Chapels of St. George, and
our Lady, enclosing the bodies of Sir John Wolley, his wife, and Sir Francis
Wolley, his son, buried in Anno 1611.
clarum nomen,
Natusque Paterque,
Ambo Equites, Natus
Franciscus Patre Ioanne:
Clarus, ut haeredem
virtutis, amoris, honoris
Praestaret, Monumenta sibi
haec, and utrique Parenti
Constituit, generis, qui
nominis, unicus haeres:
Tam cito claros est
defecisse dolendum.
Ille Pater, lumen
literarum Nobile, sydus
Oxoniae, ex meritis
Reginae accitus Elizae,
Vt qui a Secretis cum
scriberat illa Latin,
Atque a Conciliis cum
consultaret in Aula,
At Periscelidis qui
Cancellarius esset,
Tantum illo ingenio voluir,
tantum instat in illo.
Non minus omnimoda
virtute illa inclyta Matter,
Nobilibus Patre and Fratre
illustrissima Moris;
Clara domo per se:
sed Elizam ascivit Eliza
Clarior ut fieret
Wolleio ornata marito,
Quo viduata, viro, quo
non praeclarior alter,
Nubat Egertono, repetat
sed mortuae primum.
Franciscus tandem, at nimium
cito, utrumque sequutus,
Hic jacet ante pedes
Eques Illustrissimus, illis,
Haec poni jussit, seque
and tria nomina poni,
Sic voluit, placuit Superis
pia grata voluntas.
Discite mortales, memores
sic esse Parentum,
Discite qui legitis, sic,
sic petit aethera virtus.
Inclyta Ioannes
Londini gloria gentis, A comely Tomb, at entering into the South I Will of the
Quire.

Is tibi qui Quondam
Paul Decanus erat,
Qui toties magno
resonabat pectore Christum,
Doctor and interpres
fidus Evangelii:
Qui mores hominum
multum sermon diserta
Formarat, vitae
sed probitate magis.
Quique Scholam struxit
celebrem cognomine Jesus,
Hac dormit tectus
membra Coletus humo.
Floruit sub Henrico 7. and Henrico 8. Reg. Obiit Anno Domini, 1519.
Disce mori mundo,
Vivere disce Deo.
This Epitaph was made by William Lily, the first Schoolmaster of Paul's
School: which was founded by John Colet, Doctor in Divinity, and Deane of
Paul's: son to Sir Henry Colet, Mercer, twice Lord Mayor of London.

Memoriae S.
Gulielmo Hewit, Next above this Tomb in the same South I Will.
Armigero
Roberti Hewit
A. Killamarch, in Agro. Derbiensi
Filio, secundo genito.
Qui mortuo Fratre, Natu majore,
Paternam crevit haereditatem,
Posterisque transmittit:
Nobilem Mercaturam exercuit.
Vita integerrima fuit, and moribus suavissimis. Bonarum literarum studia
promovit. Egenorum proventus largiter auxit.

Liberalitate,
Charitate,
Insignis,
Nec minor Pietate.
Religionem, cum Ministris sacris, and
coluit and fovit.
Ita per omnia se ubique gessit, ut
Probitatis,
Comitatis,
Candoris
Vivum exemplar.
Christum Redemptorem cogitans,
Vitam ante mortem consummaverit.
Filios genuit quatuor,
Ioannem,
Salomonem,
Thomam,
Gulielmum:
Et Filias duas.
Mariam,
Elizabetham.
Annum LXXVII. agens,
XII. Iun. CIO. D. XCIX. ad patriam
coelestem evocatus,
Magnum sui desiderium reliquit
Posteris,
Qui hoc pie ac moeven.
M. S.
Gulielmus Cokainus Eques Auratus, Adjoining to the other in that I Will*
Civis and Senator Bondinensis, septemque ab hinc annis Vrbis Praefectus:
Antiqua Cokainorum Derbiensium Familia oriundus. Qui bono publico vixit, and
damno publico decessit, and gaudio publico, Regem Iacobum, ad decorem hujus
domus Dei senescentis jam and corrugatae restituendum, solenniter huc venientem
consulatu suo, magnifice excepit: Idcirco in Templo publico, ad aeternam rei
memoriam

Hic situs est.

At vero and Famae celebritas, quae viget in ore Hominum, and gloria
Beatitudinis, quam migrando adeptus est, and splendour Sobolis, quam numerosam
genuit, atque nobilem reliquit, junctim efficient omnia, ne dicatur

Hic situs est.

Vna cum illo, tot homines mortui, quot in illo defunctae sunt virtutes;
simulque and acies ingenii, and popularis eloquii suada, and morum gravitas,
and probitas vitae, and candor mentis, and animi constantia, and prudentia
singularis, and very Senatoris insignia

Hic sepulta sunt.

Jam tuum est Lector, felicitatis ad culmen anhelare per ista vestigia laudis,
and venerandi imitatione exempli curare, ne unquam virtutis sic semina,
intereant, ut dicatur

Hic sepulta sunt.

Obiit 20. October. An. Dom. 1626. Et Aetatis suae 66.
Hic Nicolaum me
Baconem conditum
Existima illum, A fair Tomb in the midst of the Chancell, in the same I Will.
tam
diu Britannici
Regni secundum
Columen, exitium Malis,
Bonis Asylum, coeca
quem non extulit
Ad hunc honorem sors,
sed equitas, fides,
Doctrina, Pietas,
unica and Prudentia,
Neu morte reptum creed:
qui unica brevi
Vita perennes
emeruit duas, agit
Vitam secundam
coelites inter animos,
Fama implet orbem,
vita quae illi tertia est.
Hac positum in Ara est
corpus, olim animi domus,
Ara dicata
sempiternae memoriae.
Sacrum Memoriae.
D. Chr. Hattoni, A very fair and goodly Tomb out of the Chancell, above it.
Guil. Fill. Io. Nepo. Antiquiss. Hattonorum Gente oriundi. Regiae Majestatis D.
Elizabethae ex Nobilibus Stipatoribus: L. Vici: Sacratioris Camerae Generosoru^
unius, Praetorianorum Militum Ducis: Regii Pro-Camerarii: Sanctioris Concilii
Senatoris, Summi Angliae ac Oxon. Acad. Cancellarii: Ordinis Nobiliss.
San-Georgiani de Periscellide Equitis.

Maximo Principis omnium que bonorum moerore (cum 51. Annos coelebs vixisset)
20. November. Anno 1591. in Aedibus suis Holburnae pie fato functi.

Guil. Hattonus, Eques Auratus, ejus ex Sorore, Nepos, adoptione Filius, ac
haeres moestissimus, Pietatis ergo posuit.

Quae vero, These ses are inscribed on the other side of the Tomb.
quae digna
tuis virtutibus (Heroes)
Constituent Monumenta
tui? Si qualia debet,
Posteritas, si quanta
tibi prudentia justi
Quantus amor, si quanta
fuit facundia Linguae,
Et docus and pulchro
veniens in corpore virtus,
Illaque munificae
semper tibi copia dextrae;
Denique quanta fuit
magna tibi gratia quondam
Principis, Eque tuis
quae creverat inclyta factis.
Gloria tanta tibi
statuant Monumenta Nepotes.
Ipsa tuos caperet
vix tota Britanuia Manes.
Stay, Upon a Monument fixed on a Pillar by the Tomb*
and behold the mirror
of a dead man's house,
Whose lively person would
have made thee stay and wonder;
Look, and withal learn to know
how to live and dye renowned;
For never can clean life
and famous Herses sunder.
Hatton lies here,
whose name Hugh Lupus gave,
Lupus the Silices,
son of William Conqueror,
For Nigel, his clear servants sake,
Worship and Laud:
Lo, there the Spring; look here
the Honor of his Ancestrie.
When Nature molded him,
her thoughts were most on Mars;
And all the Heavens to make
him goodly, were agreeing:
Thence was he valiant, active,
strong, and passing comely,
And God did grace his mind
and spirit with gifts excelling.
Nature commends her
workmanship to Fortunes charge;
Fortune presents him to
the Court, and to the Queen:
Queen Eliz. (O Gods
dear Handmaid) his most Miracle,
Now hearken, Reader,
rarity not heard nor seen.
This blessed Queen, Mirror
of all that Albion ruled,
Gave favor to his faith,
and precepts to his hopeful time;
First, First, she made him one of her Moble Pentioners.
trained him in the stately
band of Pentioners:
Behold, how humble hearts
make easy steps to climb.
High carriage, honest life,
heart ever loyal,
Diligence, delight in duty,
God does reward:
So did this worthy Queen,
in her just thoughts of him, Next, Captain of her guard.

And (for her safety) made
him Captain of her Guard.
Now does she prune this Vine, Next, Vice Chamberlain, and of the Council.

and from her sacred breast
Lessons his life, makes wise
his heart for her great Councels,
And so Vice-Chamberlaine;
where foreign Princes eyes
Might well admire her choice,
wherein she most excels.
So sweetly tempred was
his soul with virtuous Balm;
Religious, Lastly, L. Chancellor of England.
just to God
and Caesar in each thing;
That he aspired to
the highest Subjects Seat,
Lord Chancellor (measure
and conscience of an holy King.)
Robe, Collar, Garter,
dead Figures of great Honor,
Almsdeeds, with faith,
honest in word, frank in dispense,
The poore's friend, not popular,
the Churches Pillar;
This Tomb shows the one,
the Heavens shrine all the other.
Franciscus Florus ad memoriam Heri sui defuncti luctusque sui solatium posuit.
Anno Domini, 1593.
Thomas Heneage, Eques Auratus, ex antiqua Heneagiorum Familia, A very goodly
Tomb Eastward behind the high Altar.
in Comitatu Lincolniensi oriundus; Ingenii splendore, morum, elegantia,
orationis facultate, and optimis studiis ornatissimus, Camerae Regiae
Thesaurarius, Pro-Camerarius, Ducatus Lancastriae Cancellarius, and ab intimis
Conciliis Elizabethae Reginae, cui privatae and principi, fide and fama integra
maximis negotiis spectatus, summa cum gratia, Annis 38. inservivit: Hic
secundum Christi

Adventum in pace expectat.
Vna cum Anna, uxore charissima, filia Nicolai Points, Equitis Aurati, ex
Joanna, filia Thomae Baronis Berkley, femina lectissima, sanctissimis moribus,
and a teneris ad mortem usque Elizabethae Reginae praedilecta Famula. Que illi
unicum filiolum infantia praereptum, and unica enixa filiam, Haeredem
Elizabetham, Moylo Finch, Equiti Aurato, enuptam.

Obiit ille 17. October. An. Dom. 1594.

Praeivit illa November. An. Dom. 1592.

Optimis and charissimis parentibus, Elizabethae Finch moestissima hoc posuit.

John Elmar, Both these lie before S. Georges Chapel without Monuments.
Bishop of London, buried in Anno, 1594.

Richard Fletcher, Bishop of London, buried in Anno, 1596.

These are the glories
of a worthy praise,
Which (Noble Baskervile)
here now are read,
In honor of thy life,
and latter days,
To number thee
among the blessed dead.
A pure regard
to thy Immortal part,
A spotless Mind,
a Body prone to pain,
A giving Hand,
and an un-vanquisht Heart,
And all these Virtues
void of all disdain.
And all these Virtues
yet not so unknown,
But Netherlands, Seas,
Indiaes, Spain, and France,
Can witness that these
Honors were thine own;
Which they reserve,
thy merit to advance:
That Valor should not
perish void of Fame,
Nor Noble Deeds,
but leave a Noble Name.
Eustacius de Fauconbridge, Regis Iusticiarius, Buried in the South I Will above
the Quire within the wall.
una atque altera Legatione perfunctus in Gallia, sub Ioanne and Henrico 3.
Regibus: Quibus ab intimis Conciliis, and supremus Angliae Thesaurarius fuit:
Post Concessionem Guil. de Sancta Maria huius Ecclesiae Antistitis, Electus est
in Episcopum Londinensem, Anno Verbi Incarnati, 1221. Consecratus a Benedicto,
Roffensi Episcopo, cum jam obesset Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis. Quumque
sedisset Annos 7. Menses 6. obiit diem pridie Call. November. Anno Salutis, 1228.

Henricus de Wengham, He lies also buried in the same South I Will above the Quire.
Regi Henrico 3. a sacris, and Cancellarius, Decanus de Totenhale, and S.
Martini London, Camerarius Gasconiae; Vir (ut inquit Florilogus) curialis,
discretus, and circumspectus. He also lies buried there
Electus Anno Christi 1259. Wintoniensis Episcopus, consentire noluit. Tandem,
post mortem Fulconis Basset, hujus Ecclesiae Pontificis, eodem anno in Episc.
Londin. consecratus fuit, sed vix tribus annis sedit.

Obiit Anno Salutis 126^. At the East end behind the high Altar.

Hoc in loco requiescit in Domino Erkenwaldus 3. post Anglo-Saxonum in
Britannia ingressum Episcopus Londinensis. Episcopi.
Cujus in Episcopatu and ante Episcopatum vita and conversatio fuit
sanctissima; 1. Mellitus. 2. Wina. 3. Erkenwaldus. 4. Walcherus. 5. Ingualdus
6. Egulplnes. 7. Wigherus. 8. Edbrithus. 9. Edgarus. 10. K^ewalchus. 11.
Edbaldus. 12. Edbertus. 13. Osmondus. 14. Ethehtothus. 15. Celbertus. 16.
Rebulpbus. 17. Swithulphus. 18. Eadsinus. 19. Wilsiue. 20. Ethelwardus. 21.
Eadstanus.
ex Nobili Prosopia oriundus. Offae, Orientalium Saxonum Regis erat filius, ad
fidem Christianam a Mellito primo London. Episcopo, Anno Domini 642. conversus.

Is priusquam Episcopus factus esset, dua praeclara construxit Monasteria
sumptibus suis, de bonis quae jure haereditario sibi obvenerunt: unum sibi in
finibus Australium Saxonum loco, qui Certesey vocatur: Alterum Edelburgae
Sorori suae feminae laudatiffimae, ad Berching in ditione Orientalium Saxonum.

In Episcopatum vero Anno Salutis, 675. a Theodoro, Dorobernensium sive
Cantuariae Archiepiscualia sacratus est. Sebbam, Orientalium Saxonum Regem ad
Christi fidem convertit, and salutari Baptismatis unda suis manibus perfudit,
qui statim mundo renuncians, Isli Episcopi in Margin notati, post Erkenwaldum,
seriatim in Cathedra Londinens. usque in tempora Edwardi senioris Anglorum
Regis successerunt. Quorum omnium adeo obsolevit memoria, ut nec eorum acta,
nec mausolea s^^an^ur.
se totum Deo addixit, and in hac ipsa Ecclesia Archa Marmorea (quae ad nostra
usque tempora permanet) sepultus est. Idem Erkenwaldus celeberrimum hoc S.
Pauli Templum novis aedificiis auxit, proventubus locupletavit, and eidem
immunitates nonnullas a Regibus impetravit. Tandem, circiter Annum Domini 683.
spiritum Deo reddidit, postquam Annis 11. in Pontificatu sedisset, and
magnifico Sepulchro hic conditus est. quod nostra memoria circiter Annum Domini
1533. hoc loco visebatur.

Michael Norborow, In the new works of S. Dunstanes Chapel.
Bishop of London, 1361.

Robert Brewer, Deane of Paul's, 1366.

Adam de Bury, Lord Mayor of London, 1390.

Ralph Baldocke, In our Lady Chapel, at the East end of the Quire.
Bishop of London, 1313.

Robert Breybrooke, Canon of Lichfield, Bishop of London, and made Lord
Chancellor in the sixth year of King Richard the second. R. Baldocke was
Founder of that Chapel.
He sat Bishop 20. years, and deceased in Anno 1404.

John Stokesley, Bishop of London, Anno 1539.

Henry Lacy, In the new work of Paul's between our Lady Chapel and Saint
Dunslanes.
Earl of Lincoln, had a fair Monument erected for him with his picture in
Armor, lying on it crosse-legged (like a Knight Templer) as one that professed
his uttermost endeavor, for defense of the holy Land against the Infidels. He
was buried in Anno 1310. and his Monument is greatly defaced.

Some have noted that in digging the foundation of this new work, Will. Paston.
Chapel on the South I Will of Paul's builded* Scalps of Oxen found in digging the
foundation.
namely, of a Chapel on the South side of Paul's Church, there were found more
than an hundred scalpes of Oxen or Kine, in the year one thousand three
hundred and sixteen, which thing (say they) confirmed greatly the opinion of
those, which have reported, that (of old time) there had been a Temple of
Jupiter, and that there was daily sacrifice of beasts.

Othersome both wise and learned, have thought the Buckes head borne before the
Procession of Paul's, on Saint Paul's day, to signify the like. But true it is,
I have read an ancient Deed to this effect:

Sir William Baud, Knight, the third of Edward the first, in the year 1274. on
Candlemas day, granted to Harvy de Borham, Deane of Paul's, and to the Chapter
there, that in consideration of twenty two Acres of ground or land, by them
granted within their Manor of Westley in Essex, to be enclosed into his Park
of Curingham; he would (for ever) upon the Feast day of the Conversion of Paul
in VVinter give unto them a good Do, seasonable and sweet, and upon the Feast
of the Commemoration of Saint Paul in Summer, A Bucks head ^orn before the
Processio^ at Paul's.
a good Buck, and offer the same at the high Altar, the same to be spent
amongst the Canons residents: the Do to be brought by one man at the hour of
Procession, and through the Procession to the high Altar; and the bringer to
have nothing: the Bucke to be brought by all his meyney in like manner, and
they to have paid unto them by the Chamberlain of the Church twelve pence
only, and no more to be required.

This Grant he made, and for performance, bound the Lands of him and his
heirs to be distrained on: and if the Lands should be evicted, that yet he
and his heirs should accomplish the gift. Witnesses, Richard Tilbery, William
de Wockendon, Richard de Harlowe, Knights, Peter of Stanford, Thomas of Waldon,
and some others.

Sir Walter Baude, son to William, confirmed this gift, in the thirtieth of
the said King; and the witnesses thereunto, were Nicholas de Wockendon, Rich.
de Rokeley, Thomas de Mandevile, John de Rochford, Knights, Richard de
Broniford, William de Marks, William de Fulham, and other. Thus much for the
Grant.

Now, what I have heard by report, and have partly seen, it follows:

On the Feast day of the Commemoration of Saint Paul, the Bucke being brought
up to the steps of the high Altar in Paul's Church, at the hour of Procession,
the Deane and Chapter being apparelled in Coapes and Vestments, with Garlands
of Roses on their heads, they sent the body of the Bucke to baking, and had the
head fixed on a Pole, borne before the Cross in their Procession, until they
issued out of the West door; where the Keeper that brought it, blowed the
death of the Bucke, and then the Horners that were about the City, presently
answered him in like manner: For the which pains, they had each man of the
Dean and Chapter, four pence in money, and their Dinner, and the Keeper that
brought it, was allowed, during his abode there (fore that service) Meat,
Drink, and Lodging, at the Deane and Chapters, charges, and five shillings in
money at his going away, together with a Loaf of bread, having the picture of
Saint Paul upon it, etc.

There was belonging to the Church of Saint Paul, for both the days, two
special suits of Vestments, the one embroidered with Buckes, the other with
Does, both given by the said Bauds (as I have heard.) Thus much for that matter.

Now to the residue of the Monuments which are beneath the stairs, in the
sides and body of the Church.

Sir John Beauchamp, In a comely Chapel in the body of the Church, on the
South side.
Constable of Dover, Warden of the Cinque Ports, Knight of the Garter, the
son of Sir Guy Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, and brother to Thomas Earl of
Warwick, lies buried in the body of the Church, on the South side, 1358.
within a proper Chapel purposely made for him.

This deceased Nobleman (by ignorant people) has been erroneously mistermed,
Diverse fond peoples opinion concerning Duke Humfrey, buried in Paul's Church.
and said to be Duke Humfrey, the good Duke of Gloucester: who lies honorably
buried at Saint Albans, in Hartfordshire, twenty miles from London. In idle and
frivolous opinion of whom, some men (of late times) have made a solemn meeting
at his Tomb, upon Saint Andrews day in the morning (before Christmasse) and
concluded on a breakfast or dinner, as assuring themselves to be servants, and
to hold diversity of offices under the good Duke Humfrey.

Likewise on May Day, Tankard-bearers, Watermen, and some other of like quality
beside, would use to come to the same Tomb early in the morning, and
(according as the other) have delivered serviceable presentation at the same
Monument, by strewing herbs, and sprinkling fair water on it, as in the duty
of servants, and according to their degrees and charges in Office. But as
Master Stowe has discreetly advised such as are so merrily disposed, or simply
profess themselves to serve Duke Humfrey in Paul's: A due and fit Penance for
fond Duke Humfreyes idle servants.
if punishment of losing their dinners daily there, be not sufficient for
them; they should be sent to St. Albans, to answer there for their
disobedience, and long absence from their so highly well-deserving Lord and
Master, because in their merry disposition they please so to call him.

Margaret, Countess of Shrewsbury, in the Crowdes, or Jesus Chapel, as
appears by an Inscription on a Pillar there.

Here before the Image of JESUS, lies the Worshipful and right Noble Lady
Margaret, Margaret Countess of Shrewsbury, her Monument painted over the entry
of Jesus chapel.
Countess of Shrewsbury, late wife of the true and victorious Knight, and
redoubtable Warrior, 1. Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury; which Worshipful man
dyed in Guien, for the right of this Land. She was the first daughter, and one
of the heirs of the right famous and renowned Knight, Richard Beauchamp, late
Earl of Warwick (which dyed in Roane) and of Dame Elizabeth his wife; the
which Elizabeth was daughter and heir to Thomas, late Lord Berkly, on his
side, and on her mothers side, Lady Lisle, and Ties. Which Countess passed
from this world the fourteenth day of June, in the year of our Lord 1468. On
whose soul JESUS have mercy, Amen. Wenlocke, by his last Will, dated 1477.
appointed, that there should be dispended upon a Monument, over the Lady of
Shrewsbury, where she is buried, before Jesus, one hundred pounds. He left Sir
Humfrey Talbot his Supervisor. This Sir Humfrey Talbot, Knight, Lord Marshall
of the Town of Callis, made his Will the year 1492. He was the younger son
of John Earl of Shrewsbury, and Margaret his wife. He appointed a Stone to be
put in a Pillar, before the grave of his Lady Mother in Paul's, of his
Portraiture and Arms, according to the Will of John VVenlock: But for want of
room and lightsomenesse in that place, it was concluded, that the Image of
Jesus should be curiously painted on the wall in Paul's Church, over the door
that enters into the said Chapel of Jesus, and the Portraiture also of the
said Lady Margaret, Countess of Shrewsbury, kneeling in her mantle of Arms,
with other of her Progeny; all which was so performed, and remains till this
day.

In the Chapel of Jesus, Thomas Dowroy, William Lamb, 1578. and many other
have been interred.

John of London under the North Roode, 1266.

John Lovell, Clarke.

John Roman.

John of Saint Olave.

Walter Bloxley.

Sir Allen Boxhul, Knight of the Garter, Constable of the Tower, Custos of the
Forest and Park of Clarendon, the Forest of Brokholt, Grovell, and Melchet,
buried beside S. Erkenwalds Shrine.

Hic jacet Dominus Richardus de Piriton, An Inscription in brass, by sir John
Beauchamps Tomb.
quondam Archidiaconus Colcestriae, Canonicus and Stagiar, hujus Ecclesiae. Qui
obiit 26. die Augusti, Anno Domini, 1387. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. John
Nevil, In Saint Thomas Chapel, near the North door.
Lord Latymer, in Anno 1542. whose widow was the last wife unto King Henry the
eighth, lies there interred; but his Tomb is very much wronged and defaced.

Thomas Lynacrus, A brass Plate above in the wall, near the North door.
Regis Henrici 8. Medicus, Vir and Graece and Latin atque in re Medica long
eruditissimus. Multos aetate sua languentes, and qui jam animam desponderant,
vitae restituit: Multa Galeni opera Latina lingua mira and singulari facundia
vertit. Egregium opus de emendata structura Latini sermonis, amicorum rogatu,
paulo ante mortem edidit. Medicinae studiosis Oxoniae publicas lectiones duas,
Cantabrigiae unam in perpetuum stabilivit. In hac Vrbe Collegium Medicorum
fieri sua industria curavit, cujus and Praesidens proximus electus est: Frauds
dolosque mire perosus, fidus amicis, omnibus ordinibus juxta charus: Aliquot
annis antequam obierit Presbyter factus. Plenus annis, ex hac vita migravit
multum desideratus, Ann. Domini 1524. die 7. October.

Vivat post Funera Virtus.

Thomae Lynacro clarissimo Medico, Ioannes Caius posuit, Anno 1557.
Memoriae Sacrum.
Edwardo Stanhopo, Michaelis Stanhopiex ordine Equestri filio, A Monument
erected in the wall, near to the stairs going up into the North Quire.
Equiti Aurato, Legum Doctori, Episcopi L^ndinensis Cancellario, Archiepiscopi
Cantuariensis Vicario Generali, in publicis Ecclesiae and Reipublicae negotiis
versatissimo. Qui certa spe in Christo resurgendi, pie placideque animam Deo
reddidit, die 16. Martii, 1608.

Ioannes, Baro Stanhopus de Harington, and Michael Stanhopus, Eques Auratus,
fratres moestissimi, Officiosae Pietatis ergo P. P. Thomas Kempe, A comely
Chapel founded by himself on the north side the body of the Church.
Bishop of London, in a proper Chapel, termed of the Trinity, lies there
buried in Anno 1489. As appears not only by his name and Arms thereon in
diverse places; but likewise by this ensuing inscription, engraven on a Plate,
and fixed in the same Chapel.

Infra Capellam istam requiescit corpus D. Thomae Kemp, quondam Episcopi
London, fundatoris eiusdem, and unius Cantariae perpetuae in eadem. Qui multa
bona tempore vitae suae Ecclesiae Sancti Pauli dedit, and stetit 39. Annis, 84.
diebus Episcopus London. Ac obiit 28. die mensis Martii, An. Domini 1489. Cujus
animae propitietur Deus. Amen. Richard Vaughan, In the same Chapel.
likewise Bishop of London, lies buried in the said Chapel, 1607.

Richard Fitz-Iames, Beneath the north-west Pillar, that supports Paul's
steeple, in a Chapel builded by himself.
Bishop of London, lies buried under a fair Tomb, and in Saint Paul's
Chapel, builded of Timber, with stayres mounting up thereto, over his Tomb
of gray Marble, in Anno 1521. But this Chapel was burned by fire falling from
the steeple, and his Tomb taken thence.

Gulielmo Lilio, A Brass plate fixed in the wall, by the great North door.
Pauliae Scholae olim Praeceptori Primario, and Agnetae Conjugi, in
sacratissimo hujus Templi Coemiterio hinc a tergo nunc destructo consepultis:
Georgius Lilius, hujus Ecclesiae Canonicus, parentum memoriae pie consulens,
Tabellam hanc ab amicis conservatam, hic reponendam curavit.

Obiit ille G. L. An. Dom. 1522. Calend. Mart. Vixit An. 54.

Memoriae Sacrum.
Thomas Ravis, A fair Tomb in the wall, at the upper end of the North I Will,
below.
claris natalibus Mauldenae in Suthreia natus, Regius Alumnus in Schola
VVestmonasteriensi educatus, in Academiam Oxoniensem adscitus, omnes Academicos
honores consequutus, and Margistratibus perfunctus, Decanus Ecclesiae Christi
ibidem constitutus, and bis Academiae Pro-Cancellarius. Vnde ob doctrinam,
gravitatem, and spectatam prudentiam, a Rege Iacobo, primum ad Episcopatum
Glocestrensem provectus, deinde ad Londinensem translatus, and demum a Christo,
dum Ecclesiae, Patriae, and Principi vigilaret, in Coelestem Patriam evocatus,
placide pieque emigravit, and quod mortale fuit, certa spe resurgendi hic
deposuit, die 14. Decembris, An. Salutis 1609.

Gulielmus Harington, In S. (...) Chapel, near to the great South door.
Iurisconsultus, Protonotarius Apostolicus, D. Pauli Canonicus, ex illis quos
Residentiarios dicunt: Patria Eboracensis natus, in pago qui Estryngton
vocitatur, Patre Gulielmo Haringtono, viro claro, genere orto in pago
Commerlandiae non ignobili, qui Neubyging nuncupatur; and Matre Ioanna, Filia
Gulielmi Haskae, aliter Balivi dicti, viri Generosi in eodem pago Estryngton
nata: memor exitus vitae, qui omnibus horis impendet, hoc sibi Sepulchrum
posuit. Anno Salutis humanae, 1523.

Six Lines this Image
shall delineate, A Table hanging on a Pillar, in the South I Will.

Hight Croft, high-borne,
in spirit and virtue high;
Approved, beloved, a Knight,
stout Mars his mate,
Loves fire, Wars flame,
in Heart, Head, Hand, and Eye:
Which flame, Wars Comet,
Grace now so resignes,
That fixed in Heaven, in
Heaven and Earth it shines.
Prosopopeia.
The Womb and Tomb
in Name be not so near,
As Life to Death,
and Birth is to the Beer.
Oh! then how soon to Beer
are Captains brought,
That now do live, and dye
now with a thought?
Then, Captains, stay and
read, still think on me,
For, with a thought,
what I am, you may be.
As Mars near Mors does sound,
So Mors near Mars is found.
1. Da. of H.
Hoc Saxo tegitur corpus Thomae Creke, Somewhat near to the Convocation
stairs, a fair plated stone upon the ground.
L. Doctoris, and Almae Curiae Cantuar. de Arcubus Londini Advocatorum unius,
viri utriusque Iuris tam Canonici quam Civilis scientia non modo peritissimi,
sed and eorundem usu and praxi longo tempore exercitatissimi. Cujus in Clientem
causas defendendo, industria quanta fuit, quanta integritas, quanta fides,
quanta denique si quid contra votum, and (ut sibi videbatur) aequitatem,
accidebat solicitudo, and ii qui ejus usi sunt patrocinio optime praedicare
possunt, and celebris illius famae memoria nunquam moritura verissime
praedicavit.

Honest vixit,
Neminem laesit,
Suum cuique tribuit.
Hic requiescit in Domino Gulielmus Dethick, In the body of the Church, on the
South side, a fair stone, thus inscribed.
Eques Auratus, filius and haeres Gilberti Dethick, Equitis Aurati. Qui ambo
fuerunt Garterii Principales Reges Armorum Angliae. Cor. hic An. 1584. Aetatis
suae 48. Ille Anno 1612. Aetatis suae 70. in Domino obdormierunt, expectantes
resurrectionem per Jesum Christum Salvatorem nostrum.

Domina Thomasina sup. 40. Annos uxor praedict. Williel. and filii Georgius,
Gilbertus and Henricus pietatis ergo posuerunt.

Hic jacet Robertus Hare, A fair plated stone in the West end of the middle
I Will.
quondam Cler. Thesaur. and Scriptor Rotulorum de Recept. and exitu Thesaur.
Scaccarii. Qui obiit senex die 2. November. An. 1611.

Now, to close up all these Memories, concerning this Cathedral Church of
Saint Paul's, London, we may not be unmindfull of a very bountiful Benevolence
given thereto, by Master William Parker, whose worthy gifts deserve Volumes of
Remembrance. Five hundred pounds given by M. William Parker, toward the
glasing of Paul's windows.
By his last Will and Testament he has given the sum of five hundred pounds,
to be employed in the repairing of the VVindowes of Paul's Church, from the
upper end of the Stairs, from the first entering of the Quire, unto the upper
end of the Church: By the order and direction of the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor of the City of London, and the Right Worshipful the Aldermen, his
Brethren, for the time being. So are the express words, set down in the
Codecill annexed to his Will.

Without the North gate of Paul's Church, Pater noster Row.
from the end of the Old Exchange, West up Pater noster Row, by the two Lanes
out of Paul's Church, the first out of the Cross Isle of Paul's, the other out
of the body of the Church, about the midst thereof, and so West to the golden
Lion, be all of this Ward, as is aforesaid. The houses in this Street, from
the first North Gate of Paul's Churchyard, unto the next Gate, were first
builded without the Wall of the Churchyard, by Henry Walleis, Mayor, in the
year 1282. The Rents of those houses go to the maintenance of London Bridge.

This Street is now called Pater noster Row, because of Stationers or
Text-writers, that dwelled there, who wrote and sold all sorts of Books then
in use, namely, A. B. C. with the Pater noster, Ave, Creed, Graces, etc.

There dwelled also Turners of Beads, Pater noster makers.
and they were called Pater noster makers, as I read in a Record of one Robert
Nikke, Pater noster maker, and Citizen, in the reign of Henry the fourth, and
so of other.

At the end of this Pater noster Row, Ave Mary lane.
is Ave Mary lane, so called upon the like occasion, of Text-writers and
Bead-makers then dwelling there.

And at the end of that Lane is likewise Creed lane, Creed lane.
late so called, but sometime Spurrier Row, of Spurriers dwelling there. Amen
lane.
And Amen lane is added thereunto, betwixt the South end of Warwick lane, and
the North end of Ave Mary lane.

At the North end of Ave Mary lane, Duke of Britains house, since Pembrookes
Inn, then Aburgaveny house, and now Stationers Hall.
is one great House, builded of stone and timber, of old time pertaining to
John Duke of Britain, Earl of Richmond, as appears by the Records of Edward
the second. Since that, it was called Pembrookes Inn, near unto Ludgate, as
belonging to the Earls of Pembrooke in the times of Richard the second, the
18. year, and of Henry the sixth, in the 14. year. It was after called
Aburgaveny house, and belonged to Henry late Lord of Aburgaveny. But the
Worshipful Company of Stationers have (since then) purchased it, and made it
the Hall for the meeting of their Society, converting the stone-work into a new
fair Frame of timber, and applying it to such serviceable use, as themselves
have thought convenient.

Betwixt the South end of Ave Mary lane, and the North end of Creed lane, is
the coming out of Paul's Churchyard, on the East, and the high street on the
West, toward Ludgate, and this was called Bowyer Row, Bowyer Row.
of Bowyers dwelling there in old time, now worn out by Mercers, and others.

In this Street, on the North side, is the Parish Church of Saint Martin, a
proper Church, Parish Church of S. Martin by Ludgate.
and lately new builded: for in the year 1437. John Michael, Mayor, and the
Communalty, granted to William Down, Parson of S. Martins at Ludgate, a
parcel of ground, containing in length 28. foot, and in breadth 24. foot, to
set and build their steeple upon, etc.

The Monuments here have been of William Seven-oake, Mayor, 1418.

Henry Belwase, and John Gest, 1458.

William Taverner, Gentleman, 1466.

John Barton, Esquire, 1439.

Stephen Peacocke, Mayor, 1533.

Sir Roger Cholmley.

Gulielmo Huseo Coelebi, ^ comely Monuments, each by other, in the East end of
the Quire.
Almae Curiae Cantuariensis Registro, literarum scientia, vitae probitate,
morumque urbanitate claro, notis E. amicis omnibus dilecto. Antonius and
Katharina conjuges, Chari parents orbati filio Monumentum hoc dolentes
posuerunt. Obiit quinto Kalendas Novembris, Anno Dom. 1559. vixit annos 28.
menses 3. dies 7.

Obdormiat in Domino.

Hic situs est Antonius Huse, Armiger, Londini natus, Archiepiscopi
Cantuariensis, atque Capitulis de Pauli Londinen. Registrarius primarius. Qui
aliquot annos Judicis causarum Maritimarum officio integre functus, ac etiam in
Magistratorum Curiae Cancellariae concessum cooptatus, vergente demum aetate ad
Praefectum Collegiorum Mercatorum Angliae, tam apud Belgas, quam apud
Moscovitas, and Rhutenos commercia exercentium accitus, lingua facundus,
memoria tenax, ingenio, prudentia, doctrinaque pollens, morum comitate and
probitate gratiosus, Laurentio, Gulielmo, Gilberto, and Vrsula liberis, ex
Katharina conjuge procreatis non infelix, sexagesimo tertio aetatis Anno e vita
excessit, Kalendis Junii, An. Dom. 1560.

Here lie the bodies of Florens Caldwell, Another sightly Monument in the same
wall.
Esquire, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, and Aldermans Deputy of the Ward
of Faringdon without: And Mary Wild, his first wife; by whom he had issue one
daughter, named Mary, married to Thomas Gourney, Esquire. And Sibill Green,
his second wife. which Florens deceased the (...) and Mary his wife the 19. day
of June, An. Dom. 1590. etc.

Earth goes to Earth treads on Earth as to Earth shall to Earth As Mold to
Mold, Glittering in Gold, Return nere should, Go ere he would.


Earth upon Earth goes to Earth though on Earth shall from Earth Consider may,
Naked away, Be stout and gay, Pass poor away.


Be merciful and charitable,
Relieve the poor as thou art able,
A Shroud to thy grave,
Is all thou shall have.
Thomas Cook, A very fair new Monument in the same wall.
Citizen and Haberdasher of London, of little Wolton, in the County of
Lancaster, had to wife Joyce Hanbury, with whom he lived thirty years, and
had issue one son, and three daughters; whereof two (viz. Elizabeth, wife to
John Bourman, Mercer, and Mary, wife to Thomas Bailey, Skinner) be yet living.
He departed this life the 17. day of April, 1608. in the 55. year of his age.
She (his said wife, sole Executrix of his last Will and Testament) yet
surviving (to the memory of her dear husband) erected this Monument, 1612.

To God, his Country,
and the Poor, he had
A zealous soul, true heart,
and liberal mind:
His wife, his children,
and his kindred sad,
Lack of his love, his care
and kindness find:
Yet is their sorrow swaged,
with the thought,
He has attained the
Happiness he sought.
Dies mortis, aeternae vitae natalis est.
To the Memory of William Yeardley, Gentleman, and Elizabeth his wife, sometime
of this Parish. He died the 28. day of October, 1523. She died the 20. day of
July, 1593.

William Yeardley, A Table hanging on a pillar in the Chancell.
and
Elizabeth his wife,
Who lived on earth
free from strife,
Not far from this,
in earth does lie,
To show, that all
that live, must dye:
Where they do
quietly expect,
To rise again,
as Gods elect,
They left four
daughters, and a son,
Who left them this,
when they were gone.
Iaspero Cholmley, A comely Monument in the same wall, but on the quires South
side.
Armig. Wigorniensi, Clerico Recognitionum capiendi, sive recognosc. Virtute
cujusdam statuti fact. and ordinati 23. Hen. 8. pro debit. recuperan.
Iusticiario Pa. and Quor. Dom. Reginae in Com. Middl. Patri suo chariss. and
amantiss. Ioannes Cholmley, hoc Monu. dolens posuit, december liberos ex Margareta
sua unica conjuge procreatos, viz. Ioannem, Thomam, Gulielmum, Hugonem,
Franciscum, Mariam, Iulianam, Margaretam, Annam and Ianam tempore mortis
superstites reliquit. Obiit ultimo die October. Anno a^tatis suae 48. and Salutis
nostrae 1586.

Here lies the body of Thomas Antrobus, A new fair Monument in the same wall.
Esquire, who deceased the first day of May, 1611. Having issue by Elizabeth
his late wife (the daughter of Ralph Woodcocke, Citizen and Alderman of London)
three sons and two daughters, viz. Thomas, John, Richard, Elizabeth, and
Margaret.

Here-under lies buried Amy Edlyn, A small Monument in the same wall.
and her son with her, the daughter of Richard Edlyn, of Woodhau^e, in
Middlesex, and the wife of Robert Gomersall, Citizen and Ironmonger of London,
who departed this life the 2. day of September, 1586. and left behind her one
son and one daughter.

On the South side of this Street, The Black Friars.
is the turning into the Black Friars: which Order (sometime) had their houses
in Old-borne, where they remained for the space of five and fifty years; and
then, in the year 1276. Gregory Rocksley, Mayor and Barons of this City.
Mayor, and the Barons of this City, granted and gave to Robert Kilwarby,
Archbishop of Canturbury, two Lanes or Ways next the Street of Baynards
Castle, and also the Tower of Mountfitchit to be destroyed; in place of which,
the said Robert builded the late new Church of the Black Friars, and placed
them therein. King Edward the first and Eleanor his wife were great benefactors
thereunto. This was a large Church, and richly furnished with Ornaments:
wherein diverse Parliaments, and other great meetings have been holden: Namely,
in the year 1450. the 28. of Henry the sixth, a Parliament was begun at
Westminster, and adjourned to the Black Friars in London, and from thence to
Leycester. In the year 1522. the Emperor Charles the fifth was lodged there.

In the year 1524. the fifteenth of April, a Parliament was begun at the
Black Friars, wherein was demanded a Subsidy of 800000. pounds, to be raised
of goods and lands, 4. s. in every pound, and in the end was granted 2. s. of
the pound, of their goods and lands, that were worth 20. pounds, or might
dispend 20. l. by the year, and so upward, to be paid in two years.

This Parliament was adjourned to Westminster, Parliament at the Black Friars,
called the Black Parliament.
amongst the black Monks, and ended in the Kings Palace there the 14. of
August, at nine of the clock in the night, and was therefore called the Black
Parliament.

In the year 1529. Cardinal Campeius the Legate, with Cardinal Woolsey, sat
at the said Black Friars, where before them, as Legates and Judges, was
brought in question the Kings marriage with Queen Katharine, as to be
unlawful, before whom the King and Queen were cited and summoned to appear,
etc. whereof read more at large in my Annals, as I have touched it.

The same year, in the month of October, began a Parliament in the Black
Friars, in the which Cardinal Woolsey was condemned in the Praemunire: this
house valued at 104. l. 15. s. 5. d. was surrendered the 12. of November, the
30. of Henry the eighth.

There were buried in the ancient Church, Margaret, Queen of Scots.

Hubert de Brugh, Earl of Kent, translated from their old Church, by Old
Bourne.

Robert de Attabeto, Earl of Bellimon.

Dame Isabel, wife to Sir Roger Bygot, Earl Marshall.

William and Iame Huse, children to Dame Illis, Countess of Arundell, and by
them lies Dame Illis, daughter to the Earl Warren, and after Countess of
Arundell.

Dame I Would, wife to Sir Walter daughter to the Lord Ferrers of Chartley.

Richard de Brewes.

Richard Strange, son to Robert Strange.

Elizabeth, daughter to Sir Bartholomew Badlesmere, wife to Sir William Behan,
Earl of Northampton.

Marsh, The Earls of March and Hereford, and Elizabeth, Countess of Arundell.

Dame Joan, daughter to S. Io. Carne, first wife to Sir Gwide Brian.

Hugh Clare, Knight, 1295.

The heart of Queen Heleanor the Foundresse.

The heart of Alfence her son.

The hearts of John and Margaret, children to William Valence.

Sir William Thorpe, Justice.

The Lord Lioth, of Ireland.

Maude, wife to Geffrey Say, daughter to the Earl of Warwick.

Dame Sible, daughter to Will. Pattehulle, wife to Roger Beauchampe, and by her
Sir Richard or Roger Beauchampe.

The Lord S. Amand, and Dame Elizabeth his wife, daughter to the Duke of
Lancaster.

Sir Stephen Collington, Knight.

Sir William Peter, Knight.

The Countess of Huntington.

Duchess of Exceter, 1425.

Sir John Cornwall.

Lord Fanhope died at Ampthill in Bedfordshire, and was buried here, 1443.

Sir John Triptofte.

Earl of Worcester, beheaded, 1470. and by him in his Chapel, James Turchet.

Lord Audley, beheaded, 1497.

William Paston, and Anne, daughter to Edmond Lancaster.

The Lord Beaumond.

Sir Edmond Cornwall, Baron of Burford.

The Lady Nevil, wedded to the Lord Douglas, daughter to the duke of Exceter

Richard Scrope, Esquire.

Dame Katharine Vaux, alias Cobham.

Sir Thomas Brown, and Dame Elizabeth his wife.

Jane Powell.

Thomas Swinforth.

John Mawsley, Esquire, 1432.

John de la Bear, Nicholas Ear, Geffrey Spring, William Clifford, Esquires.

Sir Thomas Brandon, Knight of the Garter, 1509.

William Stalworth, Merchant-Taylor, 1518.

William Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, nominate, but not created, the third of
Henry the eighth, etc. Parish Church of S. Anne new builded in the Black
Friars.


There is a Parish of St. Anne, within the Precinct of the Black Friars, which
was pulled down with the Friars Church, by sir Thomas Corden: but in the
reign of Queen Mary, he being forced to find a Church to the Inhabitants,
allowed them a lodging Chamber above a staire, which since that time, to wit,
in the year 1597. fell down, and was again (by collection therefore made)
new builded and enlarged in the same year, and was dedicated on the eleventh
of December.

Here I thought good to insert the Copy of an ancient Record, concerning the
Privileges and Liberties (in elder times) granted to the said Black Friars,
which happened to my hands by friendly information, and the original thereof
brought me, as here Verbatim it follows:

Notes and Articles for maintenance of the ancient Liberties and Privileges of
the late dissolved Black Friars, near Ludgate in London.
1. FIrst, it appears, that on the 25. day of November, Job. Alforde executed
at Tyborne.
1484. John Alforde, Shoemaker, dwelling within the Black Friars in London,
was apprehended and put to death at Tyborne for Felony, Thomas Newland, alias
Norland, and William Martin then being Sheriffs of London, who sought to have
had the goods of the said Felon; but the Prior of the said Black Friars
withstood them, and possessed the same goods to the use of the Lord of S.
John's, of whom the same Friars was then holden.

2. Item, The Bridge at the Black Friars.
The Lord of St. John's has usually made the Bridge at the Thames, adjoining to
the said Friars, and not the City of London, etc.

3. Item, Incorporating of the Prior and Covent*
The Prior and Covent were incorporated by Act of Parliament, in the time of K.
Hen. the 6. whereby they might prescribe, and did always use and keep the
Liberty inviolately, and clearly exempted from the Citizens.

4. Item, No arrest within the Friars Precinct.
The Precinct has always bin of such liberties, as that no man has bin
arrested within the same, by any of the Sheriffs Officers. And if at any time
any Officers of the City has taken upon him to execute within the four Gates,
he was rescued by the Friars and Inhabitants of Antiquity.

5. Item, Forrainers traded in the Precinct freely.
At all times there has dwelt within the Precinct diverse and many persons not
free, and yet they have used their occupations there, without controulement of
the City and Citizens.

6. Item, Craftsmen come out of the countries.
Always at sundry times (of long continuance) diverse and many Carpenters,
Masons, and such like, have bin sent out of the Country, and have wrought
within the Precinct aforesaid; which is not sufferable within the Liberties of
the City, by their own customs and ordinances.

7. Item, The inquiry after the death of any one slain, by the Coroner of the
Verge.
Upon the view of any person slain, the Coroner of the Verge did always make
enquiry thereof. And the Deodand is due to the Lord of Saint John's, and not to
the City; but now to the Queens Highness due by law, equity, and good
conscience, whose right and lawful title the owners and inhabitants of the
said exempted place and Precinct, do seek with their bodies and goods to
defend and maintain against all pretended title and claim of the Citizens.
Notwithstanding diverse of the said Precinct and Liberty have bin greatly vexed
and troubled with often imprisonments within the Compters of the City.

8. Item, Freedom from watching, warding, etc.
The inhabitants within the said Precinct were never charged to watch or ward,
or to be within the compass of any imposition; such as the Citizens are used
and accustomed unto by their laws.

9. Item, In the time of K. Edw. the 6. sir Andrew Jude then being Mayor, A
Riot committed in the Black Friars.
there was a Riot committed in the Black Friars, in the house of one Master
Lucas, by one Crouchman of the City, and other persons with him. The force
whereof was soon overswayed by Sir Thomas Saunders, and Sir Henry Ierningham,
Knights, Master William Moore, Esquire, with other Gentlemen inhabiting in the
said Friars. And the parties by pursuit were twice endighted in the Marshalsea
court holden in Southwark: Sir Nicholas Hare then being Steward, and sitting at
the doing thereof. After which time, the said Crouchman (with other
Confederates with him) sought to endight the said Gentleman by an especial
Sessions in the said City. For stay whereof the Lords of the Kings Privy
Council, understanding the lewd practices of the said Crouchman and other, and
that the Lord Mayor had nothing to do within the said Precinct; Letters from
the Council to the Lo. Mayor.
wrote their letters unto the said Sir Andrew Jude, then Mayor, willing him not
to disturb the said Gentlemen for the said fact, to the infringing of the
Liberties of the said Friars: The said Sir Thomas Saunders, and Master William
Moore being bearers of the said Letters to the said Lord Mayor; who upon
deliberation, made answer to the said bearers by word of mouth, That forasmuch
as there was a complaint made to him of a Riot committed within the City; he
must needs (within one month after) enquire by Sessions of the same, which he
said could not be prejudicial unto them, being out of the Jurisdiction of the
City: for that the same should be Non coram Iudice, and yet they discharged of
the peril of the Statute. And so they proceeded with the said Letters
notwithstanding: Whereupon, the said Sir Thomas, and Master William Moore,
making report of their success with the Mayor to the Lords of the Council;
they wrote e^tsoones other Letters to the said Mayor, but of such force
touching the premises, which were also carried and delivered by the said Sir
Thomas and Master Moore: Whereupon, the said Mayor stayed from any further
proceeding therein, or any other, etc.

10. Item, In Queen Mary her time, the Council of the City put a Bill into the
Parliament house, A Bill put into the Parliament house.
seeking by the same to have the Liberties of the said Friars, which Bill, with
all their surmises, were so utterly rejected, that their Bill never came to the
question, but was so suppressed, by argument openly in the same house.

11. Item, The Liberties granted to Master Cawarden, Cawardens Letters Patents.
by Letters Patents of King Edward the sixth, the goods of Felons therein not
granted, and so due to the Queens Majesty, whose right and title the City has
not had, nor can be suffered to enjoy, according to their seeking; by the
only resistance of the said owners and inhabitants within the said Liberty and
Precinct, clearly exempted from the City, by metes and bounds on every side.

12. Item, The said Precinct has always been shut up and kept by Walls and
Gates, Walls and gates belonging to the Precinct.
so as there was no egresse that way, but by license of the Porters, who were
maintained and placed by the owners of the said Friars, and Liberties of the
same, by especial and general words, granted by Letters Patents under the
great Seal of England, to diverse owners and Freeholders there of the Queens
Majesty. And in especial above all other, to Sir Thomas Cawarden, Knight,
deceased, in his Letters Patents dated the 12. day of May, in the fourth year
of King Edward the sixth; in as large, ample and full manner, and with as many
pithy and effectual words, as ever was read or seen in any Patent, made for
grant of Liberties of any place exempted, as by the same Patent more largely
appears: The true copy whereof is annexed to these Articles, by the delivery
of Master Moore, true owner of the most part of the said liberties.

13. Item, That James Norrice, Curate of S. Peter's in Cornehill, being sometime
one of the Friars, The Curate of S. Peter's in Cornehill his affirmation.
and Brethren of the Black Friars aforesaid, near Ludgate in London, says and
affirms, That one Robert Struddell, late Prior of the said Friars, was by
order of Law constrained to pave the high street adjoining round about the
channel walls, from the Flower-de-Lize toward the hill at Creed lane end. And
a Cage at that time standing on that side the street, adjoining to the foresaid
wall, within the Parish of Saint Andrew, which Cage was plucked down by the
said Prior, and not since set up again; the Prior aforesaid saying; Seeing they
of the City cause me to pave all this side of the street next my wall, they
shall have no Cage of others standing on my ground, against mine own wall: And
so the City never builded Cage on that side after.

14. Item, Moreover, the said Master Norrioe says, That the Liberties of the
Black Friars in the said Priors days were such, The Liberties of the Precinct
in the Priors days.
that the Lord Mayor of the City of London, nor the Sheriffs did arrest any
man within the said Liberty for any thing, as free, as he well remembers in
all his time.

15. Item, Four Gates belonging to the Friars and Porters.
He remembers, that four Gates were shut in during the Friars time, by the
commandment of the Prior. And one Father Seagar, being then Porter, appointed
by the said late Prior, Robert Struddell, with others after him, at the
appointment of other Priors then succeeding: And not by the Mayor of London,
nor any other.

The saying of Thomas Vlverston, alias Wolverston, of Garlic Hithe, Officer
to the Vintners of London, and sometime a Friar of the Black Friars: Taken
before me Sir Thomas Saunders, Knight, the 30. day of May, Anno Domini, 1562.
16. ITem, He says, he has heard say many times among the Friars and others,
Of other men's doors into the Black Friars.
that Master Peacocke of London, and his Predecessors, had never door into
the Black Friars out of his house; but by fine and agreement, made for the
same with the Prior of Black Friars, long before his time of remembrance.

17. Item, He says, that the Porters of the Friars always kept their four
Gates (time out of mind) by the appointment of the Prior and Covent, How the
Porters of the Friars kept their four Gates.
clear exempted from the City. And when the Porters perceived any suspected
persons or malefactors within the limits of the Friars; they declared it to the
Prior, who forthwith commanded them, to take the aid of the honest Inhabitants
within the Friars, to make search and watch for the apprehension of such lewd
persons: which so found, were always examined by Sir William Kingston, Knight,
and other good men there inhabiting within the Friars, at the Porters desire,
and not otherwise.

18. Item, No search or watch within the Precinct, etc.
He never heard, nor did know in all his time, any search or watch to be made
within the Precinct of the Friars, by any Watchman or Constable of the City,
who could never come within any of the Friars Gates, but by the Porters license
of the same Friars.

19. Item, Paving the street by the Prior and Covent.
He says, that the Prior and Covent did once pave the Streets (by his time)
from the Friars Turnegate, unto the Flower-de-Lize, along by the Wall, to the
Channel of the same Street. But as for pulling down of any Cage, he does not
well remember.

20. Item, For punishing disordered persons.
He says, if any Vagabond, or any Drunkard, or misordered person, were taken
culpable within the Precinct of the Friars, they were always punished in the
Friars Stocks against the Church door, by the Priors commandment; and not by
the Lord Majors, or Sheriffs of London.

21. Item, Against claiming the Liberties of Black Friars.
Sir John Portenary, Knight, inhabiting within the late Black Friars, near
Ludgate in London, about 30. years past, does well remember, That after the
suppression of the said Black Friars, the Lord Mayor of London would have
entered into the said Black Friars, and claimed the Liberties of the said
Black Friars. For the which, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Zanche, Sir Thomas
Cheyney, Sir William Kingston, Sir Francis Brian, Knights, with many other
Worshipful Gentlemen, then being Inhabitants within the Liberties and
Precinct of the said late Black Friars, denied the Lord Mayor and Citizens
entrance, and would not permit nor suffer them, or any of them, to enter within
the same. And shortly after, Sir Francis Brian, and Sir Thomas Cheyney, moved
the Kings Majesty, then being King Henry the eighth; how the said Mayor and
Citizens would have entered into the said Friars. And then the Kings Majesty
said unto them these words following: Are not We as able to keep our
Privileges and Liberties, as the Friars did keep their Privileges always
before time, free from the City. Whereupon, they all (by one consent and
agreement) sent the said Lord Mayor word of the Kings Majesty his answer and
pleasure therein. Whereupon the Lord Mayor and Aldermen were satisfied, and
would no further proceed upon the Kings right and title of Liberties; as then
they promised and affirmed by the mouth of the Recorder, being sent by the
Mayor to the Worshipful of the said Friars. And the said Sir John Portenary
further says, That after the said Friars were suppressed, the Lord Cromwell,
Vicar General, caused to be delivered unto the said Sir John Portenary, the
keys of all the said Friars, safely to keep from the said City, and to
provide, that all within the said Liberty should be in safety and safeguard.
The which keys were afterward delivered by the said Sir John Portenary, to the
hands of Doctor Layton, and Doctor Wendie, they being Visitors there. For the
which, the said Sir John Portenary had a certain reward paid unto him by the
Lord North, then being Chancellor of the Augmentation Court. All which matter
the said Sir John Portenary will depose to be most certain and true, as he
will answer at the dreadful day of Judgment upon his soul.

22. Be it in remembrance perpetual for infallible truth, Two Aldermens^
entering into the Liberties of the Black Friars.
that one Alexander Avenon, being Sheriff of London, and one other, being
Alderman of the Ward of Faringdon infra, came and entered very stoutly into the
Liberty of the Black Friars near Ludgate, the fifteenth day of May, 1562. to
carry away all the Hosiers and Tailors, to come to the Guild Hall in London,
according to the Queens new Proclamation. Which Hosiers and Tailors denied to
go with the said Sheriff, affirming and saying, That they had put in Bonds
(before their coming) to the Lord Cobham, and to Sir Thomas Saunders, Knight,
two of the Queens Justices of the Peace within the said Liberty (being within
the Verge, and exempted from the City of London) according to the Queens
Proclamation. And thereupon, one John Bradford, being Constable of the same
exempted place, and within the Liberty of the said Queens Verge; caused the
four Porters of the said Friars, to shut all the Gates; which being perceived
by the said Sheriff and Alderman; the said Sheriff commanded the Gates to be
opened; whereunto the said Constable of the Friars said, That they should not
be opened, before the Justices pleasures of the Friars were known. And then
the Sheriff of London said, That he was of greater authority than the
Justices were. The Constable affirming him so to be within the City of London,
but not within the Precinct of the Liberty of the Black Friars. For the
Constable said, that he had greater power and authority there than the Sheriff
had. Which being heard, and scant well digested by them; fearing further
inconvenience to arise thereupon (as by sudden changing of the grieved
countenance was plainly declared) the said Sheriff and Alderman (with gentle
language) desired the Constable to open the Gates quietly, and suffer them to
pass thence. Which he did at their gentle request and entreaty: And so they
departed out of the Liberty of the Black Friars, by the Porters commandment,
and gave to the Porters for opening the Gates money.

People of Saint Martins, What ensued upon this business in the Black Friars.
as well Strangers as other (in the open high Street) marvelling and wondering
at the said Sheriffs and Aldermans enclosure within the said Friars Gates: On
the morrow after, being the sixteenth day of May, 1562. one Hardford being
Constable of Saint Martins Parish within Ludgate, in the high Street there,
took one Tretheru, a Hosier and Tailor, dwelling in the said Friars, and
carried him to the Lord Mayor of London. Who by and by (without delay, or any
further speech) commanded the said Gilbert to the Counter in London. Whereupon,
the said Sir Thomas Saunders, as one of the Justices of the said Liberty, went
to the Earl of Arundell, Lord Steward to the Queens most honorable Household,
declaring the whole circumstance of the said Sheriff and Aldermans enterprise.
And obtained a token to the Lord Mayor, no further to enter the said Liberty
within the Verge; until by Law, or the Privy Councels judgment, the question
moved were determined, concerning the infringing of the said ancient Liberty.
All this was spoken in the presence of Peter Baugh, Jews Rawbone, and diverse
other Strangers. In witness and probatior whereof, the said Sir Thomas has
subscribed his name, with diverse other here-under written, which were present.

23. Be it had in perpetual memory, A further testimony concerning one Robert
Flower, Tailor and Hosier in the same precinct of Black Friars.
for a continual perfect declaration of the truth, whereunto all matters of
variance and controversy should be referred and advanced; and not the sparks
of troth to be hidden (as a Candle, bearing perfect light, under a Bushel) and
so washed away in the flowing waters of unmindfull oblivion, which (amongst all
good Christian men) is at all times, and in all ages to be rejected, and not to
be embraced; but rather to be buried in the bottom of the earth, never to rise
again.

In consideration whereof, by these presents, it is for an infallible truth, to
be holden with all men, which shall hear or see this present writing: That
Robert Flower, Tailor and Hosier, dwelling within the Precinct and liberties of
the late Black Friars, near Ludgate in London; was by order and commandment
of the whole Bench or Aldermen, committed into one of the Compters of London,
the 20. day of May, 1502. For that the same Robert Flower refused to be bound
(acording to order taken) from the making of monstrous great Hosen, according
to the Queens gracious Proclamation in that behalf: Because the said Robert
Flower had (amongst other persons) put in Bonds before the Honorable Warden of
the Five Ports, and Sir Thomas Saunders, Knight, Justices within the Liberty of
the Queens Verge. After which reveiled and known to the Honorable Earl of
Arundell, Lord Steward of the Queens most Honorable Household, who caused the
Knight Marshall to go to the said Lord Mayor, requiring the deliverance of the
said prisoner. The Lord Mayor (being sickly) made answer, that he knew nothing
thereof; but desired him to speak with Master Recorder: who made answer, that
the said imprisonment was done by the whole Bench of Aldermen, and he (as one
particular person) could not deliver the prisoner, until the next Court day,
which could not be till two days after, to the great charges and hinderance of
the said prisoner.

Whereupon the Lord Steward sent for Master Cholmeley, he being then Recorder
of London, and commanded him to deliver the prisoner; or else he would imprison
the Mayor of London, and the said Recorder, and the fattest Alderman in the
City, which he could get within the Verge: And declared, that the Queens
Liberties and Franchises should not be overcome by the Lord Mayor and Bench of
Aldermen, so long as he was Officer: with many other words against the
Citizens, which were too long to write. Adding further, that the Mayor did not
meddle with Saint Martins, being within the City, and a parcel of Westminster
Deanery; much less should he meddle with the said liberty of the Friars,
bounded out by walls and gates from the City, being in the County of Middlesex,
and not within the City. And so commanded the Recorder to send home the
prisoner into the liberty presently: which was so done accordingly: Promising,
that if the L. Mayor could declare or show any good Title, whereby to break
the Liberty, the Queens learned Council should answer him and them therein.
And then the Recorder said, he never heard before that time, that the Lord
Steward did claim the precinct of the said Black Friars, to be within the
liberty of the Queens Verge: Out of which Jurisdiction the City of London is
exempted by the Statute of 32. Hen. 8. Cap. 2. Under color of which Statute,
the Mayor would bring the said Friars to be in London; which in all the Friars
time was freely exempted.

All the which matter was debated in the presence of Sir Thomas Saunders,
Knight; Master Robert Hopton, one of the Knight Marshals, and Mr. Bromeley,
under Steward of the Marshalsea, the day and year above-written.

24. Item, A man slain in the liberty of the Black Friars.
That in Queen Mary's time, or King Edwards time, her Brother, there was a man
slain within the said precinct of the Black Friars: and the goods of him that
was supposed to do the deed, were stayed within the said Friars, and an
Inventory taken by the next Justice of Peace within the Verge, Roger Cholmeley,
Knight, by the commandment of Sir Thomas Cheney, Knight; and afterward one
Master Garrard and the Recorder of London, came unto the said Sir Thomas
Cheney's house within the same precinct, and would have made an Inventory of
the goods of the party offender aforesaid, now deceased. But the said Sir
Thomas Cheyney would not permit nor suffer them so to do; for that he had
made stay of the same goods for the Queen before, if it were lawfully found
that the said party had slain the man dead. Which afterward was otherwise
found by a Quest of twelve men, sitting super visum corporis of the dead, by
the Coroner of the Verge within the said Liberty: where the Mayor of London and
Bench of Aldermen have not to do, nor intermit with the Inhabitants therein:
Because the whole Friars liberties, and franchises of the same, were freely
given unto King Henry the eighth, by Act of Parliament: whereby the Lord Mayor
of London, and Bench of Aldermen are clearly barred and secluded from the
Friars Liberties, and the inhabitants thereof franchised, and clean exempted
from all the Citizens, and their impositions or other taxations.

The true Copy of the Vicar of Bromleys Letter in Kent, sent to Master Thomas
Walsingham of Scadborough in the said County, Esquire: who sent the same Letter
to Sir Tho. Saunders, Knight, he being also one of the Queens Justices of the
Peace in the said County; to examine the several particulars therein,
concerning the liberty of the said Friars, etc.
RIght Worshipful; you shall understand that I have received your kind Letter;
according whereunto, The Vicar of Bromley dwelt formerly in the Black Friars.
these are to satisfy your mind; That I was dwelling in the Black Friars
four or five years, and came thither from Oxford, where I had been a Student
of Divinity. I was also Curate of the Parish within the Black Friars, called
Saint Agnes. We had within us a Porter, who did shut all the Gates every
night; at nine of the clock in the Winter, and at ten of the clock in the
Summer. No Sheriff, Bailiffe or Constable, nor yet the Mayor of London, took
interest there at any time, nor foreign porters had to do within our
Privilege: And the Friars did pave both within the Turn-gate and without, unto
Saint Andrews Church, down by the great Garden wall: And without the
Turne-gate there was a Cage, pulled down by my time, which was set up by the
Lord Mayor of London. The inhabitants within the Friars never watched, neither
the Constable of Saint Martins Parish warned any watch there, neither came
within the Gates, after the hour appointed at any time. The Sheriffs of
London had no Felons goods there, neither did arrest any person within the
Precinct of the house. As for Bakers and Brewers that belonged to the house,
they be dead.

There is one James Norrice, The same man spoken of before.
Curate, alive, who was brought up in the house, and dwelling at Saint Michaels
in Cornehill, he can give you further instructions: whether there be any more
living, I know not.

The fatal VESPER, or dismal EVENSONG, happening at the Black Friars on
Sunday in the afternoon, it being the 26. day of October. 1623.
THere were upon that day, being dedicated to the service of God, assembled
together in the Black Friars near the French Ambassadors house in ordinary,
above three hundred persons of sundry Nations, as English, Scottish, Welsh, and
Irish, to hear a Sermon, and after that to celebrate Evensong, according to
the Rites and Ceremonies of the Romish Church. Of which number it is certainly
known and confidently reported, that about the number of threescore of them,
had that morning both confessed themselves, and received the Sacrament,
according to the order of the Romish Church. He that was to supply that
exercise for the present, was Father Drury, a Jesuit by profession, and by
birth a Gentleman, being extracted out of the house of the Norfolcian Druries,
and son unto Doctor Drury, late professor of the Civil Law, and practiser
thereof in the Court of the Arches here in London. He was by those of the
Romish religion reputed to be a man of great learning, as having studied many
years beyond the Sea, with much approbation and allowance of his Superiors.
And although he were opposite in point of faith and belief unto the Religion
now professed in England, yet was he held by the generality of our Nation, both
Protestants and Papists, who knew him, and could make a true estimate of his
virtues and vices by the outward circumstance and appearance of his actions, to
be a man of a good moralllife, and of a plausible and laudable conversation.
So that in respect of these indowments, there could nothing have been desired
more by us of the Reformed Church, than that he had not been a Papist, but a
member of our Church, Religion, and Profession. All the day before, which was
the last that ever his eyes beheld, he was observed to be wondrous sad and
pensive, contrary unto his wonted humor and disposition, he being a man of a
free, merry and affable conversation, as though that some spirit of prediction
had foretold him of that fatal disaster, which was at hand. Thus we read of
Caesar, that he was possessed with a strange and unwonted sadness that
morning when he entered into the Senate house, where he was stabbed to death by
the Senators. And so was that Assassine Cass^^ much perplexed and troubled in
mind before that mortal and bloody battle of Pharsalia. By means of which
affection, Father Drurie finding an indisposition in himself, he would (if
with his reputation he could) have made a retraction of his promise, and a
demurre of the intended exercise. But being pressed on by diverse of his friends,
who told him that the Audience was great, and their expectation far greater,
he did then again resolve to go forward with the enterprise.

The place wherein this Congregation was assembled, was not the French
Ambassadors Chapel, according as the first report went current; for that was
reserved for the use of himself and his family, to celebrate their Even-song
after their own manner and custom, but it was a Chamber near unto the gate,
some three stories high, being some threescore foot long, and twenty foot
broad, or thereabouts. The walls were not made of Lome, composed of Laths and
Rafters, and covered over with Clay and Lime, as some at first reported: but
were of Brick and Stone, which are held by all Architects to be the strongest
and the surest building. But howsoever, a Gentlewoman of a noble house, and of
a quick and judicious spirit, who was then present, and had taken a curious
view of the pressing multitude of the people, which was at length their own
oppression, and of the unfitness and uncapacity of the place besides, told
him, That she thought it would prove an action full of danger, if he should
offer to preach in that place respectively in respect of the premises. But he
being led on by a divine and fatal necessity, which blinds the judgment of
the wise men of this world, he told her that he did mean as then to preach,
and to go forward with the greatest expedition he could, with his intended
Sermon. For the accomplishment of which design, the Father predicant being
clad in those robes and ornaments which are used by those of his Order, being a
Jesuit, having a Surplice girt about his middle with a linen girdle, a red Cap
with a white one underneath, turned up about the brimmes of his Cap, and his
other accoutrements belonging, which the Ignatian Orders have imposed upon
them: and being placed in a Chair about the midst of the room, which Chair
was raised up something higher than the ordinary level of the floor: he
crossing himself with the sign of the Cross, and having ended some private
prayers, accommodated himself to his Text, between three and four of the
clock in the afternoon of the foresaid Sunday. The words of the Text were
part of the Gospel appointed for the present day, according to the order and
instruction of the Church of Rome, being their fifth of November, which account
is thought to be the truest by the Roman Catholics, and begins ten days
before that of England. The Gospel was written in the eighteenth Chapter of St.
Matthewes Gospel, and delivered unto us by the holy Spirit, in these words:
Therefore is the Kingdom of Heaven likened unto a certain man that was a
King, which would take account of his servants. And when he had begun to
reckon, one was brought unto him which ought him ten thousand Talents. But
forasmuch as he was not able to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and
his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. The servant
fell down and besought him, saying: Sir, have patience with me and I will pay
thee all. Then had the Lord pity of that servant, and loosed him, and forgave
him the debt. So the same servant went out, and found one of his fellows which
ought him an hundred pence: And he laid hands on him, and took him by the
throat, saying: Pay that thou owe. And his fellow fell down and besought
him, saying: Have patience with me and I will pay thee all. And he would not,
but he went out and cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt. So when
his fellows went and saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and
told their Master all that happened. Then his Lord called him and said unto
him: O thou ungracious servant, I forgave thee all that debt thou desiredst
me, should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had
pity on thee, etc?

The words which he insisted especially upon, were these: Note that this Text
was divided into three parts; whereof the first part treated of Gods mercy,
the second of man's ingratitude, the third of the Remedies which man might use
for the procuring of Gods mercy, and cure himself from this contagicus
disease of his ingratitude. Which first part only in part he handled.
O thou ungracious servant, I forgave thee all the debt thou ought me,
should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pity
on thee? Upon which subject discoursing with much vehemence, and implying out
of it the infinite mercy and goodness of God, whereby he does not only give
us all that we have, but forgives us all our trespasses and offenses, be they
never so deeply stained with the scarlet dye and tincture of our guiltiness:
which merciful act of God is paraboliz'd unto us by a certain man that was a
King, who took account of his servants, and after much entreaty and
submission, forgave one ten thousand Talents, which he ought him. And also
dilating by way of blame and reprehension of the ungrateful and unrelenting
heart of man, who does not forgive trespasses as God does forgive him; but out
of his swelling and malignant humor, writes benefits in the sand, and injuries
in marble, which uncharitableness of theirs is intimated in the Parable by the
ungracious servant, who would not forgive his fellow a small debt, although his
Master had forgiven him one of a far greater value. Moreover, upon the
application of these words, he did inveigh with much bitterness, as some give
out (but I know not how truly) against the manners and doctrine of the
Protestants.

But having proceeded thus far, lo what a sudden and unexpected accident
fell out. The Sermon inclining toward the midst, and the day declining
toward an end, it being almost four of the clock in the afternoon, the
multitude and crowde of the assembly breaking down with their overbearing
weight the beams and sidetimbers wherewith this room was supported, they fell
down into the next Chamber, the floor whereof being broken down also with
the descending weight of them and the ruins, they fell at last upon the lowest
Chamber of the edifice, where some of them perished, some were hurted and
maimed, othersome were free from all hurt and danger except of that which the
present fright and terror did impose upon them, and those were they especially
who fell not at all, but remained in one angle or corner of the Chamber, which
was free from falling. Which persons being thought to be between twenty and
thirty in number, as I heard by one, who was one of them, perplexed and
frighted thus as they were, by consideration of that most fearful danger,
whereinto they had seen their fellows and brethren to fall, who did lift up
their hands for help, and beat their breasts for life, whereof they then were
spectators; and being doubtful that they should be Actors with them presently
in that Scene of their calamity; the place being weak, tottering and
unassured, for this cause fear and necessity giving motion and strength unto
their arms, they opened with their Knives a Lome wall, which parted that room
and a Chamber belonging to the Ambassadors Lodging. By which means, after
much difficulty and labor, they got their passage, and live as yet to glorify
God for their deliverance.

Presently upon the report of the fall and cry, diverse persons of all sorts
resorted unto the place, some out of charity, to help those that were thus
distressed; for which cause they brought Spades, Pickaxes, and other
instruments fit for that purpose; others out of mere curiosity came thither,
to see this wonderful event, and this object so full of admiration. Where,
after the guards were set upon all the Advenues and passages leading into the
Black Friars, and from thence into the Ambassadors house, by the direction
and command of Sergeant Finch, Recorder of the City, who was exceeding
careful that my Lord Ambassador and his servants should not suffer any
detriment in their goods or persons, being jealous in this point of the Kings,
his own, and the Cities honor: and matters being thus disposed for the safety
and assurance of the strangers, after they had broken down a wall, and opened
some doors, they fell to work upon the ruins it self, with all possible
diligence and dexterity: where at the opening of every board, planke, and piece
of Timber, there were objects which presented themselves full of horror and
confusion.

Here you might have seen a man shaking of his legs, and striving for life:
There you might have seen another, putting forth his bloody hands, and crying
for help: Here you might have seen one like some spectre, thrusting out his
head out of the grave: There you might have seen his fellow half dead and
half living, entombed in that grave which he was not long to keep. Here you
might have seen the living thus pressed, as they were mourning for the dead;
and there the dead senseless, as they were embracing of the living. So that
since the Sicilian Vespers, there was never an Evensong more dolorous unto the
French, nor more lamentable unto the Scots and English. The Count of Tillier,
who was Ambassador here in ordinary for the most Christian King, which place
he has executed with great dignity and authority for many years together, to
the general liking and applause of both Nations, although he was fortunate in
this, that not one of his retinue perished, was much agreeved with this
unluckie accident, with whom the Spanish Delegates did condole, as by mutual
reference feeling that grief, which fellow-feeling had made their own.

Moreover, it was reported by one who had good intelligence in Elie house, that
Don Carlos Colom's Steward should say, that his Master would not for a million
of gold, this accident should have fallen out in his or Exeter house. A report
like enough to be believed of those, who know how strangely zealous this Nation
is in their Religion, and how jealous they are besides of their own, their
Kings, and of their Countries honor.

Neither were the sorrows meaner amongst the naturals of this Kingdom, and the
inhabitants of the City of London. So that here some men lost their wives,
women their husbands, parents their children, children their parents, masters
their servants, and one friend lamented the loss of another. So that Rachel
was weeping for her children because they were not. Job was lamenting for his
sons and daughters, because they were slain together by the downfall of an
house, whilst they were eating of their last banquet. Insomuch that the
streets did echo with their dolorous moanes, the walls and houses did resound
with their cries and lamentations. The subsequent night was so full of horror
unto many, that it may be truly said of it, as was said of another dismal
night in the like kind: Quis cladem illius noct is,
quis funera fando
Explicit? aut potis est
lachrymis aequare dolorem?


When the bodies were drawn forth of those heaps of earth and timber, which
task of charity they were accomplishing all that night, and part of the next
day following, they were found to be 95. persons, or therabout, of diverse
conditions, besides those who were bruised, maimed or wounded. Amongst whom
were diverse persons of worth and quality: as Father Drurie, who was the
Preacher; Father Redyate, in whose lodging this calamity befell; the Lady Web,
descended of the Family of the Treshams, and sister unto my La. Morley, and my
La. Sturton, and many more besides of that weaker sex, who then and there were
assembled at their accustomed devotions. Yet were there many who were in that
unfortunate downfall, which escaped the danger strangely and wonderfully.
Amongst whom was Mistress Lucie Penruddocke, extracted from a worthy and Noble
Family, who fell between the Lady Web and her own maidservant, both of
which perished, yet she was preserved alive, by means of a Chair which fell
hollow upon her, and sheltered her from further danger. So was young Mistress
Web, daughter to my Lady Web, who fell near unto her mother, and Elenor
Sanders, who was covered, with many others, whose lives were saved within the
heaps of these blood-guilty ruins.

There was also a Minister, whose name I cannot learn, and therefore although
he survives this misfortune, it must be buried as yet in silence, who being
present at the Sermon, as being invited by some Romish Catholic to that
exercise; who also gave him the conduct unto the place; he fell with the rest
of the multitude assembled there together; and being covered with the rubbish,
boords, and other timbers, which fell upon him from the higher rooms, and
pressed with the weight of diverse persons besides, whereof some were dead, and
some were living: being in this agony, which his present pain, and the fear
of death, in his own judgment even hanging over his head, did impose (and that
not without just cause) upon him; being (I say) thus distressed, and striving
under those heaps and ruins for life, the hope whereof, in respect of the
premised impediments, had almost forsaken him; one of the French Ambassadors
Gentlemen, hearing the noise and report of this great and dismal fall, suddenly
(as he could) opened a door, which gave entrance into that chamber, upon the
floor whereof, the heaps and ruins, together with the oppressed multitude,
as then lay. Who perceiving light by the door then opened, the place before
being covered over with darkness, he strove with all the strength and agilicy
he could, which in him was not mean, he being a man of a very strong and able
body, and at last, after the loss of his cloak and renting of his clothes, he
recovered himself, without any further hurt. Which the Gentleman perceiving,
came and demanded of him, whether or no he were hurt, or that he stood in need
of any thing that might do him service, or procure him comfort. But he being
almost exanimated and astonished, could not at first apprehend those courteous
proffers which were tendered unto him by this stranger, who presently went and
brought him into a Chamber; where after he had sat a while, and refreshed
himself with wine, which was brought unto him; and having thus recovered his
strength and spirits, he returned to the foresaid place again, and used his
best endeavors for the releeving of others from that calamity, whereof but even
now he was a fellow-sufferer. His man who attended on him, was recovered
amongst the rest, he being something bruised and hurt in the arm.

Moreover, there was a young girl, about the age of ten years, as is supposed,
(when this Minister, out of his charitable and commiserating disposition, was
laboring for the safety and preservation of them, whose necessities did then
require it) came crying unto him, and said, O my Mother, O my Sister, which are
down under the timber and rubbish. But he wished her to be patient for a time,
and by Gods grace they should get forth quickly. Upon which speech the child
replied presently, that howsoever this accident would prove a great scandal to
their Religion. A speech which is worth admiration in all men, as this Relator
did truly admire it, that a child of so tender years, wherein amongst the
most towardliest, there is scarce ability to discern between good and evil,
should next unto that grief, which the danger of her mother and sister did
inflict upon her, lament for nothing more than for the scandal which their
cause was like to suffer by the disaster.

It was reported also that many more were drawn out alive the next morning:
but I will not stand too much upon the justification of this report, lest I
should seem to be too credulous of those things, which are contrary to the
rules of reason and nature.

The day following, which was Monday, and the Eve of Simon and Jude, there was
great care had for viewing the place, and for burial of the dead. For this
cause the Recorder and Sheriffs, about one of the clock in the afternoon,
met at the French Ambassadors house, having first shut up Ludgate, to prevent
the throng and resort of the people, which was exceeding great and turbulent in
those places: and then having doubled their guards upon every Port and passage,
and given express charge unto the warders, upon pain of their displeasure and
punishment, that no man should enter in without theirs, or the Coroners
Warrant, they fell at length to consult about the business, and after mature
consideration, concluded, that this doleful accident fell out, not by any
indirect practice or conspiracy (as was by some maliciously reported) but that
those fourscore and odd persons fell by means of their own weight, and the
weakness of those timbers which did support the Chamber.

The Jury having thus brought in their verdict, they disposed presently for
the burial of the dead, some of whom were carried by their friends unto
Churches, far remote, there to receive their due obsequies; others were
buried in the same place, and those were of the meanest rank, whereof some
twenty, or thereabout, were laid in one Sepulcher, having a common grave, as
they had a common death and downfall. The conjectures concerning this event
were diverse: For some gave out, that it was the just punishment and vengeance
of God inflicted upon the^ for their Idolatry. Moreover, there were diverse
doubting spirits amongst the Roman Catholics, who thought that this was some
conspiracy of the Protestants. But if the building had been demolished and
overthrown by their indirect and treacherous means, it must have been done
either by blowing it up with Gunpowder, by sapping away the earth from the
foundation, by undermining it, or by cutting off, or taking away those
supporters and pillars, upon whom the frame and machine of the building was
grounded. All which were found to be false, upon most diligent search and
inquiry made in that behalf. But that which carried apparent appearance of
truth, and that which the Protestants and Papists did allow, who were of the
more milder, temperate, and sounder judgment, was thus: That this disaster
happened not by means of any divine miracle, or humane malice; but by the defect
and weakness of the place, into which such a multitude were crowded and
assembled together, the judgment of God concurring therewithal.

The Society of the Jesuits did suffer much, in losing the persons of Father
Drurie and Father Redyate. And diverse persons of both Religions, but especially
the Priests, who are men of as great care and vigilancie, but of a far
greater moderation, did tax and blame them, for that they brought their flock
into a place of no greater safety or assurance; and besides, because their
conventicle and meeting was so public, there being diverse Protestants
assembled at it, some of whom were reported to have a share in this calamity,
and the times as yet not serving for such assemblies, the Kings pardon being
not yet published, which was granted, as they say to all the Roman Catholics
of these Kingdoms. But whatsoever thou be, Protestant or Papist, that does see
this mournful object, judge not, lest thou be judged. Neither think thou,
that those 18. men, upon whom the Tower of Silom fell, or those persons whose
blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifice, were more grievous sinners than all
the rest of the children of Israel; or that these who perished thus together,
were more notorious offenders than all the rest of their brethren and Religion:
for assure thy self, that except thou repent, thou also shall perish. And this
repentance of thine must not be propter scandalum mundi, for the scandal and
offense of the world, for so did Saul repent, when out of a foolish and
State-spoiling pity, he had spared Agag the cursed Tirant of Amalecke; and but
of a fair yet foul pretense, had spared the fairest of the Cattle for
sacrifice: for being rebuked by the Prophet Samuel, he does repent, and desires
him to honor him in the sight of the Elders, and to turn unto him, and he
would turn unto the Lord his God. Neither must it be propter poenam peccati,
for their punishment, that is due unto sin; for so did Ahab repent, when he
was reprooved by Elias for killing of Naboth, and detaining of his Vineyard, he
rent his clothes, and girded himself in sackcloth, as the Text has it: But
after that the fright and terror of Gods must terrible sentence was worn out
of his mind, and the custom of sin began to prevail again, he sold
himself to commit such abominations, the like whereof were never committed in
Israel. But our repentance must be propter reatum peccati, for the guilt of
sin, as sin is a breach of the Law, and a transgression of Gods
Commandment. Quae sic dolet commissa, ut non doleat committenda: Which
repentance does grieve for sins committed, as though it meant to commit no
more; and mourn for offenses past, as though it did mean to pass over no
more.

We must take Repentance as Job did, in dust and ashes. Being dust, we must
take it in dust; and being ashes, we must take it in ashes. Our transgressions
in this Kingdom and in this City have been most grievous, therefore our
contrition should be eminent and exemplar. Our pride has made us, with
Lucifer, to superbire and superire, to look over our selves, not into our
selves, and to esteem our selves like unto God, when we are scarce men.

Neither is this pride simplex peccatum, a single and simple sin, but it
draws after it excess and riot, as it were, with a cart-rope: unto which
luxury of ours, neither Persian nor Roman were equal. After which follow
fornications and adulteries, which are so frequent in this place, that in vain
may we speak of the Bordellas of Rome, or the Stews of Venice, since the
Suburbs of this sinful City, are as bad as the Suburraes of Rome or Venice.

Moreover, our drunkenness is such, that although our eyes look red, and our
hearts are as fat as brawn with drinking of Wine, yet, we rise up early to
drink strong drink: which when it has inflamed our blood and spirits, we are
ready, with Lot, to fall into all pollution and uncleanness.

And last of all, we are so uncharitable, so stony-hearted and close-fisted,
that we may be fitly compared unto lumps of clay, tempered with blood,
although we are statues of flint, without the blood or life of charity.

For this cause, repent, o England, repent, o London; repent Protestants,
repent Papists, for your transgressions and offenses: repent, repent; for by
these wonderful signs and tokens, it does appear most clearly, that the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

A Note of such persons as were slain, by the fall of the Room wherein they
were, in the Black Friars, at Father Druries Sermon, October. the 26. 1623.
MAster Drurie the Priest.

Mr. Redyate the Priest.

Lady Web.

Lady Blackstones Daughter.

Thomas Web, her man.

William Robinson, Tailor.

Robert Smith, Master Hicks man the Apothecarie.

Mr. Davisons Daughter.

Anthony Hall his man.

Anne Hobdin, Mary Hobdin, lodging in Mr. Davisons house.

John Galloway, Vintner.

Mr. Peirson, his wife, two sons In Robin-hood Court in Shoo-lane.

Mistress Vudall.

Abigal her maid.

Two more in her house.

John Netlan, a Tailor.

Nathaniel Coals.

John Halifaxe.

Mistress Rugbie in Holborne.

John Worrals son in Holborne.

Master Becket, a Cornish man.

Thomas Mersit, his wife and his son and maid, in Mountague Close.

Mistress Summel, and Mary her Maid, in Black Friars.

Andrew whites daughter in Holborn.

Mr. Staker, Tailor in Salisbury court.

Elizab. Summers, in Grayes Inn lane.

Mr. Westwood.

Iudeth Bellows.

A man of Sir Lues Pembertons.

Elizabeth Moore, widow.

John James.

Morris Beucresse, Apothecarie.

Davie Vaughan.

Anne Field.

Mr. Ployden.

Robert Heifime.

One Medalfe.

Mr. Maufield.

Mr. Simons.

Dorothy Simons.

Thomas Simons, a Boy.

Robert Pauerkes.

Anne Davison.

Anthony Hall.

Mistress Morton and her Maid.

Francis Downs.

Edmond Shey.

I^sua Perry.

John Tullye.

Robert Drury.

Thomas Draper.

John Staiggs.

Thomas Elis.

Michael Butler in Woodstreet.

Edmund Rivals.

Edmund Welsh.

Bartholomew Bauin.

Davie, an Irishman.

Richard Price.

Thomas Wood.

Christopher Hobbs.

Elizabeth Astime.

John Butler.

Clarentia, a Maid.

Jane Turner.

Mistress Milbourne.

Frithwith Anne.

Mistress Elton.

Mistress Walsteed.

Margaret Barrom.

Henry Becket.

Sarah Watsonne.

John Bethoms.

Master Harris.

Mistress Tompson.

Richard Fitguift.

George Ceaustour.

Master Grimes.

One Barbaret, One Hucble, Walter Ward, Rigaret. enquired for.

John Brabant, a Painter in Little Britain.

A manservant of Master Buckets, a Painter in Aldersgate street.

Now to turn again to the Black Friars, through Bowyer Row, Ave Mary lane,
and Pater noster Row, to the Church of Saint Michael ad Bladum, or at the
Corn, (corruptly, at the Querne) so called, because in place thereof, was
sometime a Corne-Market, Corne-market by Pater noster Row.
stretching up West to the Shambles. It seems that this Church was new
builded, about the reign of Edward the third. Parish Church of S. Michael ad
bladum.
Thomas Newton, first Parson there, was buried in the Quire, in the year 1461.
At the East end of this Church stood a Cross, Old cross in West-Cheape.
called the Old Cross in West Cheap, which was taken down in the year
1390. since the which time, the said Parish Church was also taken down; but
new builded and enlarged, in the year 1430. the eighth of Henry the 6.
William Eastfield, Mayor, and the Communalty, granted of the common ground of
the City, three foot and an half in breadth on the North part, and four foot
in breadth toward the East, for the enlarging thereof. This is now a proper
Church, and has the Monuments of Thomas Newton, first Parson.

Roger VVoodcocke, Harter, 1475.

Thomas Russell, Brewer, 1473.

John Hulton, Stationer, 1475.

John Oxney. Roger North, Roger North*
Merchant, Haberdasher, 1509.

John Leyland, the famous Antiquary.

Henry Prannell, Vintner, one of the Sheriffs, 1558.

Will. Elkin, one of the Sheriffs, 1586.

Thomas Banks, Barber-Chir^rgeon, 1598.

Here lies buried the body of Henry Prannell, A comely Monument in the South
side of the Chancell.
late Citizen and Alderman of London, and free of the Vintners, who deceased
the 22. day of October, Ann. Dom. 1589. Anno aetatis suae, 58. He had to wife
Anne, the daughter of Edmond Baxtar, and had issue by her, three sons and one
daughter.

Here lies the body of William Elkin, Another like Monument in the same wall.
Mercer, late Citizen and Alderman of London, who deceased the last day of
October, 1593. Anno aetatis suae, 70. who took to wife Alice Robinson, the
Daughter of Thomas Wilkes, by whom he had issue one daughter, named Vrsula.

Thomas Banks, A smaller Monument in the same wall.
Barber Surgeon, Deputy of this Ward, who had to wife Joan Laurence, by
whom he had issue seven sons and ten daughters.

John Mundham had a Chauntry there in the fourth of Edward the second.

At the East end of this Church, in place of the old Cross, Water-Conduit by
Paul's gate.
is now a water-Conduit placed; William Eastfield, Mayor, the ninth of Henry
the sixth, at the request of diverse Common-Councels, granted it to be:
whereupon, in the 19. of the same Henry, 1000. Marks was granted by a Common
Council, toward the works of this Conduit, and the reparations of other:
this is called the Little Conduit in West Cheap, by Paul's gate.

At the West end of this Parish Church, Passage through S. Michaels Church.
is a small passage for people on foot through the same Church, and West from
the said Church, some distance, is another passage out of Pater noster row, and
is called (of such a sign) Panyer Alley, Panyer Alley.
which comes out into the North, over against Saint Martins Lane.

Next is Ivy Lane, Ivy lane.
so called of Ivy growing on the walls of the Prebends houses, but now the
Lane is replenished on both the sides with fair houses, and diverse Offices
have been there kept, by Registers, namely, for the Prerogative Court of the
Archbishop of Canturbury, the Probate of Wills, which is now removed into
Warwick lane, and also for the Lord Treasurers Remembrance of the Exchequer,
etc.

This Lane runs North, to the West end of Saint Nicholas Shambles. Of old
time there was one great house, sometimes belonging to the Earls of Britain,
since that, to the Lovels, and was called Lovels Inn: Lovels Inn.
for Matild, wife to John Lovell, held it in the first of Henry the sixth.

Then is Eldenese Lane, Eldenese or Warwick Lane.
which stretches North to the high street of Newgate Market, the same is now
called Warwick lane, of an ancient house there builded by an Earl of Warwick,
and was since called Warwick Inn. Warwick Inn.
It is in Record called a Message in Eldenese Lane, in the Parish of S.
Sepulcher, the 28. of Henry the sixth. Cicilie, Duchess of Warwick, possessed
it.

Now again, from the Conduit by Paul's gate, on the North side is a large
street, running West to Newgate, the first part whereof, from the Conduit to
the Shambles, (of selling Bladders there) called Bladder street. Bladder street.
Then behind the Butchers shops be now diverse slaughter-houses inward, and
Tipling-houses outward. Mountgoddard street.
This is called Mountgoddard street, of the Tippling-houses there, and the
Goddards mounting from the Tappe to the Table, from the Table to the mouth, and
sometimes over the head.

This street goes up to the North end of Ivy lane. Before this Mount-goddard
street, Stall-Boords were of old time set up by the Butchers, to show and to
sell their Flesh meat upon; over the which Stall-Boords, they first builded
sheds, to keep off the weather: but since that (incroching by little and
little) they have made their Stall-boords and Sheds, fair houses, meet for the
principal Shambles.

Next is Newgate market, Newgate Market.
first of Corn and Meal, and then of other Victuals, which stretches almost
to Eldenese lane. A fair new and strong Frame of Timber, covered with Lead,
was therefore set up at the charges of the City, near to the West corner of
S. Nicholas Shambles, for the Meal to be weighed, in the first of Edward the
sixth; Sir John Gresham being then Mayor.

On this side the north corner of Eldenese lane, stood sometime a proper Parish
Church of S. Ewine, Parish Church of S. Ewine.
as is before said, given by Henry the eighth toward the erecting of Christ's
Church: It was taken down, and in place thereof, a fair strong frame of
Timber erected, wherein dwell men of diverse Trades. And from this frame, to
Newgate, is all of this Ward: and so an end thereof.

It has an Alderman, his Deputy, Common Counsel, twelve; Constables,
seventeene; Scavengers, eighteen; Wardmote Inquest, eighteen, and a Beadle:
and is taxed to the Fifteen, fifty pounds.

BREADSTREET WARD.
BReadstreet ward begins in the high street of West Cheap, Breadstreet Ward.
to wit, on the South side, from the Standard to the great Cross. Then is also
a part of Watheling street of this Ward, to wit, from over against the Red
Lion, on the North side, up almost to Paul's gate; for it lacks but one house
of Saint Augustines Church. And on the South side, from the Red Lion Gate to
the Old Exchange; and down the same Exchange, on the East side, by the West
end of Maiden Lane, or Distar lane, to Knight-Riders street, or, as they call
that part thereof, Old Fish-street. And all the North side of the said Old
Fish-street, to the South end of Breadstreet, and by that, still in
Knight-Riders street, till over against the Trinity Church, and Trinity Lane.

Then is Breadstreet it self, Breadstreet.
so called, of Bread in old time there sold: for it appears by Records, that
in the year 1302. which was the 30. of Edward the first, the Bakers of London
were bounden to sell no bread in their shops or houses, but in the Market; and
that they should have four Hall-motes in the year, at four several terms,
to determine of enormities belonging to the said Company.

This street, giving the name to the whole Ward, begins in West Cheap,
almost by the Standard, and runs down South, through or thwart Watheling
street, to Knight-Riders street aforesaid, where it ends. This Breadstreet is
wholly on both sides of this Ward. Out of the which street, on the East side,
is Basing lane, a piece whereof, to wit, to and over against the back gate of
the Red Lion in Watheling street, is of this Breadstreet Ward.

Then is Friday street, Friday street.
beginning also in West Cheap, and runs down South through Watheling
street, to Knight Riders street, or Old Fish-street. This Friday street is of
Breadstreet Ward, on the East side, from over against the North-east corner of
Saint Matthewes Church, and on the West side, from the South corner of the said
Church, down as aforesaid.

In this Friday street, on the West side thereof, is a Lane, commonly called
Maiden Lane, or Distaffe Lane, corruptly for Distar Lane, which runs West
into the Old Exchange: and in this Lane is also one other lane, on the South
side thereof, likewise called Distar Lane, which runs down to Knight-Riders
street, or Old Fishe-street: And so be the bounds of this whole Ward.

Monuments to be noted here: first at Breadstreet corner, the North-east end
1595. of Thomas Tomlinson, causing in the high street of Cheap a Vault to be
dug and made, there was found at fifteen foot deep, A fair paved way
found, 15. foot deep, in Cheap street.
a fair pavement, like unto that above ground; and at the further end, at the
Channel, was found a Tree, sawed into five steps, which was to step over
some Brook, running out of the West, toward Walbrooke: and upon the edge of
the said Brook, as it seems, there were found lying along, the bodies of two
great Trees, the ends whereof were then sawed off, and firm Timber, as at the
first when they fell; part of the said Trees remain yet in the ground
undigged. It was all forced ground, until they went past the Trees aforesaid,
which was about seventeene foot deep, or better; thus much has the ground of
this City (in that place) been raised from the maine.

Next to be noted, the most beautiful Frame of fair houses and shops,
Goldsmiths Row in Cheap.
that be within the Walls of London, or elsewhere in England, commonly called
Goldsmiths Row, betwixt Breadstreete end and the Cross in Cheap, but is
within this Breadstreete Ward; the same was builded by Thomas Wood, Goldsmith,
one of the Sheriffs of London, in the year 1491. It contains in number ten
fair dwelling houses, and fourteen shops, all in one Frame, uniformely
builded four stories high, beautified toward the street with the Goldsmiths
Arms, and the likeness of Wood-men, in memory of his name, riding on
monstrous Beasts; all which is cast in Lead, richly painted over, and gilt:
these he gave to the Goldsmiths, with stocks of money to be lent to young
men, having those shops, etc. This said Front was again new painted and gilt
over in the year 1594. Sir Richard Martin being then Mayor, and keeping his
Maioralty in one of them; serving out the time of Cutbert Buckle, from the
second of July, till the 28. of October.

Then for Watheling street, Watheling street.
which Leyland calls Atheling or Noble street: but since he shows no
reason why, I rather take it to be so named, of the great highway of the same
calling. True it is, that at this present the inhabitants thereof are wealthy
Drapers, retaylers of Woollen Clothes, both Broad and Narrow, of all sorts,
more than in any one street of this City.

Of the Old Exchange, Knight-Riders street.
I have noted in Faringdon Ward: Wherefore I pass down to Knight-Riders
street, whereof I have also spoken in Cordwainer street Ward. But in this part
of the said Knight-Riders street, is a Fish-Market kept, and therefore called
Old Fishstreet, for a difference from New Fishstreet.

In this Old Fishstreet is one Row of small houses, Fish-Market, called Old
Fishstreet.
placed along in the midst of Knight-Riders street, which Row is also of
Breadstreet Ward. These houses, now possessed by Fishmongers, were at the first
but moveable Boords (or Stals) set out on Market days, to show their Fish,
there to be sold: but procuring license to set up Sheds, they grew to Shops,
and by little and little, to tall Houses, of three or four stories in height,
and now is called Fishstreete. Walcer Turk, Fishmonger, Mayor, 1349. had two
Shops in Old Fishstreet, over against Saint Nicholas Church, the one rented
five shillings the year, the other four shillings.

Breadstreet, Breadstreet.
so called of Bread sold there (as I said) is now wholly inhabited by rich
Merchants, and diverse fair Innes be there, for good receipt of Carriers, and
other Travelers to the City.

On the East side of this street, Parish Church of Alhallowes in Breadstreet.
at the corner of Watheling street, is the proper Church of Alhallowes in
Breadstreete, wherein are the Monuments of James Them, Goldsmith.

John Walpole, Goldsmith, 1349.

Thomas Beaumont, Alderman, one of the Sheriffs, 1442.

Robert Basset, Salter, Mayor, 1476.

Sir Richard Chaury, Salter, Mayor, 1509.

Sir Thomas Pargitar, Salter, Mayor, 1530.

Henry Sucley, Merchant-Taylor, one of the Sheriffs, 1541.

Richard Read, Alderman, that served and was taken prisoner in Scotland, 1542.

Robert House, one of the Sheriffs, 1589.

William Albany, Richard May, and Roger Abdy, Merchant-Taylors.

Hic jacent Thomas Beaumond, An ancient gray Marble tomb, as in a Chapel by
it self.
Civis, Salter, and quondam Vicecomes Civitatis London, Alicia, and Alicia
uxores ejus. Qui quidem Thomus obiit 14. die mensis Augusti, Anno Domini, 1457.
Quorum animabus propetietur Deus. Es testis Christ, etc.

Corporis ut Christi
festum possit venerari,
Hic magis instituit
Salter iter Beaumond.
Cui Deus uxoribus
binis Coeleste solamen,
Detque suis pueris: All these have fair plate^ (...) other.

Sit benedictus. Amen.
Here lies buried the body of William Albany, Esquire, Citizen, and
Merchant-Taylor of London, with his two wives, Thomasine, by whom he had issue
five sons, and four daughters, who deceased the 15. of December, 1565. And
Ioane, who dyed without issue, the 7. of July, 1579. And the said William
yielded his soul to the Almighty the 18. day of February, 1589. being of the
age of 82. years: so rest they all here in the assured hope of a blessed
resurrection.

Respice and prospice finem.
Here lies Henry Suckley, late Sheriff, Citizen, and Merchant-Taylor of
London, which Henry deceased the one and twentieth day of July, Anno Domini,
1564. And his four wives, Anne Boughton, Elizabeth English, Alice Fletcher,
and Agnes Cachemaide, etc.

Here lies Robert Mellishe, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, which
deceased the thirtieth day of March, Anno Domini 1562. etc.

Robert Hulson lies here, A white stone by it self, near to the Tomb.

In his time well known to all;
He lived well, and died so,
When God from hence did him call.
In the three and twentieth of Henry the eighth, the seventeenth of August, two
Priests of this Church fell at variance, that the one drew blood of the other:
Wherefore the same Church was suspended, Church suspended.
and no Service sung or said therein for the space of one month after; the
Priests were committed to prison, and the fifteenth of October, being enjoined
penance, went before a general Procession, bare-headed, barefooted, and
bare-legged, before the Children, with Beads and Books in their hands, from
Paul's, through Cheap, Cornhill, etc.

More to be noted of this Church, Spire of A^hallowes, steeple smitten by
Tempest.
which had sometime a fair spired Steeple of stone. In the year 1559. the
fifth of September, about midday, fell a great Tempest of Lightning, with a
terrible clap of Thunder, which struck the said spire about 9. or 10. foot
beneath the top; out of the which place fell a stone, that slew a Dog, and
overthrew a man that was playing with the Dog. The same Spire, being but
little damnified thereby, was shortly after taken down, for sparing the
charges of reparation.

On the same side is Salters Hall, Salters Hall.
with six Almes-houses in number, builded for poor decayed Brethren of that
Company. This Hall was burned in the year 1539. and again re-edified.

Lower down, Parish Church of S. Mildred in Breadstreet.
on the same side, is the Parish Church of St. Mildred the Virgin.

The Monuments in this Church be, of the Lord Trenchaunt, of Saint Albans,
Knight, who was supposed to be either the new builder of this Church, or best
Benefactor to the Works thereof, about the year 1300. and certain Cornish
Gentlemen, 1312.

William Palmer, Blader, a great Benefactor also, 1356.

John Chadworth, Mayor, 1401. who gave the Parsonage house, a Revestry, and
Churchyard to that Parish, in the year 1428. notwithstanding, his Monument is
pulled down.

Stephen Budge, Gentleman; his Arms be three Water-Budges, 1419.

Henry Budge founded a Chauntry there, 1419.

Roger Forde, Vintner, 1440.

Thomas Barnwell, Fishmonger, one of the Sheriffs, 1424.

Sir John Hawlen, Clarke, Parson of that Church, Parson of S. Mildred and his
man burned.
who built the Parsonage house newly, after the same had been burned to the
ground, together with the Parson and his man also, burned in that fire, 1485.

John Parnell, 1510.

William Hurstwaight, Pewterer to the King, 1526.

Christopher Turner, Surgeon to King Henry the eighth, 1530.

Ralph Simonds, Fishmonger, one of the Sheriffs, in the year 1527.

Thomas Langham gave to the Poor of that Parish 4. Tenements, 1575.

Thomas Hall, Salter, 1582.

Thomas Collins, Salter, Alderman.

Sir Ambrose Nicholas, Salter, Mayor, 1575. was buried in sir John Chadworths
Vault.

An Obite consecrated to the happy Memorial of Sir JOHN CHADWORTH, A very
ancient Tomb in the North side of the Chancell.
or SHADWORTH, Knight, sometime Mercer, and Lord Mayor of this City of London;
who gave a Vestry to this Church, an house for the Pastor to dwell in, and a
Churchyard to the Parishioners, wherein to bury their dead. He deceased the 7.
day of May, An. Dom. 1401.

Here lies a man, A fair inscription on the wall.
that
Faith and Works did even
(Like fiery Chariots)
mount him up to Heaven:
He did adorn this Church.
When words were weak,
And men forget, the
living Stones will speak,
He left us Land: This
little Earth him keeps,
These balcke words Mourners,
and the Marble weeps.
Here lies the body of Thomas Copynger, A plated stone before the Communion
table*
the which deceased the 14. day of November, in the year of our Lord God,
1513. On whose soul, etc.

Here lies buried Thomas Clivelod, The like stone by the other.
of Warmoster, in the County of Wilsthire, Clothier; who deceased the 24. day
of June, An. Dom. 1558.

Here lies Sir Cuthbert Barn, One fair stone plated, for both these, by the
Communion table.
Knight, who deceased the 16. day of October, in the year of our Lord God,
1521. On whose, etc.

Here lies Roger Forde, Vintner of London, with Ioane and Margaret his wives.
The which Joane deceased the eighth day of August, Anno Domini, 1467. And
Margaret deceased the eleventh day of June, Anno Domini. 1492. And the foresaid
Roger deceased, etc.

Here lie buried the bodies of John Ireland, A fair plated stone in the South
Quire.
Citizen and Salter of London, and Elizabeth his wife, who were married
together about nine and forty or fifty years: And he had issue by her six
sons and six daughters, and he lived in this Parish sixty years. He was
Deputy of this Ward fifteen years, and was the first Master of the Company
of Salters. She deceased the second day of April, 1613. being of the age of
seventy and five years. And he deceased the five and twentieth day of June,
being aged 83. years.

So rest they both here in the bed of death, in hope of a joyful resurrection.

Respice and prospice finem.

Out of this Breadstreet, Basing lane called the Bakehouse.
on the same side, is Basing lane, a part whereof (as is before showed) is of
this Ward, but how it took the name of Basing I have not read. In the
twentieth year of Richard the second, the same was called the Bakehouse,
whether meant for the Kings Bakehouse, or of Bakers dwelling there, and baking
Bread to serve the Market in Breadstreet, where the Bread was sold, I know not:
but sure I am, I have not read of Basing, or of Gerrard the Giant, to have any
thing there to do.

On the South side of this Lane is one great house, of old time builded upon
arched Vaults, and with arched Gates of stone brought from Cane in Normandy.
The same is now a common Ostrey for receipt of Travelers, commonly and
corruptly called Gerards Hall, of a Giant said to have dwelled there. In the
high rooffed Hall of this house sometime stood a large Firre-Pole, A Pole of
40. foot long and 15. inches about, ^abuled to be the justing staff of Gerard
a Giant.
which reached to the roof thereof, and was said to be one of the staves that
Gerard the Giant used in the wars to run withal. There stood also a Ladder
of the same length, which (as they said) served to ascend to the top of the
staff. Of later years this Hall is altered in building, and diverse rooms are
made in it. Notwithstanding, the Pole is removed to one corner of the Hall, and
the Ladder hanged broken, upon a wall in the yard. The Hosteler of that house
said to me, the Pole lacked half a foot of forty in length. I measured the
compass thereof, and found it fifteen inches. Reason of the Pole could the
Master of the Hostery give me none, but ^ade me read the great Chronicles;
for there he heard of it. Which answer seemed to me insufficient: for he meant
the description of Britain, for the most part drawn out of John Leyland his
Commentaries, (borrowed of my self) and placed before Reyne Wolfes Chronicle,
as the labors of another (who was forced to confess, that he never traveled
further than from London to the University of Oxford) he writing a Chapter of
Giants or monstrous men, has set down more matter than troth, as partly
(against my will) I am enforced here to touch. R. G. in his brief Collection
of Histories (as he terms it) has these words:

I the writer hereof, did see the tenth day of March, in the year of our Lord,
1504. and had the same in my hand, the tooth of a man, which weighed ten ounces
of Troy weight: and the scull of the same man is extant and to be seen, which
will hold five peckes of wheat; and the shin-bone of the same man, is six
foot in length, and of a mavelous greatness: this saw R. G.

The error thereof is thus: R. G. saw a stone, and said the same to be a
tooth, but being by my self proved a stone, there failed both scull and
shankbone, and followed a cluster of lies together, yet since increased by
other.
he affirms a stone to be the tooth of a man, which stone (so proved) having
no shape of a tooth, had neither scull nor shin-bone. Notwithstanding, it is
added in the said description, that by conjecturall symetry of those parts, the
body to be twenty and eight foot long or more. From this he goes to another
like matter, of a man with a mouth sixteen foot wide, and so to Gerard the
Giant, and his staff. But to leave these fables, and return where I left, I
will note what my self has observed concerning that house.

I read, that John Gisors, Mayor of London, Gerards Hall restored to his old
name.
in the year 1245. was owner thereof, and that Sir John Gisors, Knight, Mayor
of London, and Constable of the Tower 1311. and diverse others of that name and
family, since that time owed it. William Gisors was one of the Sheriffs, 1329.
More, John Gisors had issue, Henry and John: which John had issue, Thomas:
Which Thomas deceasing in the year 1350. left unto his son Thomas his
message, Gerards Hall overthrown with Gerard the (...) great Spear.
called Gisors Hall, in the Parish of Saint Mildred in Breadstreet: John Gisors
made a Feoffment thereof 1386. etc. So it appears, that this Gisors Hall of
late time (by corruption, has been called Gerards Hall, for Gisors Hall, as
Bosoms Inn, for Blossoms June, Bevis Marks, for Buries Marks, Mark lane,
for Mart lane, Billiter lane, for Belzetters lane, Gutter lane, for Guthuruns
lane, Cry Church, for Christ's Church, Saint Michael in the Querne, for Saint
Mihel at Corn, and such others. Out of this Gisors Hall, at the first building
thereof, were made diverse arched doors yet to be seen, which seem not
sufficient for any great Monster, or other than men of common stature to pass
through. The Pole in the Hall might be used of old time (as then the custom
was in every Parish) to be set up in the Summer a May Pole, before the
principal house in the Parish or Street, Every man's house of old time was
decked with Holly and Ivy in the Winter, especially at Christmas.
and to stand in the Hall before the Scrine, decked with Holme and Ivy, at the
Feast of Christmas. The Ladder served for the decking of the May Pole, and
Roof of the Hall. Thus much for Gisors Hall, and for that side of Breadstreet
may suffice.

Now on the West side of Breadstreet, amongst diverse fair and large houses for
Merchants, and fair Innes for passengers, had ye one Prisonhouse, pertaining
to the Sheriffs of London, called the Compter in Breadstreet: but in the year
1555. the Prisoners were removed from thence, Compter in Breadstreet.
to one other new Compter in Woodstreet, provided by the Cities purchase, and
builded for that purpose: the cause of which remove was this: Richard Husband,
Pastelar, keeper of this Compter in Breadstreete, Prisoners removed from the
Compter in Breadstreet to a new Copter in Woodstreet* Keeper of the Compter
sent to Newgate.
being a wilful and headstrong man, dealt (for his own advantage) hard with
the prisoners under his change, having also servants, such as himself liked
best for their bad usage, and would not for any complaint be reformed:
whereupon, in the year 1550. Sir Rowland Hill being Mayor, by the assent of a
Court of Aldermen, he was sent to the Goal of Newgate, for the cruel handling
of his prisoners: and it was commanded to the Keeper, to set those Irons on his
legs, which are called the Widows alms. These he ware from Thursday, till
Sunday in the afternoon, and being by a Court of Aldermen released on the
Tuesday, was bound in an hundred Marks, to observe from thenceforth an Act
made by the Common Council, for the ordering of prisoners in the Compters: all
which notwithstanding, he continued as before, whereof my self am partly a
witness: For being on a Jury, Quest of inquiry indight the Keepers of the
Goals for dealing hardly with their prisoners.
to enquire against a Sessions of Goal delivery, in the year 1552. we found
the prisoners hardly dealt withal for their achates and otherwise, as also
that Thieves and Strumpets were there lodged for four pence the night, whereby
they might be safe from searches that were made abroad: They indighted the
Bowling-Al^ies, etc.
for the which enormities, and other not needful to be recited, he was
indighted at that Session, but did rub it out, and could not be reformed,
till this remove of the prisoners: for the house in Breadstreete was his own
by lease, or otherwise, so that he could not be put from it. Note that Iaylors,
buying their offices, will deal hardly with pitiful prisoners.

Now in Friday street, Friday street.
so called of Fishmongers dwelling there, and serving Fridayes Market, on the
East side is a small Parish Church, Parish Church of S. John Evangelist,
sometime of S. We^bridge.
commonly called Saint John Evangelist. The Monuments therein, be of John
Dogget, Merchant-Taylor, one of the Sheriffs in the year 1509.

Sir Christopher Askew, Draper, Mayor, 1533.

William de Avinger, Farrier, was buried there in the 34. of Edward the second.

Then lower down is one other Parish Church of S. Margaret Moses, Parish
Church of S. Margaret Moses.
so called (as seems) of one Moses, that was founder or new builder thereof.

The Monuments there, be of Sir Richard Dobbes, Skinner, Mayor, 1551.

William Dane, Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffs, 1569.

Sir John Allot, Fishmonger, Mayor, 1591.

There was of elder time buried, Nicholas Stanes, and Nicholas Bray, they
founded Chauntries there.

Beati mortui qui in Domino moriuntur. APOC. 14.
To William Dane that sometime was
An Ironmonger; A Monument in the South wall of the Chancell.
where, each Degree
He worthily (with praise) did pass.
By wisdom, truth, and heed, was he
Advanced an Alderman to be:
Then, Sheriff; that, he with justice pressed,
And cost, performed with the best.
In Alms frank, of Conscience clear;
In grace with Prince, to People glad:
His virtuous wife, his faithful Pheere,
Margaret, this Monument has made:
Meaning (through God) that as she had
With him (in house) long lived well;
Even so in Tombs bliss to dwell.
Obierunt in Christo.

Ille, Sabat. 5. September. 1573. Aetatis 56.

Haec vero 18. November. An. 1579.

April. 5. An. Domini, 1593.

The Monument of the Right Honorable Sir John Allot, A fair Monument in the
North wall of the Chancell.
Knight, late Lord Mayor of this City of London, and Mayor of the Staple of
England; who deceased the seventeenth day of September, Anno 1591. in the time
of his Maioralty. Aetatis suae 66.

Here lies the body of Alice Daniel, A fair plated stone under the Communion
table
the wife of John Daniel, Esquire, and mother of Gerard Daniel, Fishmonger.
Which Alice deceased the thirteenth day of October, Anno Domini 1481. On whose,
etc.

Ever do well.
On the West side of this Friday street is Maiden lane, Maiden lane, or Disiar
lane.
so named of such a Sign, or Distaffe lane, for Distar lane, as I read in
Record of a Brew House, called the Lamb in Distar lane, the sixteenth of Henry
the sixth.

In this Distar lane, Cordwayners Hall.
on the North side thereof, is the Cordwayners or Shoomakers Hall; which
Company were made a Brotherhood or Fraternity, in the eleventh of Henry the
fourth.

Of these Cordwayners I read, that since the fifth of Richard the second,
(when he took to wife Anne, daughter to Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia) by her
example the English people had used piked Shoes, Long piked shoos, tied to the
knees.
tied to their knees with Silken Laces, or Chains of Silver and Gilt: Wherefore
in the fourth of Edward the fourth it was ordained and proclaimed, Piked shoes
forbidden.
that Beakes of Shin and Boots should not pass the length of two inches, upon
pain of cursing by the Clergy, and by Parliament to pay 20. s. for every
pair. And every Cordwayner that shod any man or woman on the Sunday, to pay
30. s.

On the South side of this Distar lane, is also one other Lane, called Distar
lane; which runs down to Knight-Riders street, or Old Fishstreet.

And this is the end of Breadstreete Ward: Which has and Alderman, his Deputy,
Common Council ten, Constables ten, Scavengers eight, Wardmote Inquest
thirteen, and a Beadle. It stands taxed to the Fifteen in London, at seven
and thirty pounds, and in the Exchequer, at six and thirty pounds, eighteen
shillings, two pence.

QVEENE HITH WARD.
NExt unto Breadstreete Ward on the South side thereof, Queen Hith Ward
is Queen Hith Ward, so called of a Watergate, or Harborow for Boats,
Lighters, and Barges, and was (of old time) for Ships, at what time, the Timber
Bridge of London was drawn up, for the passage of them to the said Hith, as to
a principal stand for landing and unlading against the midst and heart of
the City. This Ward begins in the East, Knight Riders street.
in Knight-Riders street, on the South side thereof, at the East end of the
Parish Church called the Holy Trinity, and runs West on the South side, to
a Lane called Lambart hill, which is the length of the Ward in Knight-Riders
street. Out of the which street are diverse Lanes, running South to Thames
street, and are of this Ward. The first is Trinity lane, Trinity lane.
which runs down by the West end of Trinity Church. Then is Spuren lane,
or Spooners lane, Spuren lane, or Huggen lane.
now called Huggen lane. Then Breadstreet hill. Then St. Mary Mounthaunt: out
of the which Lane, on the East side thereof, is one other Lane, turning East
through S. Nicholas Olaves Churchyard, to Breadstreet hill. This Lane is
called Finimore lane, Finimore, or Five foot lane.
or Five foot lane, because it is but five foot in breadth at the West end. In
the midst of this Lane, runs down one other Lane broader, South to Thames
street, I think the same to be called Desborne lane, Desborne lane.
for I read of such a Lane to have been in the Parish of S. Mary Summerset,
in the 22. of Edward the third, where there is said to lie between the
Tenement of Edward de Mountacute Knight, on the East part, and the Tenement
sometime pertaining to William Gladwine, on the West, one plot of ground,
containing in length toward Thames street twenty five foot, etc.

Last of all, Lambart hill.
have you Lambart hill, so called of one Lambart owner thereof: and this is the
farthest West part of this Ward.

On the North side, coming down from Knight-Riders street, the East side of
Lambart hill is wholly of this Ward: and the West side from the North end of
the Black-smiths Hall (which is about the midst of this Lane) unto Thames
street. Then part of Thames street is of this Ward, to wit, from a Cooks house
called the sign of King David, three houses west from the Old Swanne Brewhouse
in the East, unto Huntington house, over against Saint Peter's Church in the
West, near unto Paul's Wharse: And on the Lane side, from a Cooks house called
the Blue Boore, to the West end of Saint Peter's Church, and up Saint Peter's
hill, two houses North above the said Church. And these be the bounds of this
Ward: in which are Parish Churches seven, Hals of Companies two, and other
Ornaments, as shall be showed.

First, Parish Church of the Trinity.
in Knight-Riders street is the small Parish Church of the Holy Trinity,
lately very old, and in danger of down falling: collections were made for the
repairing thereof, but they would not stretch so far, until a general
means was made, as appears by a public notice thereof declared in the said
Church.

John Brian, Alderman in the reign of Henry the fifth, was a great benefactor:
John Chamber had a Chauntry there. Thomas Rishby, Esquire, and Alice his wife
buried within the Chancell. John Mirfin, Auditor of the Exchequer, 1471. Sir
Richard Fowlar of Riches in Oxfordshire, 1528. George Cope, second son to Sir
John Cope of Copes-Ashby, in Northamptonshire, 1572.

Toward the West end of Knight-Riders street, Parish Church of S. Nicholas
Cold Abbey.
is the Parish Church of Saint Nicholas Cold Abbey, a proper Church, somewhat
ancient, as appears by the ways raised thereabout, so that men are forced to
descend into the body of the Church. It has been called of many Colden Abbey,
of some Cold Abbey, or Cold Bey, and so have the most ancient writings, as
standing in a cold place, as Cold Harbor, and such like. The Steeple or tall
Tower of this Church, with the South Isle, has bin of later building, to wit,
the first of Richard the second, when it was meant that the whole old Church
should have been new builded, as appears by the Arching begun on the East
side the Steeple, under the which, in the stone work, the Arms of one
Buckland, Esquire, and his wife, daughter to Beaupere, are cut in stone, and
also are in the Glass windows; whereby it appears, he was the builder of
the Steeple, and repairer of the residue. The six and twentieth of Edward the
third, Andrew Aubery being Mayor, Thomas Friar, Fishmonger, gave one piece of
ground to the said Parish Church of Saint Nicholas, containing fourscore and
six foot in length, and three and forty foot at one end, and four and thirty
at another, in breadth for a Cemitory or Churchyard. The twentieth of Richard
the second; Thomas Barnard, Castle Clerk. John Sonderash, Clerk, and John
Nouncy, gave to the Parson and Churchwardens of the said Church and their
successors, one Message and one Shop, with the appurtenances in Distaffe lane,
and Old Fishstreet, for the reparation of the body of the late Church, the
Belfrey or Steeple, and Ornaments.

Buried in this Church, John Calfe, and William Cogeshall, 1426.

Walter Turk, Fishmonger, Mayor, 1349.

Richard Esgastone, Fishmonger, 1330.

Nicholas Wolberge, Fishmonger, 1407.

Thomas Padington, Fishmong. 1485.

Robert Hary Fishmonger.

John Suring, 1490.

Roger Darlington, Fishmonger, 1557.

Rich. Lacy, Parion, under a fair tomb on the North side of the Quire, 1491.

Richard Bradburge, 1497.

William Clarke, 1501.

James Pitman, 1507.

Richard Farneford, 1525.

Thomas Nicholas, Fishmonger, 1527.

William Brade, Fishmonger, 1528.

The 14. day of May, An. Dom. 1601.

Leonard Smith, Fishmonger, A fair plated stone in the East end of the
chancell.

ended his days,
He feared the Lord,
and walked in his ways:
His body here
in earth does rest,
His Soul with Christ
in heaven is blessed.
Here lie buried the bodies of Dorothy Halye, A fair plated stone by the
Communion table.
late wife of Robert Halye, of Ipswitch, in the County of Suffolk, Merchant:
And of William Wymer, son of William Wymer, and Mary his wife, daughter of the
said Robert and Dorothy, which William the son deceased the 19. day of August;
and the said Dorothy the 20. day of September next following, An. Dom. 1601.

Hic jacet Magister Will. Sandhill, A fair plated stone under the Communion
table.
Canonicus Eccle. -- magni London. Et huius Ecclesiae quondam Rector; Qui obiit
26. die Men's. Augusti. An. Dom. 1445. Cuius animae, etc.

Hic jacet in cossa, A fair plated stone in the middle Isle.

Putredo mortis and ossa,
Cum mulieris quie
in coelis vivit amoene,
Vt puto per vitam
morum signis redimitam,
Anno Millino
qt. i. C. X. quae seno
Bissque die deno
cum perit en Elena,
Cum quarto pleno,
requiem tenet hic in ceno,
Quo cuius Jane
consternis corpus inane.
On the North side of this Church, Water Conduit.
in the wall thereof, was of late builded a covenient Cesterne of Stone and
Lead for receipt of Thames water, conveyed in pipes of Lead to that place, for
the ease and commodity of the Fishmongers; and other inhabitants in and about
Old Fishstreate. Barnard Randolph, Common Sergeant of the City of London, did
(in his life time) deliver to the Company of Fishmongers, the sum of nine
hundred pounds, to be employed toward the conducting of the said Thames water,
and cesterning the same, etc. In the Parishes of St. Mary Magdalen, and Saint
Nicholas Cold Abbey, near unto Fishstreet, seven hundred pounds, and other two
hundred pounds to charitable deeds. He deceased 1583. and shortly after, this
Conduit with the other was made and finished.

In Trinity lane, Painter stainers Hall.
on the West side thereof is the Painter-stainers Hall; for so of old time
were they called: but now that workmanship of staining is departed out of use
in England.

Lower down in Trinity lane, Earl of Cornwall his house.
on the East side thereof, was sometime a great Message, pertaining unto John,
Earl of Cornwall, in the 14. of Edward the third.

On Breadstreet hill, down to the Thames, on both sides, be diverse fair
houses, inhabited by Fishmongers, Cheefemongers, and Merchants of diverse
Trades. On the West side whereof is the Parish Church of Saint Nicholas Olave,
Parish Church of S. Nicholas Olave.
a convenient Church, having the Monuments of W. Newport, Fishmonger, one of
the Sheriffs, 1375.

Richard Wells, Parson, 1391.

Richard Sturges, Fishmonger, 1470.

Thomas Dewen, Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffs, 1537. who gave his Message
(with the appurtenances) wherein he dwelt, with 14. Tenements in the said
Parish of S. Nicholas, to be had, after the decease of Agnes his wife, to the
Ironmongers, and they to give stipends, appointed to Almes-men, in five houses
by them builded in the Churchyard of that Parish; but now they are converted
into four. More to poor Scholars in Oxford and Cambridge, etc.

Blitheman, an excellent Organist of the Queens Chapel lies buried there,
with an Epitaph, 1591.

Hic jacet Richardus Sturges, An ancient Tomb in the South wall of the Quire.
Civis and Piscenarius London, and Katharina uxor ejus. Qui quidem Rich. obiit
3. die mensis Iulii, Anno. Dom. 1479. Et praedicta Katharina obiit, etc.

Hic jacet Dominus Henricus Welleus, A fair plated stone under the Communion
table.
quondam Rector istius Ecclesiae. Qui obiit 4. die Maii, An. Domini 1391. Cujus
animae. etc.

Here Blitheman lias, a worthy wight, An engraven plate in the North wall of
the Chancell.

who feared God above,
A friend to all, a foe to none,
whom rich and poor did love.
Of Princes Chapel, Gentleman,
unto his dying day;
Whom all took great delighe to hear
him on the Organs play.
Whose passing skill in Mustokes Art,
a Scholar left behind;
John Bull (by name) his Master vein
expressing in each kind.
But nothing here continues long;
nor resting place can have;
His soul departed hence to Heaven,
his body here in Grave.
He died on Whitsunday, Anno Domini 1591.
Here, before this place, A small Monument in the North wall of the Chancell.
lies buried the body of John Widnell; Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London,
sometime Master of that Company, and Deputy of this ward; who deceased the 15.
day of February, 1601. being of the age of 70.

Here lie the bodies of Thomas Lewen, An ancient Tomb in the North Isle of the
body of the Church:
Ironmonger, and sometime Alderman of this City of London, and Agnes his wife.
Which Thomas deceased the 29. day of June, Anno Domini 1555. And the said Agnes
deceased the 26. day of October, An. Dom. 1562.

The next is Old Fishstreet hill, a passage so called, Old Fishstreet hill.
which also runs down to Thames street. In this Lane, on the East side
thereof, is the one end of Finimbre, or Five foot lane.

On the west side of this Old Fishstreet hill, Bishop of Herefords house.
is the Bishop of Herefords Inn, or Lodging; an ancient House, and large
Rooms, builded of Stone and Tiber, which sometime belonged to the Mounthaunts
in Norfolk. Radulphius de Maydenstone, Bishop of Hereford, about 1234. bought
it of the Mounthaunts, and gave it to the Bishops of Hereford, his successors;
Charles, both Bishop of Hereford, and Chancellor of the Marches, about the
year 1517. repaired it: Since the which time, the same is greatly ruinated,
and is now divided into many small Tenements: the Hall and principal rooms,
are an house to make Suger-loaves, etc.

Next adjoining is the Parish Church of Saint Mary de Monte alto, Parish Church
of S. Mary Monte alto.
or Mounthaunt, this is a very small Church, and at the first builded, to be a
Chapel for the said house of the Mounthaunts, and for Tenements thereunto
belonging. The Bishop of Hereford is Patron thereof.

Monuments in this Church of John Gloucester, Alderman, 1345. who gave
Salt-wharfe, for two Chauntries there.

John Skip, Bishop of Hereford, 1539. sat 12. years, dyed at London in time
of Parliament, and was buried in this Church.

There was sometime a fair house in the said Parish of Saint Mary Mounthaunt,
belonging to Robert Belkenape, one of the Kings Justices, Robert Belkenape his
house given to VV. Wickham.
but the said Belkenape being banished this Realm, King Richard the second, in
the twelfth of his reign, gave it to William Wickham, Bishop of Winchester.

On the East side of this Old Fishstreet hill, One old Hall of the Fishmongers.
is one great house, now letten out for rent, which house sometime was one of
the Hals pertaining to the Company of Fishmongers, Fishmonger Hall-motes, six
in number.
at such time as they had six Hall-motes or meeting places: namely, twain in
Bridgestreet, or New Fishstreet, Patents.
twain in Old Fishstreet, whereof this was one, and twain in Stockfishmonger
Row, or Thames street, as appears by a Record the 22. of Richard the second.

Next Westward, is one other Lane, called Lambard hill, Lambard Hill.
the East side whereof is wholly of this Ward, and but half the West side, to
wit, from the North end of the Black-smiths Hall. Black-smiths Hall.


Then in Thames street, of this Ward, and on the North side over against the
Queens Hith, Parish Church of S. Michael at Queen Hith.
is the parish Church of S. Michael, a convenient Church, but all the Monuments
therein are defaced.

I find that Stephen Spilman, Gentleman, of that Family in Norfolk, sometime
Mercer, Chamberlain of London, then one of the Sheriffs, and Alder-man, in
the year 1404. deceasing without issue, gave his Lands to his Family the
Spilmans, and his goods to the making or repairing of Bridges, and other like
godly uses: and amongst others, in this Church he founded a Chauntry, and was
buried in the Quire.

Also Richard Marlow, Ironmonger, Mayor, 1409. gave twenty pounds to the poor
of that Ward, and ten Marks to the Church.

Richard Gray, His Monument yet remains.
Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffs, 1515. gave 40. l'. to that Church, and was
there buried.

At the West end of that Church, goes up a Lane, called Pyellane. Pyellane.
Parish Church of S. Mary Summerset.
On the same North side, at the South end of S. Mary Mounthaunt lane, is the
Parish Church of Saint Mary Summerset, over against the Broken Wharfe: it is a
proper Church, but the Monuments are all defaced, except a Gravestone lately
there laid, with this inscription:

Here lies buried the body of Master Richard Randall of this Parish, A fair
plated stone in the chancell by the Commmunion Table.
who had issue by Margaret his first wife four sons and seven daughters, one
only daughter surviving, named Joyce. He was by freedom a Pewterer, by trade a
Brewer, and one of the Governors of Christ's Hospital. He departed this life
the 7. day of June, An. Domini 1616. being aged 75. years.

No cause to mourn,
though here he lie,
That gave to many
cause to cry.
For though his body
turn to dust,
His Soul does live
among the just.
I think the same to be of old time called Summers Hith, Summer Hith.
of some man's name, that was owner of the ground near adjoining, as Edreds
Hith was so called of Edred, owner thereof, and since called Queen Hith, as
pertaining to the Queen, etc.

Then is a small Parish Churcch of St. Peter; Parish Church of S. Peter Parva
by Paul's VVharfe.
called Parva, or little, near unto Paul's Wharfe: In this Church no Monuments
do remain.

At the West end thereof is a Lane, called St. Peter's Hill: but two houses up
that Lane, on the East side, is of this Ward, and the rest is of Castle Baynard
Ward.

On the South side of Thames street, beginning again in the East, among the
Cooks; the first in this Ward is the sign of David the King.

Then is Townes-end lane, turning down to the Thames. Townes-end Lane.


Then is Queen Hith, a large Receptacle for Ships, Eldreds Hith or Queen Hith.
Lighters, Barges, and such other Vessels. Touching the Antiquity and use of
this Gate and Hith, first I find, that the same belonged to one named Edred,
and was then called Edreds Hith: which since falling to the hands of King
Stephen, Lib. Trinit^t^e.
it was by his Charter confirmed to William de Ypre: the Farm thereof in Fee
and in Heritage. William de Ypre gave it unto the Prior and Covent of the Holy
Trinity within Ealdgate, as appears by this Charter.

To Theobald, by the grace of God, Archbishop of Canturbury, Primate of
England, and Legate Apostolic to the Bishop of London, and to all faithful
people, Clerks and Laymen, William de Ypre sends greeting: Know ye me to
have given and granted to God, and to the Church of the Holy Trinity of London,
to the Prior and Canons there, serving God, in perpetual Alms, Edreds Hith,
with the appurtenances, with such devotion, that they shall send every year
twenty pounds, unto the maintenance of the Hospital of Saint Katharines, which
Hospital they have in their hands, and an hundred shillings to the Monks of
Bermondsey, and threescore shillings to the Brethren of the Hospital of Saint
Giles, and that which remains, the said Prior and Canons shall enjoy to
themselves. Witnesses, Richard de Luce, Ralph Bigot, etc.

This Edreds Hith, (...).
after the aforesaid Grants, came again to the Kings hands, by what means I
have not read: but it pertained unto the Queen; and therefore was called Ripa
Reginae, the Queens Bank, or Queens Hith, and great profit thereof was made
to her use, as may appear by this which follows.

King Henry the third, in the ninth of his reign, commanded the Constables of
the Tower of London, Ships of the Ports arrested, and forced to bring their
Corn to Queen Hith.
to arrest the ships of the Cinque Ports on the River of Thames, and to compel
them to bring their Corn to no other place, but to the Queens Hith only. In
the eleventh of his reign, he charged the said Constable, to distraine all
Fish offered to be sold in any place of this City, but at the Queens Hith.
Moreover, in the 28. of his reign, an Inquisition was made before William of
York, the Provost of Beverley, Henry of Bath, and Hierome of Caxton, Justices
Itinerantes, sitting in the Tower of London, touching the Customs of Queen
Hith, observed in the year last before the wars between the King and his
father, and the Barons of England, and of old customs of other times, and what
customs had been changed, at what time the tax and payment of all things
coming thither, and between Woorepath, and Anede Hith, were found and seized,
according to the old order, as well Corn and Fish, as of other things. Liberty
of the Queens Hith from the Steeleyard to the Black Friars.
All which customs were as well to be observed in the part of Downegate, as in
Queen Hith, for the Kings use. When also it was found, that the Corn arriving
between the gate of the Guild Hall of the Merchants of Colleyne, and the Soke
of the Archbishop of Canturbury (for he had a house near unto the Black
Friars) was not to be measured by any other quarter, Soke is Court.
than by that of the Queens Soke.

After this, the Bailiffes of the said Hith complained, that since the said
Recognition, fourteen foreign Ships, laden with Fish, arrived at Belinsgate,
which Ships should have arrived at the said Hith: And therefore it was ordered,
that if any foreign Ship laden with Fish, should in form aforesaid arive
elsewhere than at this Hith, it should be at the Kings pleasure to amerce them
at 40. s. Notwithstanding, the Ships of the Citizens of London were at liberty,
to arrive where the owners would appoint them.

After this, Queen Hith let to farm to the Mayor and Communalty of London.
the said Henry the third confirmed the Grant of Richard Earl of Cornwall,
for the Farm of Queen Hith, unto John Gisors, then Mayor, and to the
Communalty of London, and their successors for ever, as by this his Charter
appears.

Henry by the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Guien,
and Earl of Anjou, to all Archbishops, etc. Be it known, that We have seen
the Covenant between our Brother Richard, Earl of Cornwall, of the one party,
and the Mayor and Communalty of London on the other party, which was in this
sort. In the thirtieth year of Henry, Lib. Trinit. Lon.
the son of King John, upon the Feast of the Translation of S. Edward at
Westminster, this Covenant was made between the Honorable Lord Richard, Earl
of Cornwall, and John Gisors, then Mayor of London; and the Commons thereof,
concerning certain exactions and demands pertaining to the Queen Hith of
London. The said Earl granted for himself and his heirs, that the said
Mayor, and all Majors ensuing, and all the Commons of the City, should have and
hold the Queen Hith, with all the Liberties, Customs, and other
appurtenances, repaying yearly to the said Earl, his heirs and assigns,
fifty pounds, at Clarken-well, at two several terms; to wit, the Sunday after
Easter 25. pounds, and at Michaelmas 25. pounds. And for more surety hereof,
the said Earl has set thereunto his Seal, and left it with the Mayor, and
the Mayor and Communalty have set to their Seal, and left it with the Earl.
Wherefore We confirm and establish the said Covenant, for Us and for our
heirs. Witnesses, Ralph Fitz-Nichol, Richard Gray, John and Will. Brithem,
Paulin Painter, Ralph Wancia, John Cumband, and other: At Windsor, the 26. of
February, the 31. of our reign.

The charge of this Queen Hith was then committed to the Sheriffs, and so
has continued ever since; the profits whereof are sore diminished; so that (as
writes Robert Fabian) it was worth (in his time) little above 20. Marks, Rob.
Fabian Lib. Constit.
or 15. pounds one year with another.

Now, for Customs of this Queen Hith: Custom of Queen Hith.
In the year 1302. the thirtieth of Edward the first, (...) was found by the
oath of diverse men, that Bakers, Brewers, and others, buying their Corn at
Queen Hith, should pay for Measuring, Portage, and Carriage, for every Quarter
of Corn whatsoever, from thence to West Cheap, to S. Anthonies Church, to
Horse-shoo Bridge, and to Woolsey street, in the Parish of Alhallowes the
less, and such like distances, one ob. q. to Fleetstreet, to Newgate,
Creplegate, to Birchovers lane, to East-Cheape, and Billinsgate, A
Corne-Meater, 8 Master Porters, and 24. Porters under them, at Queen Hith.
one penny. Also, that the Measurer (or the Meater) ought to have eight chief
Master Porters, every Master to have three Porters under him, and every one of
them to find one Horse, and seven Sackes, and he that so did not, to loose
his Office. This Hith was then so frequented with Vessels, bringing thither
Corn (besides Fish, Salt, Fuel, and other Merchandises) that all these men,
to wit, the Meater, and Porters, thirty seven in number, for all their charge
of Horses and Sackes, and small stipend, lived well of their labors: but now
the Bakers of London, and other Citizens, travel into the Countries, and buy
their Corn of the Farmers, after the Farmers price.

King Edward the second, Lib. (...).
in the first of his reign, gave to Margaret, wife to Peter de Gavestone,
forty three pounds, twelve shillings, nine pence half penny farthing, out of
the Rent of London, to be received of the Queens Hith. Certain impositions
were set upon Ships and other Vessels coming thither, as upon Corn, Salt, and
other things, toward the charge of cleansing Roomeland there, Roomeland at
Queen Hith.
the 41. of Edward the third.

The third of Edward the fourth, the Market at Queen Hith being hindered by
the slacknesse of drawing up London Bridge, it was ordained, that all manner of
Vessels, Ships, or Boats, great or small, resorting to the City with victual,
should be sold by retaile, and that if there came but one Vessel at a time,
were it Salt, Wheat, Rye, or other Corn from beyond the Seas, or other
Grains, Garlic, Onions, Herrings, Sprats, Eeles, Whiting, Plaice, Cods,
Mackarell, etc. then that one Vessel should come to Queen Hith, and there to
make sale. But if two Vessels came, the one should come to Queen Hith, the
other to Billinsgate: Queen Hith to be more frequented of Ships and Boats
than Billinsgate.
if three, two of them should come to Queen Hith, the third to Billinsgate,
etc. always the more to Queen Hith. If the Vessel being great, coming with
Salt from the Bay, and could not come to these Keys, then the same to be
conveied by Lighters, as before is meant.

One large house, Garner for Corn at Queen Hith.
for stowage of Corn, craned out of Lighters and Barges, is there lately
builded. Sir John Lion, Grocer, Mayor 1554. by his Testament gave 100. l'.
toward it: But since it has been increased and made larger, at the charges
of the City, in the year 1565.

Against this Queens Hith, on the River of Thames, of late years was placed a
Corne-Mill, A Corn Mill upon Barges or Lighters on the Thames.
upon, or betwixt two Barges or Lighters, and there ground Corn, as
Water-Mills in other places, to the wonder of many, that had not seen the
like. But this lasted not long without decay: such as caused the same Barges
and Mill to be removed and taken asunder, are soon forgotten. I read of the
like to have been in former time, as thus:

In the year 1525. the 16. of Henry the 8. Sir William Bailey being Mayor, John
Cook of Gloucester, Mercer, gave to the Mayor and Communalty of London, and
theirs for ever, one great Barge, in the which two great Corne-mills were made
and placed; Two corn Mils in one Barge given to this City, 1525.
which Barge and Mills were set in and upon the stream of the River of Thames,
within the jurisdiction and liberty of the said City of London. And also he
gave to the City all such Timber, Boords, Stones, Iron, etc. provided for
making, mending, and repairing of the said Barge and Mils: in reward whereof,
the Mayor gave him 50. l'. presently, and 50. l'. yearly, during his life: and
if the said Cook deceased before Ioane his wife, then she to have forty
Marks the year during her life.

Next adjoining to this Queen Hith, on the West side thereof, Salt Wharfe
is Salt Wharfe, named of Salt taken up, measured, and sold there.

The next is Strew lane, Stew lane.
of a Stew, or Hot-house there kept.

After that is Timber Hith, Timber Hith.
or Timber street, so called, of Timber, or Boords, there taken up and wharfed:
It is in the Parish of S. Mary Sonners-Hith, as I read in the 56. of Henry the
third, and in the ninth of Edward the second.

Then is Brooks Wharfe, Brooks Wharfe.
and Broken Wharfe, Broken Wharfe.
a Watergate or Key so called, of being broken, and fallen down into the
Thames.

By this Broken Wharfe remains one large old building of stone, Bygots house
by Broken Wharfe.
with arched Gates; which Message, as I find, in the reign of Henry the third,
the 43. year, pertained unto Hugh de Bygot; and in the 11. of Edward the
third, to Thomas Brothertun, the Kings Brother, Earl of Norfolk, Marshall of
England. In the 11. of Henry the 6. to John Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, etc.

Within the Gate of this House (now belonging to the City of London) is
lately, An Engine for enforcing of Thames water.
to wit, in the year 1594. and 1595. builded one large house, of great height,
called an Engine, made by Bevis Bulmar, Gentleman, for the conveying and
forcing of Thames water, to serve in the middle and West parts of the City.
The ancient great Hall of this Message is yet standing, and pertaining to a
great Brew House for Beer.

West from this is Trigge lane, Trigge lane.
going down to the Thames. Next is called Bosse lane, Bosse lane.
of a Bosse of water, like unto that of Belinsgate, there placed by the
Executors of Richard Whitington.

Then is one great Message, sometime belonging to the Abbots of Chartsey in
Surrey, and was their Inn, wherein they were lodged when they repaired to the
City: it is now called Sandy house, by what reason I have not heard: I think
the Lord Sands has been lodged there.

And this is an end of this Queen Hith Ward; which has an Alderman, and his
Deputy; Common-Counsell, six; Constables, nine; Scavengers, eight; Ward-mote
Inquest, thirteen, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteen in London, twenty
pounds, and in the Exchequer, at nineteen pounds, sixteen shillings, two
pence.

CASTLE BAYNARD Ward.
THen next is Castle Baynard Ward, Castle Baynard Ward
so named of an old Castle there. This Ward begins in the East, on the
Thames side, at an House called Huntington House, and runs West by Paul's
Wharfe, by Baynards Castle, Puddle Wharfe, and by the South side of Black
Friars. Then turning by the East wall of the said Friars, to the South-west end
of Creed lane. Then on the North side of Thames street, over against Huntington
House, by Saint Peter's Church and lane, called Peter Hill, along till over
against Puddle Wharfe; and then North up by the great Wardrobe, to the West end
of Carter lane. Then up Creed lane, Ave Mary lane, and a piece of Pater noster
Row, to the sign of the Golden Lion, and back again up Warwick lane, all
the East side thereof, to the sign of the Crown by Newgate Market: and this
is the farthest North part of this Ward.

Then out of Thames street be Lanes ascending North to Knight-riders street:
The first is Peter Hill Lane, all of that Ward, (two houses excepted, adjoining
to S. Peter's Church.) The next is Paul's Wharfe Hill, which thwarting
Knight-riders street and Carter lane, goes up to the South Chain of Paul's
Churchyard.

Then is Adle street, Adle street.
over against the West part of Baynards Castle, going up by the West end of
Knight-riders street, and to Carter lane.

Thus much for Lanes out of Thames street. The one half of the West side of
Lambard Hill lane being of this ward, at the North-west end thereof, on the
South side, and at the West end of S. Mary Magdalens Church: on the North side,
begins Knight-riders street to be of this Ward, and runs West, on both
sides, to the Parish Church of S. Andrew by the Wardrobe.

Then at the said East end of Saint Mary Magdalens Church, goes up the Old
Exchange, all the West side whereof, up to the South-east gate of Paul's
Churchyard, and by S. Austens Church, is of this Ward.

About the midst of this Old Exchange, on the West side thereof, is Carter
lane, which runs West, to the East entry of the Black Friars, and the South
end of Creed lane; out of the which Carter lane descends a Lane, Do little
lane.
called Do little lane, and comes into Knight-riders street, by the
Bores-bead Tavern: and more West is Sermon lane, by an Inn called the
Powle-head. Then out of Carter lane, on the North side thereof, the South
Chain of Paul's Churchyard, and the Churchyard it self, on that South side
of Paul's Church, and the Church of Saint Gregory, the Bishops Palace, and the
Deanes lodging, be all of this Ward: and such be the bounds thereof.

The Ornaments in this Ward, be, Parish Churches, four; of old time, a
Castle; diverse Noble-mens houses; Halls of Companies, twain; and such others,
as shall be showed.

In Thames street, at the South-east end, is an ancient Message, of old time
called Beaumonts Inn, Beaumonts Inn.
as belonging to that Family of Noblemen of this Realm, in the fourth of
Edward the 3. Edward the fourth, in the fifth of his reign, gave it to W.
Hastings, Lord Chamberlain, Master of his Mints. It is now called Huntington
house, as belonging to the Earls of Huntington.

Next is Paul's Wharfe, Paul's Wharfe.
a large landing-place, with a common Stayre upon the River of Thames, at the
end of a Street called Paul's Wharfe Hill, which runs down from Paul's Chain.

Next is a great Message, called Scroopes Inn, Scroopes Inn.
sometimes belonging to the Scroopes, in the 31. of Henry the sixth.

Then is one other great Message, sometime belonging to the Abbey of Fiscampe,
beyond the Sea: and by reason of the Wars, it coming to the hands of King
Edward the third, the same was given to Sir Simon Burley, Knight of the Garter,
and therefore called Burley house in Thames street, Burley house.
between Baynards Castle and Paul's Wharfe.

Then have you Baynards Castle, Baynards Castle.
whereof this whole Ward takes name. This Castle banketh on the River Thames,
and was called Baynards Castle, of Baynard, a Nobleman, that came in with
William the Conqueror: Of the which Castle, and of Baynard himself, I have
spoken in another place.

There was also another Tower by Baynards Castle, builded by King Edward the
second, Edward the third, in the second of his reign, gave it to William Duke
of Hamelake, in the County of York, and his heirs, for one Rose yearly to be
paid for all service. The same Place (as seems to me) was since called
Legates Inn, Legates Inn.
in the seventh of Edward the fourth, where be now diverse VVood-wharfes in
place.

Then is there a great Brew House, and Puddle Wharfe, Puddle Wharfe.
a VVater-gate into the Thames, where Horses use to be watered, and therefore
being filled with their trampling, and made puddle-like, as also of one Puddle
dwelling there, it is called Puddle Wharfe.

Then is there a Lane between the Black Friars and the Thames, called in the
26. of Edward the 3. Castle lane.

In this Lane also, is one great Message, of old time belonging to the Priorie
of Okeborne in Wiltshire, Prior of Okebornes house.
and was the Priors lodging when he repaired to London. This Prior being of
the French Order, was suppressed by Henry the 5. and with other Lands and
Tenements pertaining to the said Priorie, was by Henry the 6. given to his
College in Cambridge, called now the Kings College.

About this Castle Lane was sometime a Mill or Mils, A Mill or Mils by Baynards
Castle.
belonging to the Templers of the New Temple, as appears of Record: for King
John, in the first year of his reign, granted a place in the Fleet, near
unto Baynards Castle, to make a Mill, and the whole course of water of the
Fleet, to serve the said Mill.

I read also, that in the year 1274. the second of Edward the first, Rich.
Raison and Atheline his wife, did give to Nicho. de Musely, Clerk, ten
shillings of yearly free and quiet rent, out of all his tenements, with the
houses thereupon built, and their appurtenances, which they had of the demise
of the Master and Brethren of Knights Templars in England, next unto their Mill
of Fleet, over against the houses of Laurence de Brook, in the Parish of Saint
Andrew, next to Baynards Castle: which tenements lie between the way leading
to the said Mill on the West part. Also in the Rights belonging to Robert
Fitzwater, Soke, Court or Ward belonging to Robert Fitzwater.
and to his heirs, in the City of London, in the time of peace, it was
declared in the year 1303. that the said Robert, Castillon of London, and
Banner-bearer, had a Soke (or Ward) in the City, that was by the wall of S.
Paul, as men go down the street before the Brewhouse of S. Paul, unto the
Thames, and so to the side of the Mill, which is in the water that comes
down from Fleet bridge, and goes by London walls, betwixt the Friars
Preachers Church and Ludgate; and so that Ward turned back by the House of the
said Friars, unto the said common wall of the said Chanonrie of S. Paul: that
is all of the Parish of S. Andrew; which is the gift of his Ancestors by
Seniority, as more I have showed in the Castles.

Now here is to be noted, that the Wall of London, at that time, went
straight South from Ludgate, down to the River of Thames: But for building of
the Black Friars Church, the said Wall in that place was by commandment
taken down, and a new Wall made, straight West from Ludgate to Fleet bridge,
and then by the water of Fleet, to the River of Thames, etc.

In the year 1307. the 35. of Edward the first, in a Parliament at Carlisle,
Henry Lacie, Earl of Lincoln, complained of annoyances done to the water of
the Fleet; Mill by Baynards Castle destroyed.
whereupon it was granted, that the said Mill should be removed and destroyed.

This Ward ascends up by the East wall of the Black Friars, to the Southwest
end of Creed lane, where it ends on that side.

Then to begin again on the North side of Thames street, over against
Huntington house, by Saint Peter's Church and lane, called Peter Hill, and so to
S. Bennet Hude (or Hith) over against Paul's Wharfe, Parish Church of S. Bennet
by Paul's Wharfe.
is a proper Parish Church, which has the Monuments of Sir William Cheyny,
Knight, and Margaret his wife, 1442. buried there.

Doctor Chadwell, Physician.

Sir Gilbert Dethicke, alias Garter, King at Arms.

Mariae Martin, A comely Monument in the South I Will of the Quire.
Iohannis Roissei filiae, lectissimae feminae, uxori optime meritae 4.
liberorum incolumium Matri, ex longa infirmitate, quam ex puerperio contraxit,
defunctae ad perpetuam federis nostri conjugalis memoriam, simul ut fidei,
pietatis, and in omni vita probitatis ejus aliquod Monumentu^ extaret: Thomas
Martinus Jurisconsultus moestissimus Conjunx posui.

Obiit Calendas Maii, 1565.

Vixit Annos 32.

David Smith, Another fair Monument in the same wall.
Embroyderer to Queen Elizabeth, etc. deceased the tenth day of August, 1587.
aged 63. years, and lies here-under buried: whose honest, virtuous, and
compassionate care for the needy, both in soul and body, is expressed by his
benevolence that way extended, like a good Steward, making others partakers of
his well-imployed Talent. Who had to wife Katharine, (by whom he had eight
sons and eight daughters) at whose proper charges (in memory of her said
loving husband) is erected this Monument, the 25. of March, in An. 1596. Who
living his faithful Widow till the fourth day of February, 1607. aged 78.
years, lies also hereunder buried.

The Tomb of Master James Austen, A fair gravestone in the Chancell.
a good Benefactor of this Parish, who dyed Anno 1602. and of Joyce his wife,
and of William their only son: which Joyce married after with Sir Robert
Clarke, Knight, one of the Barons of the Kings Majesty's Court of Exchequer,
who caused this Tomb to be erected.

Here lies the body of Ellis Hilton, Esquire, who deceased the 12. day of
December, in the year of our Lord God, 1528. etc.

Hic sepultus Griffinus LLoyd, Legum Doctor, A very fair plated stone by the
Communion Table.
Qui obiit in Christo, November. 26. An. Dom. 1586.

Hic discas morti
dominari, spernere fatum.
Diram morborum
vim superare mori.
Nam jacet hic legum
Doctor virtutibus olim
Insignis, verae
Relligionis amans.
Qui moriens docuit
vivos been vivere, vivus,
Afflictos docuit
pro pietate mori.
Divitias justus
cumulavit, dives amavit
Iustitiam, voluit
sic memor esse boni.
Divitias moriens
Musis donavit, ut illos
Qui Musas colerent
emoriendo juvat.
Sic vivus moriensque
fuit propensus ad omne
Legis opus, voluit
tam memor esse Dei.
Relligio vigilem,
Lex lumen, Cambria patrem,
Oxonia eximium
perdidit alma decus.
Cum fera mors illum
violento perdidit ictu,
Quem nollet virtus
inclita posse mori.
Postquam per denos
professor Regius annos
Vixerat, hoc gelido
condidit ossa thoro.
Here lies buried the bodies of John Par, A fair Monument in the South wall
of the Quire.
and Mary his wife, who were married together 34. years, and had issue one
only daughter between them, named Anne, who after married Thomas Gough, of
the Inner Temple in London, Esquire, who had fruitfully borne him six sons and
one daughter: which said Mr. Par was Embroyderer to our late Queen Elizabeth,
and to the Kings Majesty that now is, 25. years. He was a man of good respect
in the City, liberal to the Company whereof he was free, a good benefactor
to the poor of this Parish, and bountiful to all men. He departed this life
the 17. day of July, 1607. being aged 72. years and Mary his wife dyed a year
and an half before him.

This Tomb was erected and made by Thomas Gough, and Anne his wife, appointed
by the last Will of John Par, who made the said Anne his full Executrix: And it
was finished the 29. day of June, 1611.

West from this Church, by the South end of Adle street, almost against Puddle
Wharfe, there is one ancient building of stone and timber, builded by the Lords
of Barkley, Barklies Inn.
and therefore called Barkleys Inn. This house is now all in ruin, and letten
out in several tenements, yet the Arms of the Lord Barkley remain in the
stone-worke of an arched gate, and is between a Cheveron, Crosses ten, three,
three, and four.

Richard Beauchampe, Parish Church of S. Andrew in the Wardrobe.
Earl of Warwick, was lodged in this house, then called Barkleys Inn, in the
Parish of S. Andrew, in the reign of Henry the 6. Then turning up toward the
North, is the Parish Church of S. Andrew in the Wardrobe, a proper Church, but
few Monuments has it. John Parnt founded a Chauntry there.

Hic jacet Ioannes Ley, A plated stone under the Communion Table.
Armig. de Comitatu Wiltz. Qui obiit 7. die Iunii, An. Dom. 1604. Aetat. suae
54.

Hic jacet Ioannes Barnard, nuper Civis and Sciffor Land. ac Aelinora and
Alicia, The like stone ^^ing by the other.
uxores ejus. Qui quidem Ioannes obiit 21. die November. An. Dom. 1503.

The 29. day of October, A fair plated engraven plate with Arms on a pillar
in the Chancell.
An. Dom. 1573. deceased Thomasine, the wife of Thomas Butler, of Bewsen, in
the County of Lancaster, Esquire, and lies buried before this Pillar.

Via omnis carnis: hodie mihi, cras tibi.

Marmoreum decus
hoc consortis munere grato,
Non vita verum
nomine, Longus habet.
Here lies Henry Long of Shingay, A (...) Monument in the East end of the
Chancell.
Esquire, son and heir of Sir Richard Long, Knight, Gentleman of the Privy
Chamber to King Henry the eighth, the third son of Sir Thomas Long, Knight, of
Wiltshire: who married Dorothie, the daughter of Nicholas Clarke of Weston,
Esquire, and Elizabeth Ramsey his wife, sole heir of Thomas Ramsey of Hicham,
Esquire, her Father: By whom he had issue one son and three daughters: He
dyed the 15. day of April, An. Dom. 1573. leaving alive at that time of his
death, Elizabeth, his sole daughter and heir.

Dorothea uxor, conjugis amore posuit.

Nomine Longus, vita
brevis, inclitus ortu,
Ingenio praestans,
and pietatis amans.
Nere to this place lies interred the corpse of William Nicholson, sometime of
Walton, in the County of Buck, Gent. and Citizen and Draper of London. He had
to wife Ioane, the eldest daughter, and one of the heirs of William Company,
Gent. By whom he had issue (among diverse other) these which survived, namely,
Helen, first the wife of John Minor, of London, Draper, and afterward of Sir
John Branch, Knight, Lord Mayor of London, An. Dom. 1580. And Benjamin, who
deceased at Bramley, in the County of Surrey, where he has also left issue 2.
sons, Robert and George. The said William Nicholson departed this life in
September, An. Do. 1531. Being a benefactor to this Church, and to other
charitable uses: whose soul (we doubt not) rests with the Lord.

Qui genere atque opibus
quondam florebat honestis,
Nicholson, jacet hac
parvus in aede civis.
Quod mortale fuit
fluxit: sed fama perennis
Mensque manet; nihil
hic funera juris habent.
Spiritus in Coelis
divino splendet honor,
In terris memori
nomen amore viget.
Then is the Kings great Wardrobe. Sir John Beauchamp, Knight of the Garter,
Constable of Dover, Warden of the Cinque Ports, (son to Guido de Beauchampe,
Earl of Warwick) builded this house, was lodged there, deceased in the year
1359. and was buried on the South side of the middle I Will of Paul's Church. His
Executors sold the house to King Edward the third, unto whom the Parson of S.
Andrews complaining, that the said Beauchampe had pulled down diverse houses,
in their places to build the same house, whereby he was hindered of his
accustomed Tithes paid by the Tenants of old time; granted him 40. s. by the
year out of that house for ever. King Richard the third was lodged there in
the second of his reign.

In this house of late years was lodged Sir John Fortescue, Knight, Master of
the Wardrobe, Chancellor and under-Treasurer of the Exchequer, and one of her
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. The secret Letters and writings,
touching the estate of the Realm, were wont to be enrolled in the Kings
Wardrobe, and not in the Chancerie, as appears by the Records. Claus. 18. E.
4. 1. Memb. 13. Claus. 33. E. 1. Memb. 3. Et liberat. 1. E. 2. Memb. 4. etc.

From this Wardrobe, by the West end of Carter lane, then up Creed lane, Ave
Mary lane, and a piece of Pater noster row, up Warwick lane, all the East
side, to the Brewhome called the Crown, as I said, is of this Ward.

Touching Lanes ascending out of Thames street, Peter's Hill.
to Knight-riders street, the first is Peter's Hill, Almes-houses for ^poore
viddowes.
wherein I find no matter of note, more than certain Almes-houses, lately
founded on the West side thereof, by David Smith Embroyderer, for six poor
widows, whereof each to have 20. s. by the year.

On the East side of this lane stands a large house, of ancient building,
sometime belonging to the Abbot of S. Mary in York, and was his abiding house
when he came to London, Thomas Randolph Esquire has lately augmented and
repaired it.

At the upper end of this Lane, toward the North, the corner houses there, be
called Peter Key, Peter Key.
but the reason thereof I have not heard.

Then is Paul's Wharfe Hill, Paul's Wharfe Hill.
on the East side whereof is Wood-mongers Hall.

And next adjoining is Darby House, Wood-mongers Hall.
sometime belonging to the Stanleys, for Thomas Stanley, first Earl of Darby,
of that name, who married the Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond, mother to
Henry the seventh, in his time builded it.

Queen Mary gave it to Gilbert Dethicke, then Garter, Principal King of Arms
of Englishmen, Thomas Hauley Clarentieux, King of Arms of the South parts,
William Harvy, alias Norroy, King of Arms of the North parts, and the other
Heralds and Pursevants of Arms and to their successors, all the Capital
message or house, Darby House.
called Darby house, with the appurtenances, situate in the Parish of Saint
Bennet, and Saint Peter, and then being in the tenure of Sir Richard Sackvile,
I have the Copy of the said Patent delivered me by Hum. Dyson.
Knight, and lately parcel of the Lands of Edward Earl of Darby, etc. to the
end that the said Kings of Arms, Heraults, and Pursevaunts of Arms, and their
successors might (at their liking) dwell together, and at meet times to
congregate, speak, confer, and agree among themselves, for the good
government of their faculty, and their Records might be more safely kept, etc.
Dated the eighteenth day of July 1555. Philip and Marie the first and third
year.

Then higher up, Paul's Brew House, or Powle head Tavern.
near the South Chain of Paul's Churchyard, is the Powle head Tavern, which
house with the appurtenances, was (of old time) called Paul's Brewhouse, for
that the same was so employed, but being since left off, and letten out.

On the West side of this street is one other great house builded of stone,
which belongs to Paul's Church, and was sometime letten to the Blunts, Lord
Mountjoy; but of later time to a College in Cambridge, and from them to the
Doctors of the Civil Law and Arches, who keep a Commons there, and many of
them being there lodged, it is called the Doctors Commons. Doctors Commons.
Above this, on the same side, was one other great building over against Paul's
Brewhouse, and this was called Paul's Bakehouse, Paul's Bakehouse.
and was employed in baking of Bread for the Church of Paul's.

In Addle street or Lane I find no Monuments. Addle street


In Lambart hill lane, Lambart hill.
on the West side thereof, Blackesmiths Hall.
is the Blacksmiths Hall, and adjoining to the North side thereof have ye one
plot of ground, enclosed with a Brick wall for a Churchyard, Churchyard of
S. Mary Magdalen.
or b^rying plot, for the dead of Saint Mary Magdalens by Old Fishstreet, which
was given to that use by John Iwarby, an Officer in the receipt of the
Exchequer, in the six and twentieth of King Henry the sixth, as appears by
Patent.

John Iwarby, etc. gave a piece of Land lying void in the Parish of Saint Mary
Magdalen, nigh to Old Fishstreet, between the Tenement of John Phipot on the
South, and the Tenement of Bartholomew Burwash on the West, and the Tenement
per^aining to the Covent of the Holy Well on the North, and the way upon
Lambarts Hill, on the East, for a Churchyard to the Parson and Churchwardens,
etc.

Over Against the North-west end of this Lambart hill lane in Knight-riders
street, Parish Church of S. Mary Magdalen.
is the Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen, a small Church, having but few
Monuments.

Richard Woodroffe, Merchant-Taylor, 1519.

Barnard Randalph, Esquire, 1583.

Ioannes Sugar, A very ancient Tomb in the North I Will of the Quire.
Civis and Piscenarius London: Qui obiit 29. die D^cemb. An. Dom. 1455. and
Margareta uxor ejus, quae obiit 13. die November. An. Dom. 1485. Quorum animarum,
etc.

Here lies buried the body of Barnard Randolph, A fair Monument in the east
end of the Chanc^^^.
Esquire, while he lived, Commons Sergeant of this City of London. He died the
seventh day of August, An. Dom. 1583. And of his liberality has been
beneficial to the City, as formerly has been declared.

Here lies buried the body of Herbert Randolph, A comely Monument in the South
I Will of the Quire.
of Wardis, in the County of Sussex, Esquire, Cousin and next heir to Barnard
Randolph, Esquire, etc. He took to wife Judith, the eldest daughter of Anthony
Shirley, of Freston, in the said County of Sussex, Esquire, and departed this
life (without issue) on the 9. day of April, 1604.

In Obitum lectissimae feminae Margaretae Serle, A Monument near to the other.
nuper uxoris Alexandri Serle, Reg. Majest. Procuratoris, etc. Quae obiit 8.
die Men's. Martii, Anno Salutis humanae (qua nunc beatissima fruitur) iuxta
stilum Angliae, 1605.

Virgo december and septem vixi
intaminata per annos,
Deem duos totidem
tum pia nuptafui.
Funera gnatorum vidi
lugubria quinque,
Deque nevem, reliqui
his duo, nostra vident.
Casta domi vixi, invigilans
prolique larique,
Sara viro, mundo
Martha, Maria Deo.
Memoriae Sacrum.

Selectissimae feminae Ioannae, Another Monument beneath the former.
uxoris Gilberti Dethick, sil. 2. Domini Gulielmi Dethick, Mtis filiae
Alexandri Serle, Regiae Maiestatis Procuratoris Genti, and Margaretae uxoris
suae. Quae quidem Ioanna 10. Martii, An. 1607 stilo Angliae, sub certa spe
venturae in Christo Resurrectionis, Spiritum Deo, corpus terrae commendavit.

Vt semel partu geminas eodem,
Tristis, enixa est tacitas, sorores,
Lang^ido tandem pi^cide quievit.
Quindecem virge pia vixit annos,
Quindecem menses pia nupta facis
Tum pie cedens, pia men's fit alti,
Tabida Incola Coeli
Virgo dum, spes haec and amorparentum,
Nupta dum, lux haec and honor mariti,
Vxor and virgo, decor haec, propinquis,
Et decus omnes.
George Coleman, A comely Monument with arms in the same South I Will.
Gent. a freeman of this City of London, was born in Richmonsh^re, and
afterward inhabited at Callis, in the time of the first surprise thereof by the
French, An. Dom. 1558. where he lost all his lands and substance; and at the
age of 95. years he died, the 16. of September, 1600. and lies interred on the
North side of the Communion Table. By him is buried Alice his wife, the only
daughter of George Gainsford, Esquire, a younger son of Sir John Gainsford of
Crohurst, in the County of Surrey, Knight, and brother to the last Sir John
Gainsford, of the same place, Knight. Which Alice was sole heir to her Mother
Elizabeth, daughter and coheire to John Alphew, of Boar Place, in the County
of Kent, Esquire.

She dyed the fourth of March, Anno Domini, 1581.
On the West side of this Church, Conduit of Thames water.
by the Porch thereof, is placed a Conduit or Cesterne of Lead, castellated
with Stone, for receipt of Thames water, conveyed at the charges of the
forenamed Barnard Randolph, Esquire.

By the East end of Saint Mary Magdalens Church, runs up the Old Exchange
lane, by the West end of Carter lane, to the South-east gate or Chain of Paul's
Church yard, as is before showed. And in this part was the Exchange kept, and
Bullion was received for coynage, as is noted in Faringdon Ward within.

In this Parish Church of Saint Mary Magdalen, out of Knight-riders street, up
to Carter lane, be two small Lanes: the one of them called Do little Lane, Do
little lane.
as a place not inhabited by Artificers, or open Shopkeepers, but serving for
a near passage from Knight-riders street, to Carter lane.

The other, corruptly called Sermon Lane, Sheremoniers lane.
for Sheremoniers Lane. For I find it by that name recorded in the foureteenth
of Edward the first: And in that Lane, a place to be called the Black Loft,
Black Loft of Silver melting.
(or melting Silver,) with four Shops adjoining.

It may therefore be well supposed, that lane to take name of Sheremoniers,
such as cut and rounded the Pla^es, to be coined or stamped into Estarsing
pence, for the place of Coining was the Old Exchange, near unto the said
Sheremoniers lane. Also I find, that in the thirteenth of Richard the second,
William de la Pole had an House there.

In Knight-riders street is the College of Physicians, College of Physicians.
wherein was founded, in the year 1582. a public Lecture in Surgerie, Lecture
in Ch^^urgery to be read.
to be read twice every week, etc. as is showed elsewhere.

In the South Churchyard of Paul's, is the South side and West end of the said
Church: In the which West end, be three stately Gates, West gates of Paul's
Church.
or entries, curiously wrought of stone, namely the middle Gate, in the midst
whereof is placed a massy pillar of Brass, whereunto the Leaves of the said
great Gate are closed, and fastened with Locks, Bolts, and Bars of Iron: All
which notwithstanding, on the 24. of December, in the year 1565. by a Tempest
of Wind then rising from the West, Gates of Paul's Church blown open.
these Gates were blown open, the Bars, Bolts, and Locks broken in sunder,
or greatly bended.

Also, on the fifth of January, in the year 1589. by a like tempest of Wind,
then in the South-west, the lesser West Gate of the said Church, next to the
Bishops Palace, was broken, both Bolts, Bars, and Locks, so that the same
was blown over.

At either corner of this West end, is also of ancient building, a strong Tower
of stone, made for Bell-Towers: the one of them, to wit, next to the Palace is
at this present to the use of the same Palace; the other, toward the South, is
called the Lollards Tower, For Lollards Tower read M. Fox.
and has been used as the Bishops Prison, for such as were detected for
Opinions in Religion, contrary to the faith of the Church.

The last prisoner which I have known committed thereto, was in the year
1573. one Peter Burcher, Pet. Burcher.
Gent. of the middle Temple, for having desperately wounded, and minding to
have murdered a serviceable Gentleman, named John Hawkins, Esquire, in the high
street, near unto the Strand, who being taken and examined, was found to hold
certain Opinions erroneous, and therefore committed thither, and convicted: but
in the end, by persuasion, he promised to abjure his Heresies; and was, by
commandment of the Council, removed from thence to the Tower of London, etc.
where he committed, as in my Annals I have expressed.

Adjoining to this Lowlards Tower, Parish Church of S. Gregory.
is the Parish Church of Saint Gregory, appointed to the Petty Chanons of
Paul's.

Monuments of note, these I find there: Alcia Barwis, A plated stone by the
Communion Table.
Relicta Iohannis Barwis, Civis ac Minutarii Londinensis, posuit defuncto.

Debita peccati
solvens terrestria linquo,
Visurus patriam
quam mihi Christ dabis.
Da patriam, Rex Christ
Jesus, spes unica vitae,
Da feuti veniam
Rex bone Christ Jesus.
Virtus post Fata.

Thomas Redman, The like Stone lying by the other.
Almae Curiae Cantuar. de Arcubus London Procuratorum generalium unus, qui
officium Registrariatus principalis Sedis Archiepiscopalis Cantuar. per
nonnullos Annos laudabiliter exercuit, hic inhumatur. In uxorem duxit Annam
Miliner, quacum pie and amantissime vixit. Ex ea unam sibi filiam nomine
Elizabetham procreavit: mortem obiit 12. die November. An. Dom. 1601.

Aluredus Copeley, Another Stone in the Chancell.
de Botley, in Com. Ebor. Armig. quondam Socius Lincolniensis Hospitii, Obiit
5. die Feb. An. Dom. 1598. and aetatis suae, 37.



Memoriae Sacrum.
Sanctissimae and chariffimae Conjugi, A very goodly Monument in the South I Will
of the Quire, uppermost.
Alisonae Heriot, Iacobi Primrosii, Regiae Majestatis in sanctiori Concilio
Regni Scotiae amanuensis filiae, feminae omnibus tum animi tum corporis
dotibus, ac pio cultu instructissimae; Moestissimus ipsius Maritus, Georgius
Heriot, Armiger, Regis, Reginae, Principum Henrici and Caroli Gemmarius, been
merenti, non sine lachrymis hoc Monumentum pie posuit.

Obiit Mensis Aprilis, die 16. Anno Salut. M. D. C. XII. aetatis 20. in ipso
flore juventae, and mihi parentibus amicis tristissimum sui desiderium reliquit.

Hic Alisis Primrosa
jacet crudo obruta fato*
Intempestivas
ut Rosa passa manus.
Nondum bis denos
annorum impleverat orbs,
Pulchra, pudica,
Patris delicium atque viri:
Quum gravida, heu nunquam
Matter, discessit in inde
Cura dolorque Patri,
cura dolorq viro:
Non sublata tamen,
tantum translata recessit,
Nunc Rosa prima Poli
quae fuit ante Soli.
Here lies Martha Forth, A fair Monument close by the other in the same end
of the Church.
sometime wife to Robert Forth, Doctor of Law, with whom she lived very
comfortably in true marriage, a most faithful and loving wife, the space of
24. years and 5. months. She lived virtuously and modestly, and beloved of
all that did know her, and dyed in sound faith, and in the fear of God, the
26. day of November, Ann. Dom. 1589. in the 45. year of her age, in constant
hope of a joyful resurrection, with the elect children of Almighty God.

Memoriae Sacrum.
Edwardo Baker, Another Monument close adjoining
Armig. Regiae Majestatis ad causas Ecclesiasticas Registrario principali, viro
eximia eruditione, prudentia singulari, moribus probatissimis, and in publicis
negotiis plurimum versato. Qui longo morbo intabescens, certa spe in Christo
resurgendi, pie placideque animam Deo reddidit, die 26. Maii, Anno Domini, M.
D. C. II.

Here lies intombed the body of Mary, A fair Monument in the South wall of the
Chancell.
late wife of Thomas Sandys, Esquire, and only daughter to Sir Stephen
Thornehurst, Knight, and Dame Sybill his wife: Whose soul departed this life
unto Christ, the last day of July, in the year of our Redemption, 1598. and in
the one and twentieth year of her age. In remembrance of whose piety and
singular virtues, the eternal love of her Husband has caused this Monument to
be erected.

In Heaven her soul,
In me her love,
her body rests here,
Which is to God,
Was to the World,
to me her Husband, dear.
Here-under rests Arthur Medlycote, A fair Monument in the East end of the
Chancell.
Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, son of Richard Medlycote of
Shrewsbury, Gentleman, with Elizabeth his wife, daughter of John Philips. The
said Arthur, in assured hope to be with Christ, ended this transitory life the
seven and twentieth day of July, Anno Domini, 1605. And the said Elizabeth, the
eighteenth day of October, 1605.

Here lies Dorothie, A comely Monument in the East end of the Chancell.
Daughter of John Theobald, the elder, of Shepie, in the County of Kent,
Esquire. She first married John Crook, Doctor of Law; by whom, she had only
Dorothie, first wife to Robert Honywood, Esquire. Secondly, to Ralph Allen,
Alderman of London. Thirdly, to that most Reverend, excellent, and lea^ed
Judge, Sir Roger Manwood, Knight, Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer; by whom
she had issue, John and Thomas, who dyed young. Marg^rie, the first wife of Sir
John Lewson, Knight; and Anne, first wife to Sir Percivall Heart, Knight, and
Sir Peter Manwood, Knight of the Bath.

She dyed the fourteenth day of September, Anno Domini, 1575. To whose
reverend Memory, the said Sir Peter Manwood has dutifully erected this
Monument, Anno Dom. 1606.

Gulielmi Coci hoc Tumulo
parvo ossa quiescunt, A comely small Monument by the other.

Illius ast virtus
non ita parva cubit:
Plura nam ut omittam,
Civili Iure secundus
Nulli, nec vera
dexteritate fuit.
Cui pia, ne merito
careat post funera virtus,
Hoc uxor Maria
nobile struxit opus.
Moritur 25. Augusti, Anno Domini 1558. and Mariae Reginae, 6.

12. September. An. Dom. 1587. obiit.

Ioanna, A fair plated stone in the South I Will.
filia Nich. Wallron, relicta Thomae Yale, Legu^ Doctoris, Cancellarius
Archiepiscopalis Sedis Catuarien. and sepelitur sub spe suturae Resurrectionis.

The rest of that South side of Saint Paul's Church, with the Chapter House, (a
beautiful piece of Work, builded about the reign of Edward the third) is
now defaced, by means of Licenses granted to Cutlers, Budget-makers, and
other, first to build low Sheds, but now high houses, which do hide that
beautiful side of the Church, save only the top and South gate.

On the North-west side of this Churchyard, is the Bishops Palace, The Bishops
Palace.
a large thing for Receipt, wherein diverse Kings have been lodged, and great
Household has been kept, as appears by the great Hall, which of late
years, since the rebatement of Bishops Livings, has not been furnished with
Household Meynie and Guests, as was meant by the builders thereof, and was of
old time used.

The Deanes Lodging, on the other side, directly against the Palace, is a fair
old House, and also diverse large Houses are on the same side builded, which yet
remain, and (of old time) were the Lodgings of Prebendaries and
Residenciaries, which kept great House-holds, and liberal Hospitality; but
now either decayed, or otherwise converted.

Then was there the Stationers Hall, The Stationers Hall in former days, but
now it is in Amen lane, at the end of Pater noster Row.
on the same side, lately builded for them, in the place of Peter College:
Where, in the year, one thousand, five hundred, forty, and nine, the fourth
day of January, six men were slain by the fall of Earth upon them, digging for
a Well.

And let this be an end of Baynards Castle Ward: which has an Alderman, his
Deputy; Common Counsel, nine; Constable, ten; Scavengers, seven; Wardmote
Inquest, fourteen, and a Beadle: And to the Fifteen, it is taxed at twelve
pounds, in the Exchequer, eleven pounds, thirteen shillings.

THE WARD OF FARINGDON Extra, or without.
THE farthest West Ward of this City, The Ward of Faringdon without
being the 25. Ward of London, but without the walls, is called Faringdon
without, and was of old time part of the other Faringdon within, until the 17.
of Richard the second, that it was divided, and made twain, by the names of
Faringdon infra, and Faringdon extra, as is before showed.

The bounds of which Ward, without Newgate and Ludgate, are these:

First, on the East part thereof, is the whole Precinct of the late Priory of
S. Bartholomew, and a part of Long lane, on the North, toward Aldersgate
street, and Ducke lane, with the Hospital of S. Bartholomew on the West, and
all Smithfield, to the Bars in Saint John street.

Then out of Smithfield, Chicken lane, toward Turne-Mill Brook, and over that
Brook, by a Bridge of Timber, into the Field: then back again by the Pens
(or Folds) in Smithfield, by Smithfield Pond, to Cow lane, which turns toward
Oldbourne; and then Hosiar lane, out of Smithfield also toward Oldborne, till
it meet with a part of Cow lane.

Then Cock lane, out of Smithfield, over against Pie corner: then also is
Gilt-spurre street, out of Smithfield to Newgate: then from Newgate West by
Saint Sepulchers Church, to Turne-againe lane, to Oldbourne Conduit, on Snor
Hill, to Oldbourne Bridge, up Oldbourne Hill, to the Bars, on both sides.

On the right hand, or North side, at the bottom of Oldbourne Hill, Gold lane.
is Gold lane, sometime a filthy passage into the Fields, now both sides
builded with small Tenements.

Then higher is Lither lane, Lither lane.
turning also to the Field, lately replenished with houses builded, and so to
the Bars.

Now, on the left hand or South side from Newgate, lies a street called the
Old Bailey, or Court of the Chamberlain of this City: this stretches down by
the Wall of the City, unto Ludgate. On the West side of which street, breaks
out one other Lane, called Saint Georges Lane, till ye come unto the South end
of Sea-coale Lane; and then, turning toward Flect-street, it is called Fleet
lane.

Then next out of the high street, from Newgate, turning down South, Old Bailey.
is called the Little Bailey, and runs down to the East of S. Georges lane.
Lin^e barners lane, or Sea-coale lane.


Then is Sea-coale lane, which turns down into Flect lane.

Near unto this Sea-coale lane, in the turning toward Oldbourne Conduit, is
another lane, Winde-againe lane.
called in record Winde-againe lane, it turns down to Turnmill Brook, and
from thence back again, for there is no way over.

Then beyond Oldbourne Bridge, Shoo lane.
to Shoo lane, which runs out of Oldborne unto the Conduit in Fleetstreet.

Then also is Fewtars lane, which likewise stretches South into Fleet street,
Fewtars lane.
by the East end of S. Dunstanes Church: And from this Lane to the Bars, be
the bounds without Newgate.

Now, without Ludgate, this Ward runs up from the said gate to Temple
bar, and has on the right hand, or North side, the South end of the Old
Bailey: then down Ludgate hill, to the Fleet lane over Feeet bridge, and by
Shoo lane, and Fewtars lane, and so to New street (or Chancery lane) and up
that Lane, to the House of the Rolls, which House is also of this Ward; and on
the other side, to a Lane over against the Rolls, which enters Ficquets field.

Then, Shire lane.
hard by the Bar, is one other Lane, called Shire lane, because it divides
the City from the Shire, and this turns into Ficquets field.

From Ludgate again, on the left hand, or South side, to Fleet bridge, to
Bridge lane, which runs South by Bridewell; then to Water lane, which
runs down to the Thames.

Then by the White Friars, and by the Temple, evern to the Bar aforesaid, be
the bounds of this Faringdon Ward without.

Touching Ornaments and Antiquities in this Ward, first, betwixt the said
Newgate, and the Parish of Saint Sepulchers, is a way toward Smithfield,
called Gilt Spur, Gilt Spur, or Knight-Riders street
or Knight-Riders street, of the Knights and other riding that way into
Smithfield, replenished with building on both sides up to Pie corner, a place
so called of such a sign, sometimes a fair Inn for receipt of Travelers; but
now divided into Tenements, and over against the said Pie corner, lies Cock
lane, Cock lane.
which runs down to Oldbourne Conduit.

Beyond this Pie corner, West smithfield.
lies West Smithfield, compassed about with buildings, as first on the South
side, following the right hand, stands the large Hospital of Saint
Bartholomew, Hospital of S. Bartholomewes.
founded by Rahere, the first Prior of St. Bartholomewes, thereto near
adjoining, in the year 1102.

Alfune, The first M. or Procter of the Hospital of S. Bartholomew.
that had not long before builded the Parish Church of Saint Giles without
Creplegate, became the first Hospitelar, or Protector for the poor of this
house, and went himself daily to the Shambles and other Markets, where he
begged the charity of devout people for their relief, promising to the
liberal givers (and that by alleging testimonies of the holy Scripture)
reward at the hands of God. Henry the third granted to Katharine, late wife to
William Hardell, twenty foot of Land in length and breadth in Smithfield, next
to the Chapel of Saint Bartholomew, to build her a Recluse or Ankorage, A
recluse or Ankorage by S. Bartholomewes Hospital.
commanding the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, to assign the said twenty foot
to the said Katharine, Charta 11. of Henry the third. The foundation of this
Hospital for the poor and diseased, and their special sstentation, was
confirmed by Edward the third, the 26. of his reign. It was governed by a
Master, and eight Brethren being Priests, for the Church; and four Sisters, to
see the poor served.

The Executors of Richard Whitington, sometime Mayor of London, of his goods
repaired this Hospital, about the year 1423.

Sir John Wakering, Priest. Master of this House, in the year 1463. amongst
other Books, gave to their common Library the fairest Bible that I have seen,
written in large Vellam, by a Brother of that House, named John Coke, at the
age of 68. years, when he had been Priest 43. years. Since the spoil of
that Library, I have seen this Book in the custody of my Worshipful friend,
Master Walter Cope.

Monuments in this Church of the dead, Benefactors thereunto, be these:

Elizabeth, wife to Adam Hone, Gentleman.

Bartholomew Bildington.

Jane, wife to John Cook.

Dame Alice, wife to Sir Rich. Isham.

Alice, wife to Nicholas Bailey.

John woodhouse, Esquire.

Robert Palmar, Gentleman.

Idona, wife to John Walden, lying by her husband on the North side, late new
builded, 1424.

Sir Thomas Malifant, or Nanfant, Baron of Winnow, Lord Saint-George, in
Glamorgan, and Lord Ockeneton and Pile, in the County of Pembroke, 1438.

Dame Margaret his wife, daughter to Thomas Astley, Esquire, with Edmond and
Henry his children.

William Markeby, Gentleman, 1438.

Richard Shepley, and Alice his wife.

Thomas Savill, Sergeant at Arms.

Edward Beastby, Gentleman, and Margaret his wife.

Walter Ingham, and Eleanor his wife.

Robert Warnar, and Alice, Lady Carne.

Robert Caldset, Johan and Agnes his wives.

Sir Robert Danvars, and Dame Agnes his wife, daughter to Sir Richard Delabar.

William Brooks, Esquire.

John Shirley, Esquire, and Margaret his wife, having their Pictures of Brass,
in the habit of Pilgrims, on a fair flat Stone, with an Epitaph thus:

Behold, how ended is
our poor Pilgrimage,
Of John Shirley, Esquire,
with Margaret his wife,
That twelve children had
together in marriage,
Eight sons, and four
daughters, withouten strife,
That in honor, nurture,
and labor, flowed in fame:
His pen reports
his lives Occupation,
Since Pier his life time,
John Shirley by name,
Of his degree, that
was in Brutes Albion;
That in the year of Grace
deceased from hen,
Fourteen hundred Winters,
and six and fifty;
In the year of his age,
fourscore and ten,
Of October month,
the day one and twenty.
This Gentleman, a great Traveller in diverse Countries, amongst other his
Labors, painfully collected the Works of Geffrey Chawcer, John Lidgate, and
other learned VVriters; which Works he wrote in sundry Volumes, to remain for
posterity: I have seen them, and partly do profess them.

Jane, Lady Clinton, gave ten pounds to the poor of this House, and was there
buried, 1458.

Agnes, daughter to Sir William Saint-George.

John Rogerbrooke, Esquire.

Richard Sturgeon.

Thomas Burgan, Gentleman.

Elizabeth, wife to Henry Skinard, daughter to Chincroft, Esquire.

William Mackley, Gentleman, and Alice his wife.

William Fitzwater, Gentleman, 1466. Here Robert Balthorp lies entombed, A
comely Monument in the South wall of the Chancell.

to Elizabeth our Queen,
Who Sergeant of the Surgeons sworn,
near thirty years has been.
He died at sixty nine of years,
December ninth the day,
The year of Grace eight hundred twice,
deducting nine away.
Let here his rotten bones repose,
till Angels Trumpet sound,
To warn the world of present change,
and raise the dead from ground.
Vivit post funera Virtus.

Thomas Bodleius, A Monument in the North wall of the Chancell.
Eques Auratus, fecit Annae Conjugi piissimae, atque omnibus exemplis been de
se meritae, cum qua dulciter vixit Annos 24.

John vir honoratus
jacet his Nedham tumulatus, A fair plated stone by the Communion table.

Qui prudens, gratus,
justus fuit and moderatus.
Fratribus ille suis
fuerat prae quatuor Annis
Quem mors crudelis
29.q; Decembris
M. C. quater Domini
septem simul X. numerandi,
Cujus spiritui
sint Coeli gardia regni.
The foureteenth year
of our Lord seventy, Under the Communion table

Passed Sir William Knight
to God Almighty,
The 15. day of July,
Master of this place:
Jesus for his mercy
receive him into grace.
Hic jacet Dominus Ioannes Byry, By the same table
quondam Magister istius Hospital. Qui obiit 28. die September. An. Domini,
1417. Cujus, etc.

Ecce sub hoc Tumulo
Gulielmus conditur Honus, An ancient Tomb in the North wall, beneath the
Quire.

Vir justus, verbis
integer, atque Deum
Cord timens. Qui cum
Guilda sit functus in Aula,
Cumque palam in Templo
bis legerat Anglica jura,
Cunctorum sane
non sine laud virum,
Mors hominem accersens
supremum (dixit) adi^o.
Sic moritur, corpus terrae,
vermique relinquens,
Scandit at excelsis
sidera mente poli.
Hoc posuit Conjunx
dilecta Iocosa Sepulchrum,
Dicta locosa licet
plena dolor tamen.
Sub praesenti marmore requiescunt corpora Walter Ingham Generosi, At the
entering into the Quire in the middle I Will
ac Aelianorae consortis suae. Qui quidem Walterus ingressus est viam universae
carnis 7. die Mensis Martii, Anno Domini 1464. Et praedicta Aelianora, uxor sua
terrenae mortis deg^stavic pecula 15. die September. An. Dom. 1466. Quorum, etc.

Hic vir pacificus
Shipley Richardus humatur, A fair Stone lying close by the other.

Verus Catholicus domus
haec hoc testificatur.
Esurientes ac sitientes
namque fovebat,
Pace fruentes, justa
petentes cord gerebat.
C. quater and Mill,
X. and M. V. cadit ille
Luce Maii deca ter
que monas fit humus sibi matter,
Co^lux postque sua
finivit Alicia flamen,
Q^os manus tua salvet
precor O Deus. Amen.
Hic vir Catholicus bonus
ecce Richardus humatur
Sturgeon pacificus, A fair plated stone close by the Pilgrim and his Wife.
quem
mors rapuisse probatur.
Armi ger hic Regis fuit,
and vir Nobilitatis,
Mandatum legis servans,
celsis probitatis.
Annis trigenis fit
Clericus ipse Coronae
Et quivis plene hunc
cape Christ bone.
Mill, quater contum
semel L. sex tempore Christi.
Dat fundamentum
quindena Martius isti,
Vxor eius quem bona
iungitur ecce Ioanna,
Vt capiant dona
Coelorum Jesus Hosanna.
Here lies now dead, At the foot of the same Stone.

which late was quick,
The comely Corpse
of Anne Westwick;
Who died in
Childbed, of her first,
Upon the fifth
day of August:
Whose soul (doubtless)
is long ere this,
In Heaven with Christ,
in joy and bliss;
But yet, for order
of Charity,
Upon her soul say,
Jesu have mercy.
Anno Domini, 1556.

Hic jacet Dominus Richardus Lie, A fair plated Stone in the South I Will.
quondam Abbas Salopiae, qui sua industria, sumptibus magnis and suis laboribus
(Deo suadente) recuperavit libertates suae Ecclesiae Salopiae praedict. and
postea obiit die Martii, tempore Parliamenti, Anno Domini 1512. Cuius, etc.



This Hospital was valued at the suppression, Hospital of S. Bartholomew
suppressed.
in the year 1539. the 31. of Henry the eighth, to five and thirty pounds,
six shillings, seven pence, yearly. The Church remains a Parish Church to
the Tenants dwelling in the Precinct of the Hospital: But in the year 1546.
on the thirteenth of January, the Bishop of Rochester, preaching at Paul's
Cross, declared the gift of the said King to the Citizens, for relieving of
the Poor, which contained the Church of the Gray Friars, the Church of Saint
Bartholomew, with the Hospital, the Messuages, and appurtenances in Gilt
Spur, alias Knight Riders street, Briton street, Peter Kay, in the Parish of
Saint Mary Magdalen, in Old Fish street, and in the Parish of St. Benet Huda,
Lymehurst, or Limehost, in the Parish of Stebunbeth, etc.

Then also were Orders devised for relief of the Poor: the inhabitants were
all called to their Parish Churches; where, by Sir Richard Dobbes, then Mayor,
their several Aldermen, or other grave Citizens, they were by eloquent
Orations persuaded, how great and how many commodities would ensue unto them
and their City, if the poor of diverse sorts, which they named, were taken from
out their Streets, Lanes, and Allies, and were bestowed and provided for in
Hospitals abroad, etc. Therefore was every man moved, liberally to grant (what
they would impart) toward the preparing and furnishing of such Hospitals, and
also, what they would contribute weekly toward their maintenance for a time,
which (they said) should not be past one year, or twain, until they were
better furnished of Endowment. To make short, every man granted liberally,
according to his ability: Books were drawn of the Relief in every Ward of
the City, toward the new Hospitals, and were delivered by the Mayor to the
Kings Commissioners, on the seventeenth of February; and order was taken
therein, so as the six and twentieth of July, in the year 1552. the repairing
of the Gray Friars house, for poor fatherless children, was taken in hand;
and also, in the later end of the same month, began the repairing of this
Hospital of Saint Bartholomew, and was of new endowed, and furnished at the
charges of the Citizens.

On the East side of this Hospital lies Ducke lane, which runs out of
Smithfield South, to the North end of Little Britain street.

On the East side of this Ducke lane, Priory of Saint Bartholomew.
and also of Smithfield, lies the late dissolved Priory of St. Bartholomew,
founded also by Rahere, a pleasant witted Gentleman; and therefore in his time
called the Kings Minstrell, about the year of Christ, 1102. He founded it in a
part of the often before named Moorish ground, which was therefore a common
Lay-stall o^^ll filth, that was to be voided out of the City. He placed Canons
there; himself became their first Prior, and so continued till his dying day,
and was there buried in a fair Monument, of late renewed by Prior Bolton.

Amongst other memorable matters touching this Priory, one is of an Archbishops
Visitation, which Matthew Paris has thus:

Boniface (says he) Archbishop of Canturbury, Archbishop of Canturbury
visits S. Bartholomews Priory with stripes.
in his Visitation came to this Priory; where, being received with Procession
in the most solemn wise, he said, That he passed not upon the honor, but
came to visit them; to whom the Canons answered, That they having a learned
Bishop, ought not, in contempt of him, to be visited by any other: which answer
so much offended the Archbishop, that he forthwith fell on the Sub-Prior, and
smote him on the face, saying; Words of the Archbishop to the Prior and Canons.
Indeed, indeed, does it became you English Traitors so to answer me? Thus
raging, with oaths not to be recited, he rent in pieces the rich Cope of the
Sub-Prior, Sub-Priors Cope rent and trodden under foot, and himself almost
slain.
and trod it under his feet, and thrust him against a Pillar of the Chancell
with such violence, that he had almost killed him. But the Canons seeing their
Sub-Prior thus almost slain, came and plucked off the Archbishop with such
force, that they overthrew him backwards; whereby they might see, The
Archbishop armed, and overthrown.
that he was armed, and prepared to fight. The Archbishops men seeing their
Master down, being all strangers, and their Masters Countrymen borne at
Province, The Canons beaten and trod under foot.
fell upon the Canons, beat them, tare them, and trod them under foot. At
length, the Canons getting away as well as they could, ran bloody, miry, rent
and torn to the Bishop of London to complain, who bade them go to the King
at Westminster, and tell him thereof: whereupon four of them went thither, The
Canons complained but could not be heard.
the rest were not able, they were so sore hurt. But when they came to
Westminster, the King would neither hear nor see them; so they returned
without redress. The whole City is an uproare against the Archbishop.
In the mean season the City was in an uproare, and ready to have rung the
common Bell, and to have hewed the Archbishop into small pieces, who was
secretly crept to Lambhith, where they sought him, and not knowing him by
sight, said to themselves; where is this Ruffian, that cruel smiter? He is no
winner of souls, but an exactor of money, whom neither God, nor any lawful or
free election did bring to this promotion: but the King did unlawfully intrude
him, being unlearned, a stranger borne, and having a wife, etc. But the
Archbishop conveyed himself over, and went to the King with a great
complaint against the Canons, whereas himself was guilty. This Priory of Saint
Bartholomew was again new builded in the year 1410.

Bolton was the last Prior of this house, Bolton last Prior of Saint
Bartholomew a great builder there.
a great builder there: for he repaired the Priory Church, with the Parish
Church adjoining, the offices and lodgings to the said Priory belonging and
near adjoining: Canonbury.
he builded of new the Manor of Canonbury at Islington, which belonged to the
Canons of this house, and is situate in a low ground, somewhat North from the
Parish Church there. But he builded no house at Harrow on the hill, Edward Hall.
as Edward Hall has written, following a fable then on foot.

The people (says he) being feared by Prognostications, which declared that
in the year of Christ, 1524. there should be such Ecli^ses in watery signs,
and such conjunctions, that by waters and floods many people should perish:
people victualled themselves, and went to high grounds for fear of drowning,
and especially one Bolton, which was Prior of Saint Bartholomewes in
Smithfield, builded him an house upon Harrow on the hill, only for fear of
this flood: thither he went and made provision of all things necessary within
him, for the space of two months, etc.

But this was not so indeed, as I have been credibly informed: true it is, that
this Bolton was also Parson of Harrow, and therefore bestowed some small
reparations on the Parsonage house, and builded nothing there more than a
Dovehouse, to serve him when he had forgone his Priory.

To this Priory King Henry the second granted the privilege of a Fair to be
kept yearly at Bartholomewtide, Bartholomew Fair.
for three days, to wit, the Eve, the Day, The Fortainers were licensed for 3.
days, the free men so long as they would, which was six or seven days.
and the next morrow, to the which the Clothiers of England, and Drapers of
London repaired, and had their Boothes and standings within the Churchyard of
this Priory, closed in with Walls and Gates locked every night, and watched for
safety of men's goods and wares; a Court of Piepowders was daily during the
Fair holden, for debts and contracts. Court of Piepowders.
But notwithstanding all Proclamations of the Prince, and also the Act of
Parliament, in place of Booths within this Churchyard (only letten out in the
Fair time, and closed up all the year after) be many large houses builded,
and the North Wall toward Long lane, taken down, a number of Tenements are
there erected, for such as will give great rents.

Monuments of the dead in this Priory, these are, of Rahere, the first founder.

Roger Walden, Bishop of London, 1406.

John Warton, Gentleman, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter to William Scot,
Esquire.

John Louth, Gentleman.

Robert Shikeld, Gentleman.

Sir Bacon, Knight.

John Ludlow, and Alice his wife.

W. Thirlewall, Esquire.

Richard Lancaster, Herald at Arms.

Thomas Torald.

John Royston.

John Watford.

John Carleton.

Robert, son to Sir Robert Willowby.

Gilbert Halstocke.

Eleanor, wife to Sir Hugh Fen, mother to Margaret, Lady Aburgaveny.

William Essex, Esquire.

Richard Vancke, Baron of the Exchequer, and Margaret his wife, daughter to
William de la River.

John Winderhall.

John Duram, Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife.

John Malwine.

Alice, wife to Balstred, daughter to Kniffe.

William Scarlet, Esquire.

John Golding.

Hugh Walter, Gentleman, and the late Sir Walter Mildmay, Knight, Chancellor of
the Exchequer.

Vana salus hominis.
Memor esto, A comely Monument in the East end of the Chancell.
quoniam mors non tardat, and restamentum inferorum, quia demonstratum est
tibi: testamentum enim hujus mundi morte morieris.

Omnia suo proveniunt tempore atque transeunt. Ante mortem, ne lauds hominem
quenquam, quoniam in filiis suis agnoscitur vir.

Percinalus Samlpace, Armiger, obiit secundo die Februarii, Anno Dom. 1568. R.
Elizabetha regnante: Cujus quidem corpus juxta hunc Tumulum humatum existit.
Agnes uxor ejus, and filia Ioannis Tebowld, Armigeri, obiit 3. die September. An.
Dom. 1588. R. Elizabetha regnante.

Liberi inter eos Michael and Thomas, adhuc viventes, qui in religiosa memoria
optimorum parentum, hoc monumentum posuerunt.

Behold your selves by us,
such once were we as you,
And you in time shall be
even dust as we are now.
Mors nobis lucrum.
Hic jacet Gualterus Mildmay, A very fair Tomb in the Chancell.
miles, and Maria uxor ejus. Ipse obiit ultimo die Maii, 1589. Ipsa 16. die
Martii 1576. Reliquerunt duos filios, and tres filias. Fundavit Collegium
Emanuelis Cantabridgiae, moritur Cancellarius and Sub-thesaurarius Scaccarii,
and Regiae Majestati a Consiliis.

This Pric^y, at the late surrender, the 30. of Henry the eighth, was valued at
653. l. 15. s. by the year.

This Church having in the Bell-Tower six bells in a tune, those bells were sold
to the Parish of Saint Sepulchers, and then the Church being pulled down to
the Quire, the Quire was by the Kings order annexed, for the enlarging of the
old Parish Church there to adjoining, and so was used till the reign of Queen
Mary, who gave the remnant of the Priory Church to the Friars preachers, or
Black Friars, and was used as their Coventuall Church, until the first of our
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth: then those Friars were put out, and all the
said Church, with the old parish Church, was wholly as it stood, in the last
year of Edward the sixth, given by Parliament, to remain for ever a parish
Church to the Inhabitants within the Close, called great Saint Bartholomewes.
Since the which time, the old parish Church is pulled down, except the Steeple
of rotten Timber, ready to fall of it self. I have often heard it reported, that
a new Steeple should be builded with the Stone, Lead and Timber of the old
parish Church, but no such thing was performed. The parish have lately repaired
the old wooden Steeple, to serve their turn. On the North side of this
Priory, is the Lane truly called Long, which reaches from Smithfield to
Aldersgate street. This Lane is now lately builded on both the sides with
Tenements for Brokers, Tiplers, and such like: the rest of Smithfield from Long
lane end to the Bars, Long lane.
is enclosed with Innes, Brew-houses, and large Tenements; on the West side is
Chicken lane, down to Cowbridge. Chicken lane. Cowbridge. Pens in Smithfield.
Then be the pens or folds, so called of sheep there parted, and penned up to
be sold on the Market days.

Then is Smithfield Pond, Smithfield Pond sometime a poole.
which of (old time) in Records was called Horse-Poole, for that men watered
Horses there, and was a great water. In the sixth of Henry the fifth, a new
building was made in the West part of Smithfield, betwixt the said Poole and
the River of the Wels, or Turnemill-brooke, in a place then called the Elmes,
The Elms in Smithfield a place wherein trespassers were executed.
for that there grew many Elm trees, and this had been the place of execution
for Offenders: since the which time, the building there has been so increased,
that now remains not one tree growing.

Amongst these new buildings is Cowbridge street, or Cow lane; which turns
toward Oldbourne, in which Lane the Prior of Semperingham had his Inn, or
London lodging.

The rest of that West side of Smithfield has diverse fair Innes, and other
comely buildings, Hosier lane.
up to Hosier lane, which also turns down to Oldbourne, till it meet with
Cowbridge street. From this Lane to Cock lane, Cock lane.
over against Pie-corner.

And thus much for encroachments and enclosure of this Smithfield, whereby
remains but a small portion for the old uses, to wit, for markets of horses,
and cattle, neither for Military exercises, Iustings in Smithfield.
as Iustings, Turnings, and great Triumphs, which have been there performed
before the Princes and Nobility, both of this Realm and sorraine Countries.

For example to note: In the year 1357. the 31. of Edward the third, Fabian.
great and royal Iusts were then holden in Smithfield, there being present the
Kings of England, France, and Scotland, with many other Nobles, and great
Estates of diverse lands.

In the year 1362. the 36. of Edward the 3. on the first five days of May, in
Smithfield were Iusts holden, the King and Queen being present, with the most
part of the Chivalry of England, and of France, and of other Nations, to the
which came Spaniards, Cyprians, and Armenians, Knightly requesting aid of the
King of England, against the Pagans that invaded their confines.

The 48. of Edw. the third, Dame Alice Perrers, Alice Perrers rode from the
Tower to Smithfield, as Lady of the Sun.
or Pierce (the kings Concubine) as Lady of the Sun, rode from the Tower of
London, through Cheap, accompanied of many Lords and Ladies, every Lady
leading a Lord by his horse bridle, till they came into West Smithfield, and
then began a great Just, which endured seven days after.

Also the 9. of Richard the 2. was the like great riding from the Tower to
Westminster, and every Lord led a Ladies horse bridle, and on the morrow began
the Iusts in Smithfield, which lasted two days: there bare them well, Henry of
Darby, the Duke of Lancasters son, the Lord Beaumont, Sir Simon Burley, and
Sir Paris Countney.

In the 14. of Richard the second, after Froisard, royal Iusts and Turnements
were proclaimed to be done in Smithfield, to begin on Sunday next after the
feast of Saint Michael; many strangers came forth of other countries: namely,
Valariam, Earl of S. Paul, that had married king Richards sister, the Lady
Maud Courtney, and William the young Earl of Ostarvant, son to Albret of
Baviere, Earl of Holland and Henault.

At the day appointed, Tower Royal.
there issued forth of the Tower, about the third hour of the day 60.
Coursers, apparrelled for the Iusts, and upon every one an Esquire of honor
riding a soft pace: then came forth 60. Ladies of honor mounted upon
Palfraies, riding on the one side richly apparrelled, and every Lady led a
Knight with a chain of gold, those Knights being on the Kings party, had their
armor and apparel garnished with white Hearts, and crowns of gold about the
Hearts necks, and so they came riding through the streets of London to
Smithfield, with a great number of Trumpets, and other instruments of Music
before them. The King and Queen, who were lodged in the Bishops Palace of
London, were come from thence, with many great Estates, and placed in chambers
to see the Iusts: the Ladies that led the knights, were taken down from their
Palfraies, and went up to chambers prepared for them. Then alighted the
Esquires of Honor from their Coursers, and the knights in good order mounted
upon them; and after their Helmets were set on their heads, and being ready in
all points, Proclamation made by the Heralds, the Iusts began, and many
commendable courses were run, to the great pleasure of the beholders: this
Iusts continued many days with great feasting, as ye may read in Froisard.

In the year 1393. the 17. of Richard the 2. certain Lords of Scotland came
into England to get worship, by force of Arms, the Earl of Mar challenged
the Earl of Notingham, to Just with him, and so they rode together certain
courses, but not the full challenge, for the Earl of Mar was cast both horse
and man, and two of his ribs broken with the fall, so that he was conveyed
out of Smithfield, and so toward Scotland, but dyed by the way at York.

Sir Will. Darell, knight, the Kings Banner-bearer of Scotland, challenged Sir
Percy Courtney, knight, the Kings Banner-bearer of England, and when they had
run certain courses, gave over without conclusion of victory. Then
Cookborne, Esquire of Scotland, challenged Sir Nicholas Hawberke, knight, and
rode five courses, but Cookborne was borne over horse and man, etc.

In the year 1409. the tenth of Henry the fourth, a great Play was played at
Skinners Well, which lasted eight days, where were to see the same, the most
part of the Nobles and Gentles in England: and forthwith began a royal Justing
in Smithfield, between the Earl of Somerset, and the Seneshall of Henalt, Sir
Io. Cornwall, Sir Richard Arundell, and the son of Sir John Cheyney, against
certain French men. And the same year a battle was fought in Smithfield,
between two Esquires, the one called Glaucester Appellant, and the other
Arthure Defendant, they fought valiantly, but the King took up the quarrel
into his hands, and pardoned them both.

In the year 1430. the eighth of Henry the sixth, the fourteenth of January, a
battle was done in Smithfield, within the Lists, before the King, between two
men of Feversham in Kent, John Vpton, Notary, Appellant, and John Down,
Gentleman, Defendant: John Vpton put upon John Down, that he and his Compiers
should imagine the Kings death upon the day of his Coronation. When these had
fought long, the King took up the matter, and forgave both the parties.

In the year 1442. the 20. of Henry the sixth, the 30. of January, a Challenge
was done in Smithfield, within the Lists, before the King, there being Sir
Philip la Beaufe, of Aragon, Knight, the other an Esquire of the Kings house,
called John Ansley, or Anstley; they came to the field all armed, the Knight
with his sword drawn, and the Esquire with his Spear, which Spear he cast
against the Knight, but the Knight avoided it with his sword, and cast it to
the ground. then the Esquire took his Axe, and smote many blows on the
Knight, and made him let fall his Axe, and brake up his Vmber three times, and
would have smit him on the face with his dagger, for to have slain him; but
then the King cried hold, and so they were parted: the King made John Ansley
Knight, and the Knight of Aragon offered his Harness at Windsor.

In the year 1446. the 24. of Hen. the 6. John David appeached his Master
William Cater of treason: John David a false accuser of his master: of him was
raised the byword, If ye serve me so, I will call you Davy.
and a day being assigned them to fight in Smithfield, the Master being well
beloved, was so cherished by his friends, and plied with wine, that being
therewith overcome, was also unluckily slain by his servant. But that false
servant (for he falsely accused his Master) lived not long unpunished; for he
was after hanged at Teyborn for felony.

Let all such false accusers note this for example, and look for no better
end, without speedy repentance.

The same year, Thomas Fiiz-Thomas, Prior of Kilmaine, appeached Sir James
Butler, Earl of Ormond, of treasons: which had a day assigned them to fight in
Smithfield, the Lists were made, and the field prepared: but when it came to
the point, the King commanded they should not fight, and took the quarrel
into his hands.

In the year 1467. the seventh of Edward the fourth, the Bastard of Burgoigne
challenged the Lord Scales, brother to the Queen, to fight with him, both on
horseback and on foot: the King therefore caused Lists to be prepared in
Smithfield, the length of 120. Tailors yards, and ten foot, and in breadth 80.
yards, and 20. foot, double barred, five foot between the bars, the timber
work whereof cost 200. Marks, besides the fair and costly Galleries prepared
for the Ladies and other: at the which Martial enterprise, the King and
Nobility were present. The first day they ran together with Spears, and
departed with equal honor.

The next day they turneyed on horseback, the Lord Scales horse having on his
Chafron a long spear pike of steel, and as the two Champions coaped together,
the same horse thrust his pike into the nostrils of the Bastards horse, so that
for very pain, he mounted so high that he fell on the one side with his
Master, and the Lord Scales rode about him with his sword drawn, till the King
commanded the Marshall to help up the Bastard, who said; I cannot hold by the
clouds; for though my horse fail me, I will not fail an encounter companion:
but the King would not suffer them to do any more that day.

The next morrow they came into the Lists on foot, with two Pole-Axes, and
fought valiantly, but at the last the point of the Pole-Axe of the Lord Scales
entered into the side of the Bastards Helm; and by force might have placed him
on his knees: But the King cast down his warder, and the Marshall severed
them. The Bastard required that he might perform his enterprise: but the King
gave Judgment, as the Bastard relinguished his challenge, etc. And this may
suffice for Iusts in Smithfield.

But yet we may not part with Smithfield so: Smithfield being continually
subject to extremity of weather by an honorable motion made, it was paved all
over in An. 1614.
for, as it has been a place for such honorable Iusts and Triumphs, by
reason it was a soft ground, and unpaved: so was it a Market place for Cattle,
Hay, Straw, and other necessary provisions, and likewise (once in the year) at
Bartholomewtide a general Fair, commonly called Bartholomew Fair, has
usually been kept in that place. But in regard that it was continually subject
to the iniquity of weather, and being a place of such goodly extendure,
deserved to be much better respected; it pleased the Kings Majesty, with the
advice of his honorable Lords of the Council, to w^ite graciously to the Lord
Mayor and the Aldermen his Brethren, that Smithfield might be sufficiently
paved, which would be the only means, whereby to have it kept in far cleaner
condition. And as no motion (to any good end and intent) can be made to the
City, but they as gladly embrace and willingly pursue it: even so this
honorable motion found as acceptable entertainment, and it was very speedily
proceeded withal. Some voluntary contribution in the several Parishes (what
each man willingly would give) was bestowed on the work; but (indeed) hardly
deserving any report. Notwithstanding, on the fourth day of February, in An.
1614. the City began the intended labor, and before Bartholomewtide then next
ensuing, to the credit and honor of the City for ever, Bartholo-Faire kept in
much better manner, than ever formerly it has been.
it was fully finished, and Bartholomew Fair there kept, without breaking any
of the paved ground, but the Boothes discreetly ordered, to stand fast upon the
pavement. The Citizens charge thereof (as I have been credibly told by Master
Arthur Strangwaies) amounting well near to sixteen hundred pounds.

Now to return through Gilt-spurre street by Newgate, where I first began,
there stands the fair parish Church, called S. Sepulchers in the Bailey, or
by Chamberlain gate, in a fair Churchyard, though not so large as of old
time; for the same is letten out for buildings, and a Garden plot.

This Church was newly re-edified or builded, about the reign, of Henry the
sixth, or of Edward the fourth, one of the Pophames was a great builder there:
Io. Leyland.
namely, of one fair Chapel on the South side of the Quire, as appears by
his Arms, and other Monuments in the Glass windows thereof, and also the
fair Porch of the same Church toward the South: Pophames builders of St.
Sepulchers Church.
his Image fair graven in stone, was fixed over the said Porch, but defaced
and beaten down, his titles were these, by offices: Chancellor of Normandy,
Captain of Vernoyle, Perch, Susan, and Bayon, and Treasurer of the Kings
Household; he dyed rich, leaving great treasure of strange coins, and was
buried in the Charter House Church, by West Smithfield.

The first Nobilitating of these Pophames, was by Matilda the Empress,
daughter to Henry the first, and by Henry her son: one Popham, a Gentleman of
very fair lands in Southampton shire, dyed without issue Male, about Henry the
sixth, and leaving four daughters, they were married to Fostar, Barentine,
Wodham, and Hamden. Popham Deane (distant three miles from Clarendon, and three
miles from Mortisham) was sometime the chief Lordship or Manor house of
those Pophames.

There lie buried in this Church, William Andrew, Stephen Clamparde, Laurence
Warcam, John Dagworth, William Porter, Robert Scarlet, Esquires.

Here-under lies buried the body of the virtuous Lady, A fair plated stone in
the Chancell.
the Lady Elenor Sentleger, wife to Sir Anthony Sentleger, Knight, Master of
the Rolls of the Chancery of the Realm of Ireland, and one of her Majesty's
Privy Council of the same Realm; the daughter of Richard Markham of
Seggebrooke, in the County of Lincoln, Esquire, deceased; who died the second
day of February, 1598. being of the age of 52. years, and Months odd.

Here lies Dame Elizabeth Langton, A fair stone close by the other.
late wife of Sir Thomas Langton, Knight, Baron of Newton, in the County of
Lancaster: one of the daughters of Sir Edward Stanley, Knight, Lord Mounteagle,
which deceased the 17. day of June, An. Dom. 1533.

Here lies buried the body of Richard Snelling of West Greensted in the County
of Sussex, A fair plated stone in the same Chancell.
Esquire, who died the 25. day of August, An. Dom. 1611. He married Margery
May, the eldest daughter of George May, in the County aforesaid, Esquire: By
whom he had issue 2. sons and 3. daughters; which said Margery was living in
An. 1612. and caused this Monument to be laid, desiring to be interred
here-under.

Elionora praehonorabilis viri, Iohannis Fortescue, A very fair plated stone
in the Chancell.
Equitis Aurati, Ducatus Lancastriae Cancellarii, a sanctioribus Regiae
Majestatis Conciliis, filia Edvardi Hubbard Armig. defuncti, aliquando Conjux
perquam dilecta, sub hoc Marmore jacet sepulta. Vixit annos 36. pie, just,
sobrie, quoad Deum, mundum, seipsam, gestos in fide, pace, spe Christi,
conscientiae, gloriae. Obiit 10. die Mensis Iulii, An. Regni Regis Jacobi,
Angliae, etc. 3. Anno Domini 1605.

Qualis vita, finis ita.
Here-under lies the
wonder of her kind, A fair stone by the Communion Table, richly done with
Arms.

The Quintessence
of Nature and of Grace,
Wit, Beauty, Bounty,
and (in Noble race
The rarest Jewel)
a right humble mind;
Here lies her body,
but her soul refined
Above the Empyreall,
has imperial place,
In bliss so boundless,
as no words embrace,
Nor Art can seigne,
nor mortal heart can find.
Her fame remains a
Monument of honor,
Built by her virtue
gilt with purest gold,
With Lilly-flowers and
Roses strewed upon her,
Her Epitaph
Urania thus enrol'd:
Mild child, chaste maiden,
and religious wife:
The Even crowns the day,
Ioane Essex death her life.
Pie obiit die Martis Martii 15. Ann. aetat. suae 26. Salutis nostrae, 1607.

A Dorcas mild, Under the Communion Table, a fair plated stone.

a Mary full of grace,
A Virgin chaste,
and of rare education,
Entombed lies here
underneath this place.
Whose life and name
deserved commendation.
But in the blooming
Month of pleasant May,
Untimely Death has
stolen her life away.
Yet spite of Death,
her virtue still remains;
And in the heaven
a better life she gains:
Upon whose Tomb
I consecrate this Verse,
In stead of flowers.
to deck her Funeral Hearse.
Nemo ante obitum foelix.
In Ioannem Brewster Armigerum, in obitum D. Elizabethae Deane, uxoris ejus.
Obiit 24. die October. 1609.
MAde generous by birth
and kept that fount, A very fair Monument in the Chancell.

From times pollution,
striving still to rise,
Above the earth, high
in the worlds account
For outward and
inbred courtesies.
Her actions, alms, her life,
faith, hope, and love,
A suffering spirit,
rendering right for wrong:
Her heart a Sphere, where
all good thoughts did move,
Whose influence was
dispersed by the tongne.
Religion was her Compass,
Truth her Star,
In sundry Seas
of worlds prosperity.
Wealth her bad angel,
flesh and blood her war,
Yet wisdom made
this discord Harmony.
Then Marble keep
to all posterity
Her lives dear memory,
upon whose urne
And to her obsequies
(O, obsequiously)
In loves sweet Odours
hearts shall ever burn.
And let each Christian
heart join with my pen,
TO imbalme her virtues
in the hearts of men.
Thou bed of rest,
reserve for him a room,
Who lives a man divorc't
from his dear wife:
And as they were one heart,
so this one Tomb
May hold them near
in death, as linckt in life.
She Is gone before,
and after comes her head;
To sleep with her
among the blessed dead.
Here is buried the body of Henry Cotton, A Monument on a Pillar in the body of
the Church.
Gentleman, eldest son of Thomas Cotton, of Connington, in the County of
Huntingdon, Esquire, by Dorothy Tamworth, his second wife. He living honestly,
died the 11. day of June, 1614. And made his Elcecutors, Sir Edward Montagu,
Knight of the Bath, married to Frances his second sister, and William Mulsho,
Esquire, married to Rebecca his third sister; who in requital of his kindness
to them, erected this remembrance for him.

Barckly sublatus, jacet hic
sub marmore stratus, A Gravestone at the North I Will entering into the Quire*

Qui pueros docuit multos
veluti been sciunt.
Quem rapuit Dominus,
sed vivit spiritus ejus,
Inter seculas quo' obierunt
qui been formas
Annis millenis
quingentenis simul oct^,
Quod Domini migrat
qui non cursum sibi pigrat.
Mense Decembre fero
de quo non plus majus edo
Binas uxores habuit
senas quoque proies.
Quarum tres nati,
natae tres atque fuere,
Quos nece truncavit
Christus quicunque creavit.
Next to this Church is a fair and large Inn for receipt of Travelers, and
has to sign the Sarasens head.

There lies a street from Newgate West, to the end of Turne-againe lane, and
winding North to Oldbourne Conduit. Oldbourne Conduit by Oldbourne Cross.
This Conduit by Oldbourne Cross was first builded 1498. Thomasin, widow to
John Percival, Mayor, gave to the second making thereof 20. Marks, Richard
Shore ten pounds, Thomas Knesworth, and others also did give toward it.

But of late, a new Conduit was there builded in place of the old, namely, in
the year 1577. by William Lamb, sometime a Gentleman of the Chapel to King
Henry the eighth, and afterward a Citizen and Clothworker of London, the water
thereof he caused to be conveyed in Lead, from diverse Springs to one head,
and from thence to the said Conduit, and waste of one Cock at Oldbourne
bridge, more than 2000. yards in length, all which was by him performed at his
own charges, amounting to the sum of 1500. l.

From the West side of this Conduit is the high way, there called Snor hill,
stretching out by Oldbourne bridge over the often named water of Turnmill Brook,
and so up to Oldbourne hill, all replenished with fair building.

Without Oldbourne bridge, on the right hand, is Gold lane, as is before
showed: up higher on the hill be certain Innes, and other fair buildings,
amongst the which (of old time) was a Message called Scroopes Inn; Scroopes
Inn, sometime Sergeants Inn, in Oldbourne.
for so I find the same recorded in the 37. of Henry the 6.

This house was sometime letten out to Sergeants at the Law, as appears, and
was found by Inquisition taken in the Guild Hall of London, before William
Purchase, Mayor, and Escheator for King Henry the seventh, in the 14. of his
reign, after the death of John Lord Scroope, that he dyed deceased in his
demesne of fee, by the feoffement of Guy Fairfaix, Knight, one of the Kings
Justices, made in the 9. of the same King, unto an Esquire, the said Io.
Scroop, Knight, Lord Scroope of Bolton, and Robert Wingfield, of one house or
tenement late called Sergeants Inn, situate against the Church of St. Andrew
in Oldbourne in

the City of London, with two Gardens, and two Messuages to the same Tenement
belonging in the said City, to hold in burgage, valued by the year in all
reprises 10. s.

Then is the Bishop of Elies Inn, Ely place in Oldbourne.
so called of belonging and pertaining to the Bishops of Ely. William de Luda,
Bishop of Ely, deceased 1297. and gave this house, by the name of his Manor
with the appurtenances in Oldbourne, to his successors, with condition, that
his next successor should pay a thousand Marks toward the finding of three
Chaplains in the Chapel there.

More, John Hotham, Bishop of Ely, did give by the name of six Messuages, two
Cellars, and forty Acres of land in the Suburbs of London, in the Parish of
Saint Andrew in Oldbourne, to the Prior and Covent of Ely, as appears by
Patent the ninth of Edward the third: this man was Bisop of Ely 20. years, and
deceased 1336.

Thomas Arundell, Bishop of Ely, beautifully builded of new his Palace at Ely,
and likewise his Mannours in diverse places, especially this in Oldbourne, which
he did not only repair, but rather new builded, and augmented it with a large
Port, Gate House, or Front toward the street, or highway: his Arms are yet
to be discerned in the stone work thereof: he fate Bishop of Ely fourteen
years, and was translated to York.

In this house, for the large and commodious rooms thereof, diverse great and
solemn feasts have bin kept, especially by the Sergeants at the Law, whereof
twain are to be noted for posterity.

The first in the year 1464. the fourth of Edward the fourth, Sergeants feast
in Ely house.
in Michaelmas Term, the Sergeants at Law held their feast in this house, to
the which amongst other Estates, Matthew Philip, Mayor of London, with the
Aldermen, Sheriffs, and Commons of diverse crafts being invited, did repair:
but when the Mayor looked to keep the State in the Hall, as it had been used in
all places within the City and Liberties (out of the Kings presence) the Lord
Gray of Ruthen, then Lord Treasurer of England, unwitting the Sergeants, and
against their wills (as they said) was first placed: whereupon the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commons departed home, and the Mayor made the Aldermen to dine
with him: howbeit, he and all the Citizens were wonderfully displeased, that
he was so dealt with, and the new Sergeants and others were right sorry
therefore, and had rather than much good (as they said) it had not so happened.

One other feast was likewise there kept, in the year 1531. the 23. of King
Henry the eighth. The Sergeants then made were in number eleven: namely, Thomas
Audeley, Walter Luke, 1. Bawldwine, 1. Hind, Christopher Ienny, John Dowsell,
Edward Mervine, Edmond Knightley, Roger Chomley, Edward Montague, and Robert
York.

These also held their feast in this Ely house for five days, to wit, Friday
the tenth of November, Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday. On Monday (which
was their principal day) King Henry and Queen Katharine dined there (but in
two chambers) and the foreign Ambassadors in a third chamber. K. Henry the 8.
and Queen Katharine dined at the Sergeants feasts.


In the Hall at the high table, sat Sir Nicholas Lambard, Mayor of London, the
Judges, the Barons of the Exchequer, with certain Aldermen of the City: At the
board on the South side sat the Master of the Rowles, the Master of the
Chancery, and worshipful Citizens: On the North side of the Hall certain
Aldermen began the board, and then followed Merchants of the City: In the
Cloystry, Chapel and Gallery, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen were placed:
In the Hals the Crafts of London: the Sergeants of Law and their Wives kept in
their own chambers.

It were tedious to set down the preparation of fish, fles, and other victuals
spent in this feast, and would seem almost incredible, and (as to me it
seems) wanted little of a feast at a Coronation: Nevertheless a little I
will touch, for declaration of the change of prices.

There were brought to the slaughter house four and twenty great Beefes, at
26. s. 8. d. the piece from the Shambles, one carcass of an Ox, at 24. s. an
hundred fat Muttons, 2. s. 10. d. the piece, fifty one great Veales, at 4. s.
8. d. the piece, thirty four Porkes, 3. s. 8. d. the piece, ninety one Pigs, 6
d. the piece, Capons of Greece of one Poulter (for they had three) ten dozens,
at twenty pence the piece: Capons of Kent, nine dozen and six, at twelve pence
the piece: Capons course nineteen dozen, at six pence the piece. Cocks of
gross, seven dozen and nine, at eight pence the piece: Cocks course, fourteen
dozen and eight, at three pence the piece: Pullets the best, 2. d. ob. other
Pulle^s, two pence: Pigeons, thirty seven dozen, at ten pence the dozen: Swans,
fourteen dozen: Larkes, 340. dozen, at five pence the dozen, etc. Edward
Nevill was Seneshall or Steward, Thomas Ratcliffe Controwier, Thomas Wildon
Clerk of the Kitchen.

Next, Lither lane. Furnivals Inn, an Inn of Chancery*
beyond this Manor of Ely house, is Lither lane, turning into the field. Then
is Furnivals Inn, now an Inn of Chancery, but sometime belongging to Sir
William Furnival, Knight, and Thomasin his wife, who had in Oldbourne two
Messuages, and 13. Shops, as appears by Record of Richard the second in the
sixth of his reign.

Then is the Earl of Bathes Inn, now called, The Earl of Bathes Inn.
Bathe Place, of late (for the most part) new builded, and so to the Bars.

Now again from Newgate, on the left hand or South side, lies the Old Bailey,
which runs down by the wall upon the ditch of the City, called Hounds Ditch
to Ludgate: Hounds Ditch.
I have not read how this street took that name, but it is like to have risen
of some Court of old time there kept: and I find, that in the year 1356. the
34. of Edward the third, the tenement and ground upon Hounds Ditch, between
Ludgate on the South, and Newgate on the North, was appointed to John
Cambridge, Fishmonger, The Chamberlaines house and Court in the Old Beyly.
Chamberlain of London, whereby it seems, that the Chamberlaines of London
have there kept their Courts, as now they do in the Guild hall, and till this
day, the Mayor and Justices of this City kept their Sessions in a part thereof,
now called the Sessions hall, The Sessions hall.
both for the City of London, and Shire of Middlesex. Over Against the which
house, on the right hand, turns down Saint Georges lane, S. Georges lane,
and Inn of Chancery there.
toward Ficet lane.

In this St. Georges lane, on the North side thereof, remains yet an old wall
of stone, enclosing a piece of ground up Seacole lane, wherein (by report)
sometime stood an Inn of Chancery: which house being greatly decayed, and
standing remote from other houses of that profession, the Company removed to a
common Hostery, called of the sign, our Lady Inn, not far from Clements
Inn, which they procured from Sir John Fineox, Lord chief Justice of the
Kings Bench, and since have held it of the Owners, Original of New Inn.
by the name of the New Inn, paying therefore six pounds rent by the year,
An Inn of Chancery.
as renants at their own will: for more (as is said) cannot be gotten of them;
and much less will they be put from it.

Beneath this Saint Georges lane, the Lane called Fleet lane, winding South by
the prison of the Fleet, into Fleetstreet, by Fleet Bridge.

Lower down into the Old Bailey, P. standard of Spring water in the Old Beyly.
is at this present a Standard of Timber, with a Cock, or Cocks, delivering
fair Spring water to the inhabitants, and is the waste of the water, serving
the Prisoners in Ludgate.

Next, out of the high street turns down a Lane, called the Little Bailey,
which runs down to the East end of Saint Georges lane.

The next is Sea-coale lane, Sea-coale lane, or Lime-burners lane, sometime so
called.
I think, called Lime burners lane, of burning Lime there with Sea-coale. For
I read in Record of such a Lane, to have bin in the Parish of Saint Sepuld^re,
and there yet remains in this Lane an Alley, called Lime-burners Alley.

Near unto this Sea-coale lane, in the turning toward Oldbourne Conduit, is
Turne-againe lane, Wind-againe lane.
or rather, as in a Record of the fifth of Edward the third, Wind-againe lane,
for that it goes down West to Fleet Dike, from whence, men must turn again
the same way they came; for there it is stopped.

Then the high street turns down Snor hill, Snore lane.
to Oldbourne Conduit, and from thence to Oldbourne Bridge; beyond the which
Bridge, Shoo lane.
on the left hand, is Shoe lane, by the which men pass from Oldbourne to
Fleetstreet, by the Conduit there.

In this Shoe lane, on the left hand, is one old House, Oldbourne hall.
called Oldbourne Hall; it is now letten out into diverse Tenements.

On the other side, at the very corner, stands the Parish Church of St.
Andrew; Parish Church of S. Andrew in Oldbourne.
in the which Church, or near thereunto, was sometime kept a Grammar School,
Grammar school in Oldbourne.
as appears in another place by a Patent, made (as I have showed) for the
erection of Schools.

There be Monuments in this Church of Thomas, Lord Wriothesley, Earl of
Southampton, buried 1550.

Ralph Rokeby, of Lincolnes Inn, Esquire, Master of Saint Katharines, and one
of the Masters of Requests to Queen Elizabeth, who deceased the 14. of June,
1596.

He gave by his Testament to Christ's Hospital in London, an hundred pounds.

To the College of the Poor of Queen Elizabeth, in East Greenwitch, an
hundred pounds.

To the poor Scholars in Cambridge, an hundred pounds.

To the poor Scholars in Oxford, an hundred pounds.

To the Prisoners in the two Compters in London, two hundred pounds.

To the prisoners in the Fleet, an hundred pounds.

To the prisoners in Ludgate, an hundred pounds.

To the prisoners in Newgate, an hundred pounds.

To the prisoners in the Kings Bench, an hundred pounds.

To the prisoners in the Marshalsey, an hundred pounds.

To the prisoners in the White Lion, twenty pounds.

To the poor of S. Katharines, twenty pounds; and to every Brother and Sister
there, forty shillings.

Will. Sydnam founded a chauntry there.

There was also of old time (as I have read in the third of Henry the fifth) an
Hospital for the poor, Hospital in Oldbourne.
which was a Cell to the house of Cluny in France, and was therefore suppressed
among the Priories Aliens.

Here rests the body of Margery Parkinson, late wife of John Parkinson, A
Monument in the North wall of the Chancell.
of the City of Chester, Gentleman, the daughter of William Dimmocke, of the
same City, Gentleman, who died in the faith of Christ on the fourth day of
February, Anno Domini 1610. She left behind unto her said husband these
children at her death, Gerrard, William, John, Edward, and Katharine
Parkinson; which Gerraid died at Brazen-nose College in Oxford, the 4. day of
January, Anno Domini 1611.

John Parkinson, her sorrowful husband, caused this Monument to be here
erected, for a memorial of her virtue, and of their mutual love.

Here lies buried William Tipper, A fair stone before the door of the Vestre*
Esquire of the body to our Sovereign Lord King James, who departed this world
the first day of September, An. Domini 1613. being aged 71. years. Hec was the
son of Henry Tipper, of London, Citizen and Grocer, and of Helen his wife,
daughter of Randall Dodd of Cheshire. This William Tipper married Mary,
daughter of Io. Clarke, of London, Goldsmith, and had issue Robert Tipper.

Memoriae Sacrum.
Michael Jews, A small Monument in the wall at the east end of the Chancell.
of Collyweston, in the County of Northampton, Esquire, zealous in Gods truth,
and virtuous in conversation, did learnedly read in the Common Law of Grayes
Inn, Anno 1584. Aetatis suae 45. whose body lies here buried, but his soul
is with Christ, at the right hand of God, expecting the glorious resurrection
of the faithful.

Vincemus mundi Praelia pace Dei.
Reginaldus Biens, ortu clarus, A comely small Monument in the wall in the
Chancell.
virtue Militari clarior, terris multum jactatus and undis: huic tandem libens,
ac laetus appulit portui. An. Dom. 1611. Aetatis 49.

En fuit, en non est hic
qui sepelitur in umbris;
En fuit, en non est
umbra, cadaver, homo.
Vixit sua tempora nosque sequemur.
Monumentum Roberti Coke de Milleham in Comitatu Norfolciae Armig. A fair
Monument in the same wall.
Illustrissimi Hospitii Lincolniensis quondam Socii Primarii.

Qui ex Winefrida uxore sua, Gulimi Knightly filia, hos suscepit liberos:

Edwardum Coke, filium, Majestatis
Regiae Attornatum Generalem.
Winefridam, Miloni Mingay, Generos.
Dorotheam, Gulielmo Francklyn, Generos.
Elizabetham, Richardo Osborne, Generos.
Vrsulam, Georgio Ledys, Generos.
Annam, Francisco Stubbe, Generos.
Margaretam, Roberto Barker, Armig.
Ethelredam, Nicholae Bohun, Armig.
Obiit in Hospitio praedicto 15. die November. An. Domini, 1561. Elizab. 4.
Aetat. suae 48.

Ioannes Corbettus, a Chri. been mot.
Hic jacet spe novissimae tubae Jo. Corb. A comely Monument in the South wall of
the Chancell.
Armig. fill. Milonis Corbetti, Militis, natus quintus mortuus 2. unus
Clericorum Serenissimi Iacobi a secretioribus Conciliis. Occubuit 9. Decembris,
1611.

Si totus parvam
promeretur frater in urnam
Flerem, sed pars est
vilior ista sui
Quam Tumulo clausam,
pars altera vidit Olympo
Redditam, ut invidiam
semodo flere velim.
Elizabethae Ferreriae unicae filiol. Joan. A small Monument under the other.
Ferrerius Galvidamus Carnutensis, and Francisca Iuberta, moesti. par. P. P.
Anno CIC. IC. LXX. Octavo Kalend. Sextil.

Here lie the bodies of Richard Aldworth, A gilt Plate in the South wall of the
Quire.
Gentleman, and Elizabeth his wife, who had issue six sons and three
daughters: which Elizabeth deceased the 24. day of August, 1603. And the said
Richard, etc.

My Turtle gone,
all joy is gone from me,
I Will mourn awhile,
and after flee:
For Time brings
youthful Youths to Age,
And Age brings
Death, our Heritage.
They lived married together four
and forty years.
Their race is run,
and Heaven is won.
Non illo melior quisquam,
nec amantior aequi.
Radulpho Rokeby, A comely Monument in the same wall of the Quire.
a Marthamla (Oppido Richmondiensis agri) oriundo, Lincolniensis Hospitii Socio
Primario. Xenodochii diuae Catharinae prope Arcem Londinensem Magitro;
Augustissimaeque Anglorum Reginae Elizabethae a libellis supplicibus, non minus
domi ac foris, quam pace belloque de Principe, ac patria been merito. Caelibi
septuagenario, fatisquea demum 14. Iunii. Anno post natum Messiam, 1596.
feliciter functo: Heredes in Testamento scripti piae grataeque memoriae gratia
posuerunt.

Here lies the body of Henry Topham, Two fair Grav^-stones in South I Will of
the Quire.
Esquire, one of the Readers of Grayes Inn: who dyed the first day of May, An.
Dom. 1612.

Hic jacet corpus Saintmontis Wells, Generos. de Grayes Inn, qui coelebs
obiit 18. Februarii, 1612.

Here lies the body of Thomas Thorney, A comely Monument in the South I Will of
the Church in the wall.
late Citizen and Barber-Chirurgion of London, who dyed the 4. of June, 1614.
and lived 71. years, being twice Master of his Company, and one of the Common
Council of this City: who gave to the poor of this Parish of St. Andrew, 10.
pounds to be distributed on the day of his funeral, and ten pounds a year
afterward to ten poor Pentioners of this Parish for ever. And twenty shillings
to the poor people of Acton for ever; who dyed without issue of his body, and
made Peter Thorney, Citizen and Barber-Chirurgion of London (his brothers
son) his heir and sole Executor: who kneeleth with him in this module, being
finished and set up in the month of December, An. Dom. 1614. and at the only
cost and charges of the said Peter Thorney, in memory of so worthy a member,
who lived in good credit, name and fame all the days of his life, and did many
good offices, and memorable acts in this Parish.

George Harison Gentleman, A comely Monument in the North wall of the Quire.
lies here,
and Elizabeth his wife,
Which in this Parish many a year
did live a gracious life:
And he at her departure gave
to the poor of Parishes twain,
Saint Giles in the Field, and this,
Annuity to remain,
For six and forty years to come,
to give the poorest souls,
One year six and twenty Gowns,
and two good loads of Coals.
Next year as many shirts and smocks,
and as many Coals again,
Till six and forty years run out,
to women and to men.
To Prisoners and to many more
great gifts she gave beside,
And in the faith of Jesus Christ,
they both assured died.
Quid superbis terra and cinis?
Huc oculos, Lector,
versa, de corpore caeso
I am cineres praeter
quod superest, nihil est.
Creed mihi de quo
laetaris corpore, digent,
Iam cineres praeter
quod superest, nihil est.
Georgio Egeock, de Salford prioris in agro varvicensi, A comely Monument on a
pillar in the Quire
Armigero, viro omni virtutum genere instructo: integerrimae fidei cum erga
Deum tum erga homines, illaesae probitatis, illibati nominis, de Patria,
Conjuge, amiciss. omnibus optime merito. Dorothea (origin S. John) relicta
moestissimi officii and desiderii, conjugalis triste argumentum, adjumentum
memoriae, Monumentum posteris and nonnullum moeroris ac viduitatis lenamentum
posuit.

Obdormivit in Domino fideliter ac feliciter An. Salutis hum. 1601. Eliz. Reg.
43. Aetatis suae circa 40. nexus Conjug. 11. Men's. Martii 19. die Veneris, 1606.

Here rest the bodies of Francis Ienner, sometime of little Walsingham in the
County of Norfolk, A Grave at the Chancell door.
Esquire, and sometime Fellow of Grayes Inn, and Margaret his wife (daughter
to William Hamon of Acris in the County of Kent, Esquire) who had issue one
only daughter and Heir, named Frances Ienner, yet living. The said Margaret
deceased in October, Anno 1603.

From this Church to Saint Andrew up Oldbourne Hill, be diverse fair builded
houses, amongst the which, on the left hand, there stands three Innes of
Chauncery, Crookehorn Alley, Thavies Inn.
whereof the first, adjoining unto Crookehorne Alley, is called Thavies Inn,
and stands opposite to Ely House.

Then is Fewter lane, Fewters lane.
which stretches South into Fleetstreet, by the East end of Saint Dunstanes
Church, and is so called of Fewters (or idle people) lying there, as in a way
leading to Gardens; but the same is now oflater years on both sides builded
through with many fair houses.

Beyond this Fewters lane is Barnards Inn, Barnards Inn.
alias Mackworths Inn, which is of the Chancery, belonging to the Deane and
Chapter of Lincoln, Pat. Hen. 3. 32. 1.
as says the Record of Hen. the 6. the 32. of his reign, and was founded by
Inquisition in the Guild Hall of London, before I. Norman, Mayor, the Kings
Exchetre. The Jury said, that it was not hurtful for the King to license
Thomas Atkins, Citizen of London, and one of the Executors of John Mackworth,
Deane of Lincoln, to give one Message in Oldbourne in London, with the
appurtenances, called Mackworths Inn (but now commonly known by the name of
Barnards Inn) to the Deane and Chapter of Lincoln, to find one sufficient
Chaplain, to celebrate divine Service in the Chapel of S. George, in the
Cathedral Church of Lincoln, where the body of the said John is buried, to
have and to hold the said message to the said Deane and Chapter, and to their
successors for ever, in part of satisfaction of twenty pound Lands and Rents,
which Edward the third licenced the said Deane and Chapter to purchase to their
own use, either of their own fee, or tenure, or of any other, so the Lands
were not holden of the King in Capite.

Then is Staple Inn also, Staple Inn.
of Chancery but whereof so named, I am ignorant; the same of late is (for a
great part thereof) fair builded, and not a little augmented: And then at the
Bars ends this Ward without Newgate.

Without Ludgate, on the right hand or North side, from the said Gate, lies
the Old Bailey, as I said: Then the high street, called Ludgate Hill, down to
Fleet lane; Ludgate hill.
in which lane stands the Fleet, a Prisonhouse, so called of the Fleet or
Water running by it, and sometime flowing about it, but now vaulted over.

I read, The Fleet, or Jail, in the reign of Richard the first.
that Richard the first, in the first year of his reign, confirmed to Osbere
(brother to William Longshampe, Chancellor of England, and elect of Ely) and to
his heirs for ever, the custody of his House, or Palace at Westminster, with
the keeping of his Jail of the Fleet at London. Also King John by his Patent
dated the third of his reign, gave to the Archdeacon of Wells, the custody
of the said Kings House at Westminster, and of his Jail of the Fleet, together
with the Wardship of the daughter and heir of To. Leveland, etc.

Then is Fleet bridge, pitched over the said Water, whereof I have spoken in
another place.

Then also, Conduit in Fleetstreet.
against the South end of Shoo lane, stands a fair Water-Conduit; whereof
William Eastfield, sometime Mayor, was Founder: For the Mayor and Communalty of
London being possessed of a Conduit Head, with diverse Springs of water gathered
thereinto, in the Parish of Padington, and the water conveyed from thence by
Pipes of Lead toward London unto Teyborne, where it had layne by the space of
six years, and more; the Executors of Sir William Eastfield obtained license
of the Mayor and Communalty, for them, in the year 1453. with the goods of Sir
William, to convey the said waters, first, in Pipes of Lead, into a Pipe begun
to be laid besides the great Conduit Head at Maribone, which stretches from
thence unto a Separall, late before made against the Chapel of Rounsevall, by
Charing Cross, and no further; and then from thence to convey the said water
into the City, and there to make Receipt or Receipts for the same, unto the
Commonweal of the Communalty, to wit, the poor to drink, the rich to dress
their meats: which water was by them brought thus into Fleetstreet, to a
Standard, which they had made and finished 1471.

The inhabitants of Fleetstreet, in the year 1478. obtained license of the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Communalty, to make (at their own charges) two Cesternes,
Conduit at Fleet bridge.
the one to be set at the said Standard, the other at Fleet bridge, for the
receipt of the waste water. This Cesterne at the Standard they builded, and on
the same, a fair Tower of Stone, garnished with Images of Saint Christopher on
the top, and Angels round about, lower down, with sweet sounding Bells before
them, whereupon, by an Engine placed in the Tower, they diverse hours of the
day and night, chymed such an Hymn as was appointed.

This Conduit, or Standard, was again new builded, with a larger Cesterne, at
the charges of the City, in the year 1582.

From this Conduit, Parish Church of S. Dunstane.
up to Fewters lane, and further, is the Parish Church of Saint Dunstane,
called in the West, (for difference from St. Dunstan in the East) where lies
buried T. Duke, Skinner, in Saint Katharines Chapel, by him builded, 1421.
Nicholas Coningston, John Knape, and other, founded Chantries there. Ralph
Bane, Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, 1559. and other, lie there buried.

O bone Protector animae, A fair plated stone under the Communion Table.

miserere Iohannis
Hor sepoole, qui Rector
Auerham fuit ejus in annis.
Cancellariae fuerat
vivendo Magister,
Sis sibi fons veniae
cujus fuit ipse Magister.
Morte die decimo nono
Iu^ii ruit anne,
M. C. quater nono
seciato bis sibi de^e,
Hic jacet Richardus Nordon, Another fair stone close by the other.
Civis and Scissor, ac quondam Vicecomes Londini, and Ioanna uxor ejus: Qui
quidem Richardus obiit 23. die Martii, Anno Domini 1460. Ac etiam dicta Ioanna
obiit 21. die Novembris, Anno 1459.

Hic jacet Gulielmus Chapman, nuper Civis and Scissor, Another fair stone
lying by it*
ac Vicecomes Civitatis London, and Alicia uxor ejus. Qui Guliel. pro uno
Capellano hic perpetuo celebraturo, ac pro uno Cereo coram venerabili
Sacramento ad summum Altar hujus Ecclesiae continue ardente, neonon prosuo
Anniversario in perpetuum fiendo feliciter ordinavit. Et idem Guliel. obiit
primo die Mensis Iulii, An. Dom. 1446.

Hic jacet Rogerus Horton, A fair stone, hard by.
quondam unus Justiciariorum de Banco Domini Regis. Qui obiit ultimo die
Aprilis, An. 1423. Cujus, etc.

Jesus animae famuli tui Laurentii Bartlot nuper Registrarii Episcop. A fair
stone by the Communion Table.
Lincoln. Qui obiit die Octobris, Anno 1470. Dona requiem, etc.

Quisquis ades vultumque vides,
sta, perlege, plora,
Iudicii memor esto mei,
tua nam venit hora.
Sum quod eris, fueramque
quod es, tua posteriora
Commemorans, miseris miserans,
pro me precor ora.
Here Edward Cordell, A comely Monument at entering into the Vestry.
Squire, lies;
who when he life possessed,
Had place among the learned and wife,
and credit with the best.
Abigail Heningham, his wife,
this Monument prepared,
For love to him, who in his life,
to love her well declared.
God has his soul, this Earth his Earth,
her heart his love shall keeps;
The ods 'twixt you and him, is breath;
which gone, all flesh thus sleeps.
In obitum Thomae Valentis, Lincolniensis Hospitii Socii. Qui obiit 23. die
December. Anno 1601. Aetatis 78.

Hoc Tumulo Thomae
requiescunt ossa Valentis, A small Monument in the east end of the Chancell,
North.

Et parvum corpus
parvula terra tegit:
Sed men's, quae melior pars est,
expresque Sepulchri,
Infima despiciens
sidera celsa colit.
Here-under lies the body of Thomas Powle, A fair Monument in the South wall
of the Chancell, at the east end.
Esquire, Clerk of the Crown, and one of the six Clerks of the High court
of Chancery, Controller of the Hamper, Clerk of the Forest of Waltham, and
High Steward to the late Queen Elizabeth, of all her Manors within the County
of Essex. He had by his wife Jane Tate (descended from the Line of honorable
Ances^ors) five sons and one daughter; who likewise is here with him buried.
Both lived in the fear of God, and dyed in his favor: She, in the 57. year
of her age, the 24. day of November, 1577. And he, in the 88. year of his
age, the 26. day of June, Anno 1601.

Stephen Powle, Esquire, their only surviving son, and successor to his
father in the Office of one of the six Clerks of the Chancery; in dutiful
piety, consecrated to lasting memory this holy Monument.

Corpus foetidum
carcer, Mors libertas,
Vita mare procellosum,
Sepulchrum perortus,
Mundus vaga peregrinatio,
Coelum Patria.
Disce ergo mori,
dedisce vivere.
In God is only my Trust: God is my Defender. A Brazen Plate on a Pillar in
the Chancell.


My friend, whosoever this place of mine
thou be that shall behold,
With petience pawse, and hear a friend
his mind to thee unfold,
Seek not with heaps of worldly toys
to furnish thy delight;
Nor let him fancy high degree,
that hopes to live aright.
If thou have wealth supply their want
that languish and decay,
And linger not thy good intent,
until the later day.
If poverty oppress thy mind,
let patience be thy guide;
Let rigor fail to false thy faith,
what hap so thee betide:
For, as from death no way there is,
whereby thee to defend;
So, happy may no creature be,
before his final end.
Wherefore, of God his mercy crave,
who has of mercy sto^e,
And unto him commend my soul:
(my friend) I crave no more.
Here before, An ancient Marble Tomb in the South I Will of the Quire.
lies buried in the Vault, Robert Witchcotte, of Lions Inn, Gentleman, the
son of Thomas Witchcotte, Esquire, who deceased the 9. day of August, in An.
Dom. 1557.

Here lies the body of Sir Roger Cholmeley, Another like Tomb close adjoining.
Knight for the body to King Henry the eighth: which Sir Roger deceased the 28.
day of April, An. Dom. 1538.

Ranulphus Cholmeley clara
hic cum conjuge dormit. Another Tomb by it, in the wall.

Binaque Connubii
corpora juncta fide,
Haec brevis urna tenet
veros disjungere amantes
Nec potuit mortis
vis truculenta nimis.
Justitia in signis
nulli pietate secundus,
Ranulphus clara
stirpe creatus erat.
Non deerant Arts
Generoso pectore dignae,
Doctus and Anglorum
Iure peritus erat.
Ille Recordator Londini
huic extitit urbis,
Et miseris semper
mite levamen erat.
Hujus acerba viri
Londinum funera deflet,
Dicens, justitiae
vive perennis honor.
Obiit 25. die Aprilis,
An. 1563.
Mors mihi lucrum.
Near to this place lies buried the body of Elizab. North, A fair Monument
in the east end of the North Quire.
wife to Roger North, Esquire, and one of the daughters and coheires of Sir
John Gilbert, Knight, of great Finborow, in Suffolk. She had issue, two
sons and one daughter, Henry North, Dudley North, and Mary North. On the 29.
of November in Anno 1612. (she being about the age of 22. years) ended this
life: Leaving behind her many of the gravest, that may justly imitate her
virtues and godly course of life.

Anno Domini 1556.
Hic jacet humatus Williel. An ancient Monument in the South end of the Quire.
Portman, Miles, Serviens inclitissimae Principis H. 8. ad Legem, and illo
tempore unus Justice. suorum ad placitum coram ipso Rege tenend. ac postea temp.
illustriss. Principum, Phil. and Mariae Regis and Reginae Angliae Capitalis
iusticiarius hujus Regni Angliae, eoque officio summa aequitate ita perfunctus
erat, ut in Deum in primis sanctus and pius, in Patriam ac Principem fidus and
morigerus, in omnes denique semper aequabil. fuit and perseveravit. Ab hac
autem luce in coelestem Praetorum coetum 5. die Februarii, Anno Regni praefat.
Regis and Reginae 3. and 4. emigravit.

Here lies Thomas Browke, A small ancient Monument in the east end of the
South Quire.
Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of Land. and sometime Master of his Company, and
Alice his wife: which Thomas deceased the first day of November, An. Dom. 1546.
And the said Alice deceased, etc.

Gerardi Legh, Generosi, and clari viri interioris Templi Socii Tumulus. Civis
and Hospes Interloquutores.

C. Hospes fiste pedem, A comely Monument in the East end of the North Quire.

Tumulum nec temne, Gerardus
Legh jacet hac humili
contumulatus humo.
H. Vnde genus duxit?
C. Generoso e sanguine natum,
Antiquae stirpis
en Monumenta docent.
Nec Generosus erat vir
sola ex parre caduca,
Sed virtute magis,
men's Generosa fuit.
Religio summa splendebat
mentis in arce,
Et seeds Verae
pectus amicitiae.
Ingenio ac raro morum
candore refulcit,
Men's violare fidem
credidit esse nefas.
H. Quod studium vivo placuit?
C. Scrutare solebat
Vivens clarorum
magna Trophaea virum.
Abdita naturae and
rerum cognoscere vires
Occultas, vivo
maxima cura fuit.
H. Talibus imbutum studiis
reor esse beatum,
Sed lethi causam
tu mihi quaeso refer?
C. Vrbe ista passim dum
faevit lucida pestis,
Occldit heu relo
pestis acuta tuo.
H. O durum fatum! sed
sculptum cur stat in urna
Numen Amicitiae
Civis amice refer?
C. Numen Amicitiae quo magni
haec machina Mundi
Constat, divina
quae fabricata manu,
Hujus acerba viri
deplorat funera, dicens,
Vives, O verae
cultor Amicitiae,
Donec summa dies
nostros dissolverit artus,
Corruat and summa
mundus ab arce poli.
H. Mercurius nitidis
cur star caducifer alis
Hic (...) lug^t magnus
sunera and ista Deus?
C. Nuncius ille Deum plangens
sua pectora palma,
Inc^^ans Parcas
talia verba re^ert:
Crudeles Parcae
nostrum rapuistis Alumnum,
Artibus ornatum,
muneribusque meis
In terris, cujus docti
Monumenta laboris
Extant, and nullo
sunt peritura die.
Obiit An. 1563. October. 13. Ardum vitis non deserit ulmum.

The memorial of William Crowche, A small Table.
Citizen and Mercer of London, and one of the Common Council of this City;
Monument on a pallar in the North I Will of the Quire.
who gave by his Will ten shillings a year for a Sermon on his Funeral day,
and forty shillings yearly for a Dinner to be made on that day, for the Common
Council, the Churchwardens, and twelve freemen of this Parish, at the
election of his Executors. And he also gave ten pounds a year for ever to be
distributed yearly among six and thirty poor people of honest life, dwelling
in this Parish. He was buried near to this place the sixteenth day of April,
Anno Domini 1606.

Lo, thus he dyed, for
vain and frail is flesh;
Yet lives his sold (by faith)
in endless bliss,
By faith in Christ; whose
grace was so enlarged,
That by his blond, man's
sin he has discharged.
Here lies George Harington, of Salby, Esquire, On the same Pillar.
who died the ninth day of October, 1556.

Here lies Laurence Dalton, On the same Pillar.
Esquire, late Norroy, King of Arms; who deceased on Saturday the thirteenth
of December, 1561. And Dorothy his wife, daughter to Richard Breame, late of
London, Esquire.

Henry Leigh, On the same Pillar.
sometime Citizen and Draper of London, a man borne of a good Family, whose
life and conversation was pleasing to God and man, departed out of this life
the ninth day of April, Anno Dom. 1568. And lies buried in the Churchyard by
his two wives, Isabel and Elizabeth, both very virtuous, good to their
neighbors, and therefore right heartily beloved.

Here lies buried Colborne, On the same Pillar.
Esquire, late York, Herald of Arms: who deceased on Saturday, the thirteenth
of September, 1567. and was buried on Monday, the 15. of the same month.

Memoriae Sacrum.
Hic jacet Cutbertus Fethestone, A comely Monument in the wall of the South I Will.
Generos. nuper Optiarius and Proclamator Dom. Regis, in Curia ipsius Regis
coram ipso Rege ubicunque fuerat in Anglia.

Functus est hoc munere, Ann. 35.

Obiit 10. Decembris, 1615.

Aetatis 78.

Quem saepe transcit casus, aliquando invent.
Next beyond this Church is Cliffords Inn, Cliffords Inn.
sometimes belonging to Robert Clifford, by gift of Edward the second, in these
words:

The King grants to Robert Clifford that message, with the appurtenances
next the Church of S. Dunstane in the West, in the Suburbs of London, which
message was sometime Malculines de Herley, and came to the hands of Edw. the
1. by reason of certain debts, which the said Malculine was bound at the time
of his death to our said Father, from the time that he was Escheator on this
side Trent: which house, John, Earl of Richmond, did hold at our pleasure, and
is now in our possession, Patent the third of Edward the second.

After the death of this Robert Clifford, Isabel his wife let the same Message
to Students of the Law, as by the Record following may appear:

Isabel, quae fuit uxor Roberti Clifford, Messuagium unipartium, quod Robertus
Clifford habuit in Parochia S. Dunstani, West. in Suburbio Londini, etc.
tenuit, and illud dimisit post mortem dict. Roberti Apprenticiis de Banco, pro
10. l. Annuatim, etc. Anno 18. Edvardi tertii, inquisitis post mortem Roberti
Clifford.

This house has since fallen into the Kings hands, as I have heard, but
returned again to the Cliffords, and is now letten to the said Students for
four pounds by the year.

Somewhat beyond this Cliffords Inn is the South end of New street (or
Chancelar lane) on the right hand, New street. or Chancelar lane.
whereof is Sergeants Inn called, in Chancery lane.

And then next was sometime the house of the Converted Jews, House of Converts.
founded by K. Henry the third, in place of a Jews house to him forfeited, in
the year 1233. and the 17. of his reign, who builded there for them a fair
Church, now used, and called the Chapel, for the custody of Rolls and
Records of Chancery. It stands not far from the old Temple, but in the
midway between the Old Temple and the New: in the which house, all such Jews
and Infidels as were converted to the Christian Faith, were ordained and
appointed (under an honest rule of life) sufficient maintenance; whereby it
came to pass, that in short time there were gathered a great number of
Converts, which were baptized, instructed in the Doctrine of Christ, and there
lived under a learned Christian, appointed to govern them. Since the which
time, to wit, in the year 1290. all the Jews in England were banished out of
the Realm, whereby the number of Converts in this place was decayed: and
therefore in the year 1377. this House was annexed by Patent to William
Burstall, Clerk, Custos Rotulorum, or Keeper of the Rolls of the Chancery, by
Edward the third, in the fifty one year of his reign; and this first Master
of the Rolls was sworn in Westminster Hall, at the Table of Marble stone:
since the which time, that House has been commonly called the Rolls in
Chancery lane. Notwithstanding, such of the Jews, Rolls in Chancery lane.
or other Insidels, as have in this Realm been converted to Christianity, and
baptized, have been relieved there: for I find in Record, that one William
Piers, a Jew, that became a Christian, was baptized in the fifth of Richard the
second, and had two pence the day allowed him, during his life, by the said
King.

On the West side, Prior of Necton Park, his Inn or house of the six Clerks.
sometime was an house pertaining to the Prior of Necton Park, a house of
Canons in Lincolnshire: this was commonly called Hereflete Inn, and was a
Brewhouse, but now fair builded for the six Clerks of the Chancery, and
stands overagainst the said house, called the Rolls, and near unto the Lane
which now enters Fickets Croft, Fickets croft Shere lane.
or Fickets field. Then is Shere lane, opening also into Fickets field, hard by
the Bars. On this North side of Fleetstreet, in the year of Christ, 1595. I
observed, that when the Laborers had broken up the pavement from against
Chancery lanes end, up toward Saint Dunstans Church, and had dug four foot
deep, they found one other pavement of hard stone, more sufficient than the
first; and therefore harder to be broken, under the which they found in the
made ground piles of Timber, driven very thick, and almost close together, the
same being as black as pitch or coal, and many of them rotten as earth, which
proves that the ground there (as sundry other places of the City) have been a
Marish or full of Springs.

On the South side from Ludgate, before the wall of the City, be fair builded
houses to Fleet bridge, Conduit at Fleet bridge.
on the which bridge, a Cesterne for receipt of Spring water was made by the men
of Fleet Street, but the watercourse is decayed, and not restored.

Next, Bridewell the Kings house.
is Bride lane, and therein Bridewell, of old time the Kings house: for the
Kings of this Realem have been there lodged, and till the ninth of Henry the
third, the Courts were kept in the Kings house wheresoever he was lodged, as
may appear by ancient Records, where of I have seen many, and for example
have set forth one in the Chapter or Towers and Castles.

King Henry the eighth builded there a stately and beautiful house of new, for
receipt of the Emperor Charles the fifth, who in the year of Christ 1522. was
lodged himself at the Black Friars; but his Nobles in this new builded
Bridewell, a Gallery being made out of the house over the water, and through the
wall of the City, into the Emperors lodging at the Black Friars, King Henry
himself oftentimes lodged there also, as namely, in the year 1525. a
Parliament being then holden in the Black Friars, he created States of
Nobility there; to wit:

Henry Fitz Roy, States created at Bridewell.
a child (which he had by Elizabeth Blunt) to be Earl of Nottingham, Duke of
Richmond, and of Somerset, Lieutenant General from Trent northward, Warden of
the east middle, and west Marches for anenst Scotland.

Henry Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, Cousin-German to the king, to be
Marquess of Excester.

Henry Brandon, a child of two years old, son to the Earl of Suffolk, to be
Earl of Lincoln.

Sir Thomas Manners, Lord Rosse, to be Earl of Rutland.

Sir Henry Clifford to be Earl of Cumberland.

Sir Robert Ratcliffe to be Vicount Fitzwater.

Sir Thomas Boloine, Treasurer of the Kings Household, to be Vicount Rochford

In the year 1528. Cardinal Campeius was brought to the Kings presence, being
then at Bridewell, whither he had called all his Nobility, Judges and
Councellers, etc. And there the eighth of November, in his great Chamber, he
made unto them an Oration touching his marriage with Queen Katharine, as ye
may read in Edward Hall.

In the year 1529. the same K. Henry and Queen Katharine were lodged there,
whilst the question of their marriage was argued in the Black Friars, etc.

But now you shall hear how this house became a house of correction.

In the year 1553. the seventh of Edward the sixth, Bridewell given to the
City of London to be a Worke-house for the poor.
the tenth of April, Sir George Barn, being Mayor of this City, was sent for
to the Court at White Hall, and there at that time the King gave unto him, for
the Communalty and Citizens to be a Workhouse for the poor and idle persons
of the City, his house of Bridewell, and seven hundred Marks land, late of the
possessions of the house of the Savoy, and all the Bedding and other furniture
of the said Hospital of the Savoy, toward the maintenance of the said
Worke-house of Bridewell, and the Hospital of Saint Thomas in South-warke.

This gift King Edward confirmed by his Charter, dated the 26. of June, next
following. And in the year 1555. in the month of February, Sir William
Gerard, Mayor, and the Aldermen, entered Bridewell, and took possession
thereof, according to the gift of the said King Edward, the same being
confirmed by Queen Mary.

The Bishop of S. David's had his Inn over against the North side of this
Bridewell, The Bishop of S. David's house.
as I have said.

Then is the Parish Church of Saint Bridges, Parish Church of S. Bridges, or
Bride.
or Bride, of old time a small thing, which now remains to be the Quire, but
since increased with a large Body, and side Isles, toward the West, at the
charges of William Venor, Esquire, Warden of the Fleet, about the year 1480.
all which he caused to be brought about in the stone, in the figure of a Vine,
with Grapes and Leaves, etc. The partition betwixt the old Work and the new,
sometime prepared as a Screne, to be set up in the Hall of the Duke of Somersets
house at Strand, was bought for eightscore pounds, and set up in the year
1557. One wilful body began to spoil and break the same, in the year 1596.
but was (by the high Commissioners) forced to make it up again, and so it
rests.

John Vlsthorpe, William Evesham, John Wigan, and other founded Chauntries
there.

Here lies Edward Trussell, A comely small Monument in the South wall of the
Quire.
Citizen and Clothworker of London, son of Avery Trussell, of Bilseley, in the
County of Warwick, Esquire, with Anne his wife, daughter of James Philpot.
which Anne departed this life An. Do^. 1586. And he having lived 38. years in
this Parish, departed in the Lord the nineteenth day of June, Anno Dom. 1613.
Aetatis 67.

He left behind three sons by the said Anne, and one daughter by Elizabeth, his
second wife. Iacobus, filius natu maximus pietatis ergo posuit.

Here lies James Kinnon, A fair Monument in the same Quire, in the East
corner of the wall.
a Gent. of Lentilo in Monmouthshire, a Citizen, and Cannoniere, and a
Soldier. He dyed aged 67. years, over-heating his blood in preparing of 40.
Chambers, at the entertainment of the Prince in the Artillery Garden; to the
which Society he gave 40. Chambers, and five Marks in money. To the poor of
this Parish he gave 10. l. per annum for one and twenty years, and to the
poor of Lentilo the like sum, and five pounds present. He had one wife and
one son. Obiit 19. die December. An. Dom. 1615.

It ever was his wish
to dye in Field,
Or else at Sea. Fates
half his wish did yield.
A Prince and Army
stood about him round:
Yet age (o're-wearied)
took the mortal wound.
Arts Mathematicke
he both loved and knew,
In which his skill increast,
as his years grew.
Wales gave him breath,
fair was his birth and name,
And though death stole
his life, he left him fame.
The next is Salisbury Court, The Bishop of Salisbury his house.
a place so called, for that it belonged to the Bishop of Salisbury, and was
their Inn or London house, at such time as they were summoned to come to the
Parliament, or came for other business. It has of late time been the
dwelling, first of Sir Richard Sackvile, and after of Sir Thomas Sackvile his
son, ^aron of Buckhurst, Lord Treasurer, who very greatly enlarged it with
stately buildings.

Then is Water lane, running down by the West side of a house, Water lane.
called the Hanging Sword, to the Thames.

Then was the White Friars Church, White Friars*
called Fratres beatae Mariae de monte Carmeli, John Baconthorpe.
first founded (says John Bale, by sir Kich. Gray, knight, Ancester to the
Lord Gray of Codnor, in the year 1241. King Edward the first gave to the Prior
and Brethren of that house, a plot of ground in Fleetstreet, whereupon to build
their house, which was since re-edified or new builded by Hugh Courtney, Earl
of Devonshire, about the year 1350. the 24 of Edward the third.

John Lufken, Mayor of London, and the Communalty of the City, granted a Lane,
called Crockers lane, reaching from Fleetstreet to the Thames, Crockers lane.
to build in the West end of that Church. Sir Robert Knoles, Knight, was a
great builder there also, in the reign of Richard the second, and of Henry the
fourth: he deceased at his Manor of Scone Thorpe, in Norfolk, in the year
1407. and was brought to London, and honorably buried by the Lady

Constance his wife, in the body of the said White Friars Church, which he had
newly builded.

Robert Marshall, Bishop of Hereford, builded the Quire, Presbytery steeple,
and many other parts, and was there buried about the year 1420.

There were buried also in the new Quire, sir John Mowbray, Earl of
Nottingham, 1398.

Sir Edward Courteny.

Sir Hugh Mongomery, and sir John his brother.

John Wolle, son to sir John VVolle.

Thomas Bayholt, Esquire.

Elizabeth, Countess of Athole.

Dame Johan, wife to sir Thomas Say of Alden.

Sir Pence Castle, Baron.

I. Lord Gray, son to Reginald, Lord Gray of Wilton, 1418.

Sir John Ludlow, knight.

Sir Richard Derois, knight.

Richard Gray, knight.

John Ashley, knight.

Robert Bristow, Esquire.

Thomas Perry, Esquire.

Robert Tempest, Esquire.

William Call.

William Neddow.

In the old Quire were buried Dame Margaret, etc.

Elianor Gristles.

Sir John Brown, knight, and John his son and heir.

Sir Simon de Berford, knight.

Peter VVigus, Esquire.

Robert Matthew. Esquire.

Sir John Skargell, knight.

Sir John Norice, knight.

Sir Geffrey Roose, knight.

Matthew Hadocke, Esquire.

William Clarell, Esquire.

John Aprichard, Esquire.

William Wentworth, Esquire.

Thomas VVicham, Esquire.

Sir Terwit, knight.

Sir Stephen Popham, knight.

Bastard de Scales.

Henry Blunt, Esquire.

Elizabeth Blunt.

Io. Swan, Esquire.

Alice Foster, one of the heirs of sir Stephen Popham.

Sir Robert Brocket, knight.

John Drayton, Esquire.

John, son to Robert Chanlowes, and his daughter Katharine.

John Salvin, William Hompton, John Bampton, John Winter, Edmond Oldhall, Will.
Appleyard, Thomas Dabby, Esquires.

Sir Hugh Courtney, knight.

John Drury, son to Robert Drury.

Elizabeth Gemersey, Gentle woman.

Sir Thomas Townsend, knight.

Sir Richard Green, knight.

William Scot, Esquire.

Thomas Federinghey.

John Fulforde, Esquire.

Edward Eldsmere, Gentleman.

William Heart, Gentleman.

Dame Mary Senclare, daughter to sir Thomas Talbot, knight.

Ancher, Esquire.

Sir William Moris, knight, and Dame Christian his wife.

Sir Peter de Mota, knight.

Richard Hewton, Esquire.

Sir John Heron, knight.

Richard Eton, Esquire.

Hugh Stapleton, Gentleman.

William Copley, Gentleman.

Sir Ralph Saintowen, knight.

Sir Hugh Bromeflete, knight.

Lord Vessey, principal Founder of that order, the 6. of Edw. the fourth, etc.

This house was valued at 26. pounds, seven shillings, and three pence, and was
surrendered the tenth of November, the 30. of Henry the eighth.

In place of this Friars Church, be now many fair houses builded, lodgings
for Noblemen and other.

Then is the Sergeants Inn, Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet.
so called, for that diverse Judges and Sergeants at the Law keep a Commons,
and are lodged there in Term time.

Next, New Temple.
is the New Temple, so called, because the Templers before the building of this
house, had their Temple in Oldbourne. This house was founded by the knights
Templers in England, in the reign of Henry the second, and the same was
dedicated to God and our blessed Lady, by Heraclius, Patriarch of the Church,
called the holy Resurrection in Jerusalem, in the year of Christ, 1185.

These knights Templers took their beginning about the year 1118. in manner
following: Original of the Templers.
Certain Noblemen, horsemen, religiously bent, bound by vow themselves in the
hands of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, to serve Christ after the manner of
Regular Canons, in chastity and obedience, and to renounce their own proper
wills for ever: the first of which order were Hugh Paganus, and Geffrey de S.
Andromare. And whereas at the first they had no certain habitation, Baldwin,
King of Jerusalem, granted unto them a dwelling place in his Palace by the
Temple, and the Cannons of the same Temple, gave them the street, thereby to
build therein their houses of office, and the Patriarch, the King, the Nobles,
and the Prelates, gave unto them certain revenues out of their Lordships.

Their first profession was for safeguard of the Pilgrims, Profession of the
Templers.
coming to visit the Sepulcher, and to keep the high ways against the lying
in wait of thieves, etc. About ten years after, they had a rule appointed unto
them, and a white Habit, by Honorius the second, then Pope; and whereas they
had but nine in number, they began to increase greatly. Afterward in Pope
Eugenius time, they bare cross of red cloth on their uppermost garments, to be
known from others: and in short time, because they had their first mansion
hard by the Temple of our Lord in Jerusalem, they were called Knights of the
Temple.

Many Noblemen in all parts of Christendom, became Brethren of this order, and
builded for themselves Temples in every City or great Town in England, but
this at London was their chief house, which they builded after the form of the
Temple near to the Sepulcher of our Lord at Jerusalem. They had also other
Temples in Cambridge, Bristow, Canturbury, Dover, Warwick. This Temple in
London was often made a Storehouse of men's Treasure, I mean such as feared
the spoil there of in other places.

Matthew Paris notes, Mat. Paris. Hubert Earl of Kent his Treasure in the new
Temple.
that in the year 1232. Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent, being Prisoner in the
Tower of London, the King was informed that he had much treasure laid up in
this New Temple, under the custody of the Templers: whereupon he sent for the
Master of the Temple, and examined him straightly, who confessed, that money
being delivered unto him and his Brethren, to be kept, he knew not how much
there was of it: The King demanded to have the same delivered: but it was
answered, that the money being committed unto their trust, could not be
delivered, without the license of him that committed it to Ecclesiastical
protection; whereupon the King sent his Treasurer and Iusticier of the
Exchequer unto Hubert, to require him to resign the money wholly into his
hands: who answered that he would gladly submit himself and all his unto the
Kings pleasure, and thereupon desired the Knights of the Temple (in his
behalf) to present all the Keys unto the King to do his pleasure with the
goods which he had committed unto them. Then the King commanded the money to
be faithfully told, and laid up in his Treasure by Inventory, wherein was
found (besides ready money) vessels of Gold, and Silver unpraiseable, and many
precious Stones, which would make all men wonder, if they knew the worth of
them.

This Temple was again dedicated 1240. belike also newly re-edified then.

These Templers at this time were in so great glory, that they entertained the
Nobility, foreign Ambassadors, and the Prince himself very often, Mat. Paris.
insomuch that Matthew Paris cries out on them for their pride, who being at
the first so poor, as they had but one horse to serve two of them, in token
whereof they gave in their Seal, two men riding on one horse; Seal of the
Templers.
yet suddenly they waxed so insolent, that they disdained other orders, and
sorted themselves with Noblemen.

King Edward the first, 30. Dunmow.
in the year 1283. taking with him Robert Waleran and other, came to the
Temple, where calling for the keeper of the Treasurehouse, as if he meant to
see his Mothers Jewels, that were laid up there to be safely kept, he entered
into the house, breaking the Coffers of certain persons, that had likewise
brought their money thither, and he took away from thence to the value of 1000.
l.

Many Parliaments and great Councels have been there kept, Parliament at the
new Temple.
as may appear by our Histories.

In the year 1308. all the Templers in England, as also in other parts of
Christendom, were apprehended and committed to diverse prisons.

In 1310. a Provincial Council was holden at London against the Templers in
England, upon heresy, and other Articles whereof they were accused, but denied
all except one or two of them: Notwithstanding, they all did confess, that
they could not purge themselves fully, as faultlesse, and so they were
condemned to perpetual penance, in several Monasteries, where they behaved
themselves modestly.

Philip, The order of Templers condemned.
King of France, procured their overthrow through-out the whole world, and
caused them to be condemned by a general Council to his advantage, Templers
burned.
as he thought, for he believed to have had all their Lands in France, and
therefore seizing the same in his hands, (as I have read) caused the Templers,
Rob. Fabian.
to the number of 54. or after Fabian, threescore, to be burnt at Paris.

Edward the second, in the year 1313. gave unto Aimer de la Valence Earl of
Pembrooke, Patent. The Temple given to Aimer de Valence.
the whole place and houses called the New Temple at London, with the ground
called Fiquetes Croft, and all the Tenements and Rents, with the appurtenances
that belonged to the Templers in the City of London, and Suburbs thereof.

After Aimer de Valence (says some) Hugh Spencer (usurping the same) held it
during his life. By whose death it fell again to the hands of Edward the
third, but in the mean time, to wit, 1234. by a Council holden at Vienna, all
the Lands of the Templers (lest the same should be put to profane uses) were
given to the Knights Hospitalers of the order of Saint John Baptist, Temple
given to the Hospitalers of Saint John of Jerusalem.
called S. John of Jerusalem, which Knights had put the Turks out of the I Will
of Rhodes, and after wan upon the said Turk daily for a long time.

The said Edward the third therefore granted the same to the said Knights,
Patent 2* E. 3. Clase, 18. E. 3.
who possessed it, and in the eighteenth year of the said Kings reign, were
forced to repair the Bridge of the said Temple. These Knights had their head
house for England by West Smithfield, and they, in the reign of the same
Edward the third, granted (for a certain rent of ten pounds by the year)
the said Temple, The Temple granto the Students of the Law and made an Inn of
Court.
with the appurtenances thereunto adjoining, to the Students of the Common
Laws of England: in whose possession the same has ever sithence remained, and
is now divided into two houses of several Students, by the name of Innes of
Court, to wit, the Inner Temple, and the Middle Temple; who kept two several
Halls. But they resort all to the said Temple Church: in the round Walk
whereof (which is the West part, without the Quire) there remain Monuments of
Noblemen buried, Monuments in the Temple.
to the number of eleven: eight of them are Images of Armed Knights; five lying
crosse-legged, Images of Knights buried crosse-legged, the cause why.
as men vowed to the Holy Land, against the Infidels and unbeleeving Jews; the
other three straight-legged: The rest are coaped stones, all of gray Marble.
The first of the crosse-legged, was W. Marshall the elder, Earl of Pembrooke,
who dyed 1219. Will. Marshall, his son, Earl of Pembrooke, was the second; he
dyed 1231. And Gilbert Marshall, his brother Earl of Pembrooke, slain in a
Turnament at Hartford, besides Ware, in the year 1241.

After this, Robert Rose, otherwise called Fursan, being made a Templer in the
year 1245. dyed, and was buried there. And these are all that I can remember
to have read of.

Sir Nicholas Hare, Master of the Rolls, was buried there, in the year 1557.

In the year 1381. the Rebels of Essex and of Kent destroyed and plucked down
the Houses and Lodgings of this Temple, Records of the Temple destroyed.
took out of the Church the Books and Records that were in Hutches of the
Apprentices of the Law, carried them into the streets, and burnt them:
Gatehouse of the Temple new builded.
the house they spoiled and burnt for wrath that they bare Sir Robert Hales
Lord Prior of Saint John's in Smithfield. But it was since again at diverse
times repaired; namely the Gate House of the Middle Temple, in the reign of
Henry the 8. by Sir Amias Paulet, Knight, upon occasion, Great Hall of the
Temple new builded.
as in my Annals I have showed. The great Hall of the Middle Temple was newly
builded in the year 1572. in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

This Temple Church had a Master, Order for Divine Service in the Temple.
and four stipendary Priests, with a Clerk: These, for the ministration of
divine Service there, have stipends allowed unto them, out of the possessions
and Revenues of the late Hospital and House of S. John's of Jerusalem in
England, as it had been in the reign of Edward the sixth.

And thus much for the said New Temple, the farthest West part of this Ward,
and also of this City, for the Liberties thereof: which Ward has an Alderman,
and his Deputies three. In S. Sepulchers Parish, common Council, six;
Constables, four; Scavengers, 4. Wardmote Inquest, twelve. In S. Bridgets
Parish, common Counselors, 8. Constables, eight; Scavengers, eight; Wardmote
Inquest, twenty. In S. Andrews, common Council, two; Constables, two;
Scavengers, three, Wardmote Inquest, twelve. It is taxed to the Fifteen at 35.
pounds, one shilling.

BRIDGE WARD WITHOUT, The 26. in number, consisting of the Borough of
Southwarke, in the County of Surrey.
HAving treated of Wards in London, Bridge Ward without.
on the North side the Thames (in number five and twenty) I am now to cross
over the said River, into the Borough of Southwarke, which is also a Ward of
London without the walls, on the South side thereof, as is Portsoken on the
East, and Faringdon extra on the West.

But before I come to the particular description of this Ward, it will not be
impertinent to declare, Ex Hum^r. Dys^n.
when, and by what means the Borough of South^^rk now called Bridge Ward
without, was made one of the six and twenty Wards, belonging to the City of
London; which was in this manner:

After the dissolution of the Monasteries, How the Borough of Southwarke became
at the first to be one of the 26. Wards of London.
Abbeys, Priories, and other religious Houses, in this Realm of England: The
Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens of this City of London taking into their
considerations, how commodious and convenient it would be unto the City, to
have the Borough of Southwarke annexed thereunto, and that the same Borough was
in the Kings hands wholly; they became humble suitors unto King Henry eighth,
and to the Lords of his Highness Privy Council, for the obtaining of the
same. Which suit not being granted unto them; after the decease of King Henry
the eighth, they renewed their suit unto his Son and next successor, King
Edward the sixth, and to the Lords of his Privy Council for the obtaining of
the same Borough.

At the length, after long suit, and much labor, it pleased King Edward the
sixth, by his Letters Patents, sealed with the great Seal of England, bearing
date at Westminster the three and twentieth day April, in the fourth year of
his reign, as well in consideration of the sum of six hundred forty seven
pounds, two shillings, and a penny, of lawful money of England, paid to his
Highness use, by the Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens of London, as for diverse
other considerations him thereunto moving; To give and grant unto the said
Mayor and Communalty, and Citizens of London, diverse Messuages, lands and
Tenements, lying in or near the said Borough of Southwark, in the said Letters
Patents particularly expressed, which were sometimes the Lands of Charles, then
late Duke of Suffolk, and of whom King Henry the eighth did buy and purchase
the same.

But there was excepted out of the said Grant, The Mint of Coynage in
Southwarke.
and reserved unto the said King Edward the sixth, his Heirs and successors,
all that his Capital Message, or Mansion House, called Southwarke Place, late
of the said Duke of Suffolk, and all Gardens and Land to the same adjoining:
And all that his Park in Southwarke: And all that his Message, and all
Edifices and ground, called the Antilope there.

And the said King Edward the sixth did by his said Letters Patents give and
grant to the said Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens, and their successors, all
that his Lordship and Manor of Southwarke, with all and singular the Rights,
Members, and appurtenances thereof, in the said County of Surrey, then late
belonging to the late Monastery of Bermondsey, in the same County: And also all
that his Manor and Borough of Southwarke, with all and singular the Rights,
Members, and appurtenances thereof, in the said County of Surrey, then late
parcel of the Possessions of the Archbishop and Archbishoprickes of
Canturbury, Together with diverse yearly rents, issuing out of diverse Messuages
or Tenements, in the said Letters Patents particularly expressed.

And also the said King Edward the sixth, by his said Letters Patents, as well
for the abovementioned considerations, as also for the sum of five hundred
Marks, paid to his use, by the said Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens of the
said City of London, did give and grant to the said Mayor, Communalty, and
Citizens of the said City, and to their successors, in and through the whole
Borough and Town of Southwarke, and in and through the whole Parish of* Saint
Saviors, Saint Olaves, and Saint George in Southwarke, and in and through the
whole Parish, then late called Saint Thomas Hospital, and then called the
Kings Hospital in Southwark, The kings Hospital in Southwarke.
and elsewhere whersoever, in the Town and Borough of Southwarke, and in
Kentish street and Blackman street, in the Parish of Newington, All Wayffes,
Estrays, Treasure-trove, Goods and Chattels of Traitors, Felo^s, Fugitives,
Out-lawes, Condemned persons, Convict persons, and Felons defamed, and of such
as be put in Exigent of Outlawry, Felons of themselves, and Deodands, and of
such as refuse the Laws of the Land: And all Goods disclaimed, found, or being
within the said Borough, Town, Parishes and Precincts: And all manor of
Escheats and Forfeitures.

And that the said Mayor, Communalty, The power of the Mayor, Communalty, and
Citizens of London in Southwarke.
and Citizens, by themselves, or their Deputy, or Officer or Officers, should
have in the Town, Borough, Parishes, and Precincts aforesaid, the Taste and
Assize of Bread, Wine, Ale, and Beer, and of all other Victuals, and things
whatsoever, sold in the same Town. And whatsoever should or might appertain
to the Office of the Clarke of the Market of his Majesty's Household. And the
correction and punishment of all persons there selling Bread, Wine, Beer, and
Ale, and other Victuals; and of others there inhabiting, or using any Arts
whatsoever. And all Forfeitures, Fines, and Amerciaments, to be forfeited to
the King, or his Heirs or Successors. And that they should have the execution
of the Kings Writs, and of all other Writs, Commandments, Precepts, Extracts,
and Warrants, with the returns thereof, by such their Minister or Deputy as
they should choose.

And that they should have, The Fair to be kept in Southwarke.
keep, and hold there, every year, yearly, one Fair, to endure for three
days, viz. the seventh, eighth, and ninth days of September. And that during
the said three days, they should hold there by their Minister or Deputy, from
day to day, from hour to hour, and from time to time, all Actions, Plaints,
and Pleas of the Court of Pipowder, with all Summons, Attachments, Arrests,
Issues, Fines, Redemptions, Commodities, and other Rights whatsoever, to the
Court of Pipowder by any means belonging. And also, that they should have
throughout the whole Precinct aforesaid, View of Franke-pledge, with all
Sommons, Attachments, Arrests, Issues, Amerciaments, Fines, Redemptions,
Profits, Commodities, and other things, which thereof to the King, his Heirs,
or Successors, should appertain.

And also, that the said Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens, and their successors,
by themselves, or by their Officers or Deputies, may take and arrest in the
Borough, Town, Parish, and Precincts aforesaid, Felons in Southwarke committed
to Newgate in London.
all Thieves, Felons, and other Malefactors, and may carry them to the Jail of
Newgate. And that the said Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens, and their
successors, should for ever have in the said Borough, Town parishes, and
Precincts, all such Liberties, privileges, Franchises, Discharges, and
Customs, which the King or his Heirs should have had, if the said Borough had
remained in the Kings hands.

And also he granted to the said Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens of London, and
to their successors, that they should for ever hold and keep, all manner of
Pleas, Pleas, Actions, Plaints, and personal Suits.
Actions, Plaints, and personal Suites, and all manner of causes, Matters,
Contracts, and Demands whatsoever, happening in the Precincts aforesaid, before
the Mayor and Aldermen of London, and before the Sheriffs of London, for the
time being, or any of them, in the Guild hall and Hustings of the said City:
and the like Actions, Bills, Plaints, Process, Arrests, Judgments, Executions,
and other things whatsoever, and the same days and times, and in such like
manner, as the like Pleas happening in the said City, before the Mayor, Aldermen
and Sheriffs, or any of them, in the said Courts, or any of them, time out of
mind, have been taken, holden, prosecuted, or executed. And that the Sergeants
at Mace, and other Officers of London, using to serve Process, might from
thenceforth, for ever, serve and execute all manner of Process in the said
Borough, Town, Parishes and Precincts, concerning such Pleas and executions of
the same, as time out of mind has been used in the City of London.

And that the Inhabitants of the same Borough, Inhabitants of the Borough to
implead, and be impleaded in London.
Parishes, and Precincts, for Causes and Matters there growing, may implead or
be impleaded in the said City, in form aforesaid, and in the said Courts. And
that if the Iuries impanelled, and so moved to try such Issues, shall not
appear before the said Mayor and Aldermen, or Sheriffs, in the said Courts in
London, they shall be amerced in like manner, and forfeit such Issues, as
Iuries in London, making default of appearance, have used to forfeit. And that
the Issues so forfeited, shall be to the use of the Mayor, Communalty, and
Citizens of London, and their successors for ever. And also, that the said
Mayor and Communalty, and Citizens, and their successors for ever, should have
the Cognizance of all manner of Pleas, Plaints, and personal Actions, out of
all the Kings Courts, before the King, or before any of his Justices, for any
thing happening in the said Borough, or Precincts, Issues taken upon Suits
tried before the Mayor and Aldermen.
before the said Mayor and Aldermen, and Sheriffs, or any of them, in the
Courts of the said City. And that the Issues taken upon the said suits, shall
be tried in the said Courts, before the Mayor and Aldermen and Sheriffs, by
men of the said Borough, as Issues in London are tried.

And that the said Mayor, Two Coroners for the Borough.
Communalty, and Citizens, and their successors, should for ever choose,
according to the Law, every year, or as often as they should think meet, two
Coroners in the said Borough: And that the said Coroners, and either of them so
chosen, should in the Precincts aforesaid, have and use like authority, as any
Coroners in England ought to have and execute: and that no other of the Kings
Coroners should in any wise presume to execute any thing belonging to the
Office of a Coroner, The Mayor of London Escheat^r in Southwarke and Clark of
the Market there also.
in the Precincts aforesaid.

And that the Mayor of London, for the time being, should be Escheator in the
Precincts aforesaid, and have power to direct Precepts to the Sheriff of the
County of Surrey for the time being, and to do all other things, which to the
Office of Escheator in any of the Counties of England appertains: and that no
other Escheator shall enter there, or intermeddle with any thing belonging to
the Office of Escheator: and that the Mayor of London, for the time being,
shall be the Kings Clarke of the Market within the Precincts aforesaid, and may
do all things there appertaining to the Office of Clarke of the Market, and
that the Clarke of the Market of the Kings Household shall not there
intermeddle with any thing.

And that the said Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens, and their successors for
ever, should have, hold, use, and enjoy, in the Precincts aforesaid, as well
all the Liberties and Franchises aforesaid, as the Toll, Tallage, Picage, and
all other the said Kings Jurisdictions, Toll, Tallage, Picage, etc.
Franchises, and Privileges, which any Archbishop of Canturbury, Charles D. of
Suffolk, or any the M. Brother and Sisters of the then late Hospital of St.
Thomas in Southwarke, or any Abbot of the then late Monastery of S. Saviors of
Bermondsey, near Southwarke; or any Prior or Covent of the then late Priory of
Saint Mary Overy, or any of them ever had, then had, or ought to have had in
the premises, in any of the places aforesaid; or which the said King Edward the
sixth then lately held and enjoyed, or ought to have had and enjoy, and in as
ample manner as King Henry the 8. had and enjoyed, or ought to have had, and
enjoy the same: So that none of the Kings Sheriffs, or any other of his
Officers should intermeddle in any thing in the said Borough and Precincts
aforesaid.

And the said King Edward the sixth did by his said Letters Patents further
grant, The inhabitants to be within the governance and correction of the Mayor,
etc.
that all the Inhabitants of the said Precincts should be within the ordinance,
governance and correction of the Mayor and Officers of London and their
Deputies, as the Citizens and Inhabitants of London ought to be; by reason of
any Charter formerly granted by any of the said Kings Progenitors, to the
Mayor, Communalty and Citizens of London. And that the said Mayor, Communalty
and Citizens, and their Successors for ever should have, enjoy, and use such
Laws, Jurisdictions, Liberties, Franchises and Privileges whatsoever in the
Borough, and Precincts aforesaid, as fully and freely as they then used, or
ought to have used and enjoyed the same in London, by virtue of any grant to
them made by any of the said Kings Progenitors.

And that the Mayor of London for the time being, and the Recorder of London
for the time being, after they have borne the Office of Maioraltie of London,
should be Justices of the Kings Peace in Southwarke, and the Precincts
aforesaid, so long as they should stand Aldermen of the said City, Justices of
London in the like Office in Southwark.
and should in the said Borough and Precincts aforesaid do and execute all
things which other Justices of the Peace might do in the County of Surrey,
according to the Laws and Statutes of England.

And also, that the said Mayor, Communaltie and Citizens, and their Successors
should have every week, on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Satterday in the said
Borough and Town of Southwarke, 3. Market and Markets in Southwarke.
one Market or Markets there to be kept, and all things to Markets
appertaining: All which Manor, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Liberties,
Privileges, Franchises, and other the premises granted by the said Letters
Patents, did extend to the clear yearly value of 35. li. 14. s. 4. d. And
were granted to be holden to the said Mayor, Communalty and Citizens of
London, and their Successors for ever, of the said King, his Heirs and
Successors, as of his Manor of East Greenwitch, in the County of Kent, by
Fealty only in Free Socage (and not in Capite) for all manner of services and
demands whatsoever.

But there was excepted and reserved out of the said Grant, Exceptions and
reservations to the King.
to the said King Edward the sixth, his Heirs and Successors, all his Rights,
Jurisdictions, Liberties and Franchises whatsoever, within the Walk, Circuit,
and Precinct of his Capital Message, Gardens, and Park in Southwarke, and in
all Gardens, Curtilages, and Lands, to the said Mansion House, Gardens, and
Park belonging.

Also, there was excepted and reserved out of the said Grant, the House,
Message, or Lodging there, called the Kings Bench, and the Gardens to the same
belonging, so long as it should be used as a Prison for Prisoners, as it was
then used.

Also, there was excepted and reserved out of the said Grant, the House,
Message, or Lodging there, called the Marshalsey, and the Gardens to the same
belonging, so long as it should be used as a Prison for Prisoners, as it was
then used.

Also it was provided, that the said Letters Patents should not be prejudicial
to the Offices of the Great Master or Steward of the Kings Household, within
the Borough and Precincts aforesaid, to be executed while the same Borough and
Precincts should be within the Verge: Nor to Ioh. Gates, Knight, one of the
Gentlemen of the Kings Privy Chamber, concerning any Lands, Tenements,
Offices, Profits, Franchises, or Liberties to him granted during his life, by
the said King Edward the sixth, or by his Father King Henry the eight.

About the space of a month after the said Borough of Southwarke was so
granted by King Edward the sixth to the Mayor, Communaltie, and Citizens of
London, and that they by force of the said Letters Patents stood charged with
the Ordering, Survev, and Government of the same Borough, and of all the Kings
subjects inhabiting therein, The ordering survey, and government of the
Borough, etc.
and repayring thither: At a Court holden before Sir Rowland Hill, Knight, then
Lord Mayor of London, and the Aldermen of the same City, in the Guild Hall of
London, on Tuesday the eight and twentieth of May, in the said fourth year of
the reign of King Edward the sixth, the said Town or Borough was named and
called the Ward of Bridge Ward without. The Ward of Bridge Ward without; and
Sir John Ayliffe first Alderman thereof.
And Sir John Ayliffe, Knight, Citizen and Barber-Surgeon of London, was then
also named, elected, and chosen by the same Court, to be Alderman of the same
Ward, albeit that before that time there neither was any such Ward nor Alderman.

And it was then also ordered, That the said Sir John Ayliffe, by that name of
Alderman of Bridge Ward without, and all other that from thenceforth should be
Alderman of the same Ward, should have the Rule, Survey, and Government, not
only of the Inhabitants of the said Town and Borough of Southwarke, and other
the Kings people repayring to the same, but also of all the Liberties,
Franchises, and Privileges within the said Town and Borough, then formerly
granted by the King and his Progenitors to the said Mayor, Communaltie, and
Citizens of London. Sir John Ayliffe sworn and admitted in the Maioralitie of
Sir Rowland Hill.
And for the due execution of which Office, the said Sir John Ayliffe was then
presently sworn and admitted.

Not long after, videlicet, at a Court of Common Council, holden in the
Guild Hall of London, on the last day of July, in the said fourth year of the
reign of King Edward the sixth, and in the time of the Maioraltie of the said
Sir Rowland Hill, it was enacted, That besides the then ancient accustomed
number of five and twenty Aldermen, there should be one Alderman more elected,
to have the Rule, Charge, and Governance of the said Borough and Town. And
that four discreet persons, or more, being Freemen of London, and dwelling
within the said City, or the Borough of Southwarke, or in other the Liberties
of the said City, sold from thenceforth, as often as the case should require,
be from time to time nominated, appointed, and chosen by the Inhabitants of the
said Borough for the time being, before the Lord Mayor of London for the time
being, sitting in the said Borough for that purpose, in such sort and order, as
the Aldermen of London were in those days commonly elected.

And that the said Lord Mayor for the time being should (at the next Court of
Aldermen to be holden at the Guild Hall of the said City, next after such
election) present the names and surnames of all such persons as so should be
named before him, and put in the said election. Election of an Alderman by
Scrutiaie.
And that the said Lord Mayor and Aldermen for the time being, should of those
four persons, or mo, so presented, elect and choose one, by way of Scrutinie,
to be an Alderman of the said City, and to have the peculiar Ordering, Rule
and Governance of the said Borough and Town of Southwarke, and of the
Inhabitants thereof, and of all other the Kings liege people, repayring to the
same.

And that the said Alderman so especially elect and chosen, and from time to
time, as the cause sold require thenceforth, to be elect and chosen for the
Survey and Government of the said Borough, and the Inhabitants and other
remaining in and to the same, should always be named and called the Alderman
of Bridge Ward without, The Alderman of Bridge Ward without.
and by none other Name, for or concerning that Office, or Room, and should
have the Cure and Charge of the good Ordering and Government of the said
Borough and Town of Southwarke, and of the Inhabitants and People of and in
the same, and of none other Place within the said City, by reason or color of
the said Room, as long as he should remain and stand Alderman of the said
Ward, but as the residue of the said Aldermen of the said City be commonly
charged: And therein to do and use himself, as other Aldermen within the
Liberties of the said City were accustomed and used to do, in as much as the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm would permit and suffer.

Yet nevertheless it was provided, and by the said Common Council further
ordained and enacted, That the said Sir John Ayliffe, Knight, should then be
Alderman of the said Ward: And that as well the same Sir John Ayliffe, as also
all and every person and persons, that thenceforth should fortune to be
Alderman of the same Ward, should have and enjoy like prerogative, liberty, and
benefit, to change and remove from the same Ward, The Alderman to change from
that Ward, as occasion served.
and to accept and take at his and their free will and pleasure any such other
Ward or Wards within the said City, as it should fortune him, or them, or any
of them, to be thenceforth duly elect and chosen unto by the Inhabitants of
the same other Ward, or Wards, or any of them in like manner and form, as
the other Aldermen of the said City lawfully might, and commonly use to do:
Any thing in the said recited Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Nevertheless, at a Court of Aldermen holden on Tuesday, the second of
September, in the said fourth year of the reign of king Edward the sixth, and
in the time of the Maioralty of the said Sir Rowland Hill, it was ordered, That
the Aldermen of Bridge Ward without, for the time being, The Alderman of Bridge
Ward without to continue so for the space of 3* years, without removing.
should stand and remain Alderman of the same Ward three whole years next
after his election, before he should be permitted to be removed to the
governance of any other Ward: Notwithstanding any former Law, Usage, or
Custom.

But afterward it seems, upon better advice, that another order should be
taken in the election of the Alderman of the same Ward: For at a Common
Council holden in the Guild Hall in London, on the 16. day of June, in the
fourth and fifth years of King Philip and Queen Mary, and in the time of the
Maioralty of Sir Thomas Curtis, Knight, the said former Act, made on the last
day of July, in the fourth year of King Edward the sixth, for so much thereof
as did concern the form and order of the election of the Alderman of the said
Ward of Bridge Ward without, 4. Another order for electing the Alderman of
Bridge Ward without, in the time of K. Philip and Queen Mary.
was utterly repealed. And then it was enacted, That from thenceforth the
Alderman of the same Ward should always, at the time of vacation, or lack of
an Alderman thereof, be elected and chosen by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
London, for the time being, at a full Court of Aldermen, by them to be holden
in the Inner Chamber of the Guild Hall of the same City in this manner, viz.
That the Lord Mayor and Aldermen should at their said full Court, amongst
themselves, nominate four discreet and meet Citizens, being Freemen of London,
either resiant within the said Borough, or in London, or the Liberties thereof,
to be put in election of Alderman of that Ward. And of the said four persons
so nominated, the said Lord Mayor and Aldermen should by Scrutiny, according to
their accustomed manner, elect one to be Alderman of the same Ward: Which
Alderman, so by them elected and sworn, should use and behave himself in all
things, as by the residue of the former Act of Common Council, made the last
day of July, in the fourth year of King Edward the sixth was ordained and
appointed.

Thus having declared, by what means and at what time the said Borough of
Southwarke was made and named one of the six and twenty Wards, now belonging
to the City of London; I intend to proceed to the description of the several
particular places of the same Ward, and likewise of such Monuments of
Antiquity, as are to be found therein.

This Borough being in the County of Surrey, consists of diverse streets,
ways, and winding lanes, all full of buildings inhabited: and first, to begin
at the West part thereof, over against the West Suburb of the City.

On the bank of the River Thames, there is now a continual building of
Thenements, about half a mile in length to the Bridge.

Then South a continual street called Long Southwarke, builded on both sides
with diverse Lanes and Allies up to St. Georges Church, and beyond it through
Blackman street, toward Newtowne (or Newington) the liberties of which Borough
extend almost to the Parish Church of Newtowne aforesaid, distant one mile from
London bridge, and also Southwest a continual building, almost to Lambith,
more than one mile from the said Bridge.

Then from the Bridge along by the Thames Eastward, S. Olaves street.
is S. Olaves street, having continual building on both the sides, with lanes
and Alleyes up to Battle bridge, to Horse-downe, and toward Rother-hith: also
some good half mile in length from London bridge.

So that I account the whole continual buildings on the Bank of the said
River, from the West toward the East, to be more than a large mile in length.

Then have ye from the entering toward the said Horsedowne, one other
continual street, called Barmondes eye strees, which stretches South,
likewise furnished with buildings on both sides, almost half a mile in length,
up to the late dissolved Monastery of S. Savior, called Bermondsey.

And from thence is one long lane (so called of the length) turning West to
Saint Georges Church aforementioned. Out of the which lane mentioned Long lane,
breaks one other street toward the South and by East, and this is called
Kentish street, for that it is the way leading into that Country: and so have
you the bounds of this Borough.

The Antiquities most notable in this Borough are these: first, for
Ecclesiastical, there was Bermondsey, an Abbey of black Monks, Saint Mary
Overies, a Priory of Canons Regular, Saint Thomas a College or Hospital for
the poor, and the Look, a Lazar-house in Kent street. Parish Churches there
have been six, whereof five do remain, (viz.) Saint Mary Magdalen, in the
Priory of Saint Mary Overy: now the same Saint Mary Overy is the Parish Church
for the said Mary Magdalen, and for Saint Margaret on the Hill, and is called
St. Savior.

Saint Margaret on the Hill being put down, is now a Court for Justice. S.
Thomas in the Hospital serves for a Parish Church, as before, Saint George a
Parish Church, as before it did: So does Saint Olave, and Saint Mary Magdalen,
by the Abbey of Bermondsey.

There be also these five Prisons, or Gaoles.

The Clinke, on the Bank.

The Compter, in the late Parish*

Church of S. Margaret.

The Marshalsey.

The Kings Bench.

And the White Lion; all in Long Southwarke.

Houses most notable, be these.
The Bishop of Winchesters House.

The Bishop of Rochesters House.

The Duke of Suffolkes. House, or Southwarke Place.

The Tabard, an Hostery, or Inn.

The Abbot of Hyde his House.

The Prior of Lewis his House,

The Abbot of S. Augustine his house.

The Bridge-house.

The Abbot of Battle his House.

Battaile-Bridge.

The Stews on the Bank of Thames.

And the Beare-Gardens there.

Now to return to the West Bank: The Bear Gardens*
there were two Beare-Gardens, the Old and New, Places wherein were kept
Bears, Bulls, and other Beasts, to be bayted: As also Mastives, in several
kenels, nourished to bait them. These Bears, and other Beasts are there
baited in plots of ground, scaffolded about, for the beholders to stand safe.

Next, on this Bank, Liber Manuscript.
was sometime the Bordello or Stews, a place so called, of certain
Stew-houses privileged there, The Stews on the Bank-side.
for the repair of incontinent men to the like women; of the which Privilege
I have read thus:

In a Parliament holden at Westminster, the eighth of Henry the second, it was
ordained by the Commons, and confirmed by the King and Lords, That diverse
Constitutions for ever should be kept within that Lordship, or Franchise,
according to the old Customs, that had been there used time time of mind:
Amongst the which, these following were some: videlicet.

That no Stew-holder, or his wife, should let or stay any single woman to go
and come freely at all times, when they listed.

No Stew-holder to keep any woman to board, but she to board abroad at her
pleasure.

To take no more for the woman's chamber in the Week, than fourteen pence.

Not to keep open his doors upon the Holy Days.

Not to keep any single woman in his house on the Holy Days, but the Bayliffe
to see them voyded out of the Lordship.

No single woman to be kept against her will, that would leave her sin.

No Stew-holder receive any woman of Religion, or any man's wife.

No single woman to take money to lie with any man, except she lie with him all
night, till the morrow.

No man to be drawn or enticed into any Stew-house.

The Constables, Bayliffe, and others, every week to search every Stew-house.

No Stew-holder to keep any woman, that has the perilous infirmity of
Burning; nor to sell Bread, Ale, Flesh, Fish, Wood, Coal, or any Victuals, etc.

These and many more Orders were to be observed, upon great pain and
punishment.

I have also seen diverse Patents of confirmation, Li. S. Mary Eborum.
namely, one dated 1345. the ninetenth of Edward the third. English people
disdayned to be Bawds.
Also I find, that in the fourth of Richard the second, these Stew-houses
belonging to William Walworth, then Mayor of London, were farmed by Froes of
Flaunders, Froes of Flaunders were women for that purpose.
and spoiled by Walter Tylar, and other Rebels of Kent: notwithstanding, I
find that ordinances for the same place, and houses, were again confirmed in
the reign of Henry the sixth, and to be continued as before. Rob. Fabian.
Also Robert Fabian writes, that in the year 1506. the one and twentieth of
Henry the seventh, Stew houses put down by Henry the 7. for a time.
the said Stew-houses in Southwarke were (for a season) inhabited, and the
doors closed up: but it was not long (says he) ere the houses there were set
open again, so many as were permitted, for (as it was said) whereas before
were eighteen houses, from thenceforth were appointed to be used but twelve
only. These allowed Stew-houses had signs on their fronts, toward the
Thames, not hanged out, but painted on the walls as a Boares head, Signs on the
Stew-houses.
the Cross keys, the Gunne, the Castle, the Crane, the Cardinals Hat, the
Bell, the Swanne, etc. I have heard ancient men of good credit report, that
these single women were forbidden the rights of the Church, Single women
forbidden rights of the Church.
so long as they continued that sinful life, and were excluded from
Christian burial, if they were not reconciled before their death. And therefore
there was a plot of ground, called the Single women's Churchyard, appointed for
them, far from the Parish Church.

In the year of Christ, a thousand five hundred forty six, Stew-houses put
down.
the seven and thirtieth of Henry the eighth, this row of Stews in Southwarke
was put down by the Kings commandment, which was proclaimed by sound of
Trumpet no more to be privileged, and used as a common Brothel; but the
inhabitants of the same to keep good and honest rule, as in other places of
this Realm, etc.

Then next is the Clinke, a Jail or Prison for the Trespassers in those parts;
namely, in old time for such as should brabble, fray, or break the peace on
the said Bank, or in the Brothell houses, they were by the inhabitants
thereabout apprehended and committed to this Jail, where they were straightly
imprisoned.

Next is the Bishop of Winchesters house, Winchester house.
or lodging when he comes to this City: which house was first builded by
William Gifford, Bishop of Winchester, about the year one thousand, one
hundred and seven, the seventh of Henry the first, upon a plot of ground
pertaining to the Prior of Bermondsey, as appears by a Writ directed unto the
Barons of the Exchequer, in the year 1366. the one and fortieth of Edward the
third (the Bishops Sea being void) for 8. pounds due to the Monks of
Bermondsey, for the Bishop of Winchesters lodging in Southwarke. This is a very
fair house well repaired, and has a large Wharfe, and a landing place called
the Bishop of Winchesters stairs.

Adjoining to this on the South side thereof, Rochester house.
is the Bishop of Rochesters Inn or lodging, by whom first erected I do not
now remember me to have read, but well I wot, the same of long time has not
been frequented by any Bishop, and lies ruinous for lack of reparations. The
Abbot of Naverley had a house there.

East from the Bishop of Winchesters house, directly over against it stands a
fair Church, called S. Mary over the Rye, Saint Mary Overies a Priory, and now
a Parish Church.
or Overy, that is, over the water. This Church, or some other in place
thereof, was (of old time long before the Conquest) an house of Sisters,
founded by a Maiden, named Mary, unto the which house and Sisters she left (as
was left to her by her Parents) the oversight and profits of a Cross Ferrie,
or traverse Ferry over the Thames, there kept before that any Bridge was
builded. This house of Sisters was after by Swithen a noble Lady, converted
unto a College of Priests, who in place of the Ferrie, builded a Bridge of
Timber, and from time to time kept the same in good reparations; but lastly the
same Bridge was builded of Stone, and then in the year 1106. was this Church
again founded for Canons Regular, by William Pont de le Arch, and William
Dauncy, Knights Normans.

William Gifford, Bishop of Winchester, was a good Benefactor also, Lib. Rufen.
for he (as some have noted) builded the body of that Church, Liber Bermondsey.
in the year one thousand, one hundred and six, the seventh of Henry the
first.

The Canons first entered the said Church, then Algodus was the first Prior.

King Henry the first, by his Charter gave them the Church of Saint Margaret in
Southwarke.

King Stephen confirms the gift of King Henry, and also gave the Stone House,
which was William de Ponte le Arche, by Downgate.

This Priory was burned about the year 1207. wherefore the Canons did found an
Hospital near unto their Priory, where they celebrated until the Priory was
repaired: which Hospital was after (by consent of Peter de la Roch, Bishop of
Winchester) removed into the land of Anicins, Archdeacon of Surrey, in the
year 1228. a place where the water was more plentiful, and the air more
wholesome, S. Thomas Hospital.
and was dedicated to S. Thomas.

This Peter de Rupibus, or de la Roch, founded a large Chapel of Saint Mary
Magdalen, Parish Church of S. Mary Magdalen.
in the said Church of St. Mary Overy, which chapel was afterward appointed
to be the Parish Church for the inhabitants near adjoining.

This Church was again newly builded in the reign of Richard the second and
King Henry the fourth.

John Gower, Esquire, a famous Poet, was then an especialll Benefactor to that
work, John Gower was no Knight, neither had he any Garland of lvie and Roses,
but a Chaplet of four Roses only.
and was there buried on the North side of the said Church, in the Chapel of
Saint John, where he founded a Chantry, he lies under a Tomb of Stone, with
his Image also of Stone over him. The hair of his head aburne, long to his
shoulders, but curling up, and a small forked beard; on his head a Chaplet,
like a coronet of four Roses, an habit of Purple, damasked down to his seet,
a Collar of Esses of gold about his neck, under his feet the likeness of
three Books, which he compiled. The first, named Speculum Meditantis, written
in French: The second, Vox Clamantis, penned in Latin: The third, Confessi^
Amantis, written in English, and this last is printed. Vox Clamantis, with his
Cronica Tripartita, and other both in Latin and French, never printed, I have
and do poffesse, but Speculum Meditantis, I never saw, though heard thereof to
be in Kent; Beside on the wall where he lies, there was painted 3. Virgins
crowned, one of the which was named Charity, holding this divice:

En toy qui es Fitz de Dieu le Pere,
Savue soit, qui gist sours cest Pierre.
The second writing Mercy, with this device.

O bone lesu fait ta mercy,
Al'ame, don't le corpse gift icy.
The third writing Pity, with this device.

Pour ta pite Jesus regar'de,
Et met cest a me en savue guard.
His Arms, in a Field Argent, on a Cheveron Azure, three Leopards heads Gold,
their tongues Gules, two Angels Supporters; on the Crest a Talbot. His Epitaph,

Armigeri Scutum nihil
a modo fert sibi tutum,
Reddidit immolutum morti
generale tributum,
Spiritus exutum
se gaudeat esse solutum,
Est ubi virtutum
Regnum sieve labe statutum.
The roof of the middle waste I Will sell down in the year 1469. This Priory
was surrendered to Henry the eighth, the one and thirtieth of his reign, the
seven and twentieth of October, the year of Christ 1539. valued at six
hundred, twenty four pounds, six shillings, six pence, by the year.

About Christmas next following, the Church of the said Priory was purchased of
the King by the inhabitants of the Borough. Priory of S. Mary Overy made a
Parish Church.
Doctor Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, putting to his helping hand,
they made thereof a Parish Church for the Parish Church of S. Mary Magdalen, on
the South side of the said Quire, out of Saint Margaret on the hill, which were
made one Parish of S. Savior.

There be Monuments in this Church of Robert Liliard, or Hilliard, Esquire.

Margaret, Daughter to the Lady Audley, wife to Sir Thomas Audley.

William Grevill, Esquire, and Margaret his wife, one of the heirs of William
Spershut, Esquire.

Dame Katharine, wife to John Stoke, Alderman.

Robert Merfin, Esquire.

William Vndall, Esquire.

Lord Ospay Ferar.

Sir George Brewes, Knight.

John Brown.

Lady Brandon, Wife to Sir Thomas Brandon.

William Lord Scales.

William Earl Warren.

Dame Maude, wife to Sir John Peach. Lewknor.

Dame Margaret Elrington, one of the heirs of Sir Thomas Elrington.

John Bowden Esquire.

Robert Saint Magil.

John Standhurst.

John Gower.

John Duncell, Merchant-Taylor, 1516.

John Sturton, Esquire.

Robert Rouse.

Thomas Tongue, first Norroy, and after Clarenciaulx, King of Arms.

William Wickham, translated from the Sea of Lincoln, to the Bishopric of
Winchester, in the month of March, 1595. deceased the 11. day of June next
following and was buried here.

Thomas Cure, Esquire, Sadler to King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth, deceased the 24. day of May, 1598.

Hic jacet Ioannes Gower, A very fair Tomb in the North Il^ of the Church.
Armiger, Anglorum Poeta celeberrimus, ac huic sacro Aedificio benefactor
insignis, vixit temporibus Ed. 3. and Rich. 3.

Noviter constructum impensis Parochiae, An. Dom. 1615.

Epics^ion Thomae Cure, Southwarchiensis Armigeri.
Elizabetha tibi Princeps
servivit Equorum
A sellis Curus, A fair Tomb in the North wall of the Quire.

quem lapis iste regit.
Servivit Edvardo Regi,
Mariaeque Sorori,
Principibus magna
est laus placuisse tribus.
Convixit cunctis charus
Respublica Curae
Semper erat Curo,
commoda plebis erant:
Dum vixit tribui
senibus curavit alendis,
Nummorum in sumptus
annua dona domos.
Obiit 24. die Maii, An. Dom. 1588.

An Epitaph upon John Trehearne, Gentleman Porter to King James the first.
Had Kings a power
to lend their Subjects breath, A very Monument close by the other.

^rehearne, thou should
not be cast down by death:
Thy Royal Master still
would keep thee then;
But length of days
are beyond reach of men.
Nor wealth, nor strength,
nor great men's love can ease
The wound Deaths Arrows make,
for thou have these.
In thy Kings Court
good place to thee is given:
Whence thou shall go
to the Kings Court of Heaven.
Peter Humble, A very fair Tomb in the chancell.
Gentleman, dedicates this Monument to the pious memory of Richard Humble,
Alderman of London, and Margaret his first wife, daughter to John Pierson of
Nathing, in the County of Essex, Gentleman. By whom he had issue two sons,
John, who died young, and the abovenamed Peter, now living. Also four
daughter, Katharine, Weltham, Margaret, and Elizabeth, who survived the other
three, and was interred the same day with her Father, being the 30. of April
1616. Richard left Isabel his second wife, widow, who was the daughter of
Robert Kitchinman, of Hemsley, in the County of York, Gentleman, bequeathing
to the poor of this Parish five pounds, four shillings yearly for ever, out
of a Tenement adjoining to the Southside of the three Crowns gate in
Southwarke.

Gulielmus Wickham, A very fair stone by the Communion table.
translat. a sede Lincoln. and Mense Martii, 1595. existen Episcopus Winton.
Obiit 11. Iunii, prox. sequent. Reliquit uxorem laudatiff. quae sepelit in
Awkenbery, Com. Hunt.

Doctrina Antistes praestans
and moribus aequis,
Eloquio and pietate gravis,
mensaque manuque.
Non parcus, justi neglectus
honor sepulchri,
Hic jacet. O seculum
insipiens, verum aequior illi,
Dum moritur, Deus Aligeros
dat cernere, missos,
Qui migrantem animam
Coeli ad sublimina ferrent.
F. M. posuit 10. Iunii, Anno Domini 1600.

The Monument of Bishop Andrews is in a Chapel at the East end of the
Church, and his body lies within the Monument.

Lector,
Si Christianus es, siste:
Morae pretium erit,
Non nescire te, qui vir hic situs sit:

Ejusdem tecum Catholicae Ecclesiae membru, Sub eadem felicis Resurrectionis
spe, Eandem D. Jesus praestolans Epiphaniam,

Sacratiss. Antistes Lancelotus Andrews, Londini oriundus, educatus
Cantabrigiae, Aulae Pembroch. Alumnor. Socior. Praefector. Vnus, and nemini
secundus:

Linguarum, Artium, Scientiarum, Humanorum, Divinorum, Omnium

Infinitus Thesaurus, Stupendum Oraculu^:

Orthodoxae Christi Ecclesiae,
Dictis, scriptis, precibus, Exemplo
Incomparabile propugnaculum:
Reginae Elizabethae a sacris,
D. Pauli London. Residentiarius,
D. Petri Westmonast. Decanus:
Episcopus Cicestrensis, Eliensis, Wintoniensis, Regique Iacobo tum ab
Eleemosynis, Tum ab utriusque Regni Consiliis, Decanus denique Secelli Regii:

Idem ex
Indefessa opera in studiis,
Summa sapientia in rebus,
Assidua pietate in Deum,
Profusa largitate in Egenos,
Rara amoenitate in suos,
Spectata probitate in omnes,
Aeternum admirandus.
Annorum pariter and publicae famae satur, Sed bonoru^ passim omnium cum luctu
denatus, Coelebs hinc migravit ad aureolam coelestem,

Anno Regis Caroli 11o. Aetatis S. LXXIo. Christi MDCXXVIo.
Tantum est (Lector) quod te moerentes posteri Nunc volebant, atque vt voto tuo
valeas, dicto Sit Deo gloria.

There is a Monument of John Bingham, Esquire, Sadler to Queen Elizabeth and
King James. Who was a worthy benefactor to the Parish, and to the Free-Schoole
there: who departed this life in the year of our Lord, 1625.

There is a Monument for William Emerson, This Monument stands in the South
I Will.
who departed this life the 27. of June, An. Dom. 1575. in the year of his age
92.

Arvum hoc Sepulchrale.
Exuviarum opt. matris Iocosae dominae Clerk. Sui ipsius lectissimaeque uxoris
consitioni destinatum, Gulielmus Augustinus Armiger vivus sacravit.

Anna
Conjux charissima primo. inseritur.

Quae post decimu^ partum (An MDCXXIII. Ian. XXI. Marito, ac liberis quinque
superstitibus) Tricenaria valedicens:

In restorescendi dic and spem; Hac terra tegitur.

Sequimur caeteri: Sati corruptibiles,

Suscitandi incorruptibiles.

The Monument with this inscription stands on the South side of the Quire.

Monumentum viri justi.
In memory of John Symons, Citizen and White-Baker of London; who departed this
life the 10. of August, in the year of our Lord 1625. and was a good
Benefactor unto this Parish: who gave unto the poor the sum of eight pounds
Per Annum for ever, to be distributed on the Feast day of St. Thomas before
Christmas. And unto Saint Georges Parish in Southwarke the sum of ten pounds
per Annum, for ever. And unto the Parish of Saint Mary Newington in Surrey, the
sum of five pounds per Annum, for ever. These sums to come unto the said
Parish, after the decease of his father Samuel Symons, who yet lives, in the
year 1631.

The Monument stands in the South side of the Church, with this Epitaph: His
flesh interred here
once contained a spirit,
Who (by Gods mercy
and his Saviors merit)
Departed in that constant
hope of trust,
To reign eternally
amongst the just:
To live and dye well
was his whole endeavor,
And in (assurance) dyed
to live for ever.


In the South side of the Church by the Quire there stands the Monument of
William Austin, Esquire, very fair and beautiful; the invention thus:

Over the head of the Angel is a Sun, and in it written Sol Iustitiae.

There stands an Angel upon a Rock, with a Sickle in the left hand, and the
right hand erected toward heaven, with these words written on the Rock: Petra
erat Christus; and under the Rock is a field of ripe wheat, and in it
written: Si non moriatur, non reviviscit. And under that these words: Nos
sevit, fovit, lavit, cogit, renovabit.

Upon the right hand of this Angel are written these words: Vos estis Dei. And
on the left this: Agricultura.

On each side of this Angel sits two other Angels, leaning on their arms;
the one with a Forke, and under written Messores. The other with a Rack, and
under written: Congregabunt.

Under all this is the form of a winnowing Fan, and words written in it.

The Lady Clarke, mother to Master William Austin, gave a very fair Communion
Table railed about, where 60. may kneel to receive the Sacrament, with a fair
Carpet for it, and the railes hung about with the same embroidered.

Master William Austin gave a fair Silver Chalice, and a Dish for the Bread,
to the value of almost forty pounds. And his wife that now is, who was the
Relict of John Bingham, Esquire, gave two very fair Silver Flagons of the like
value.

Ex Registro Curiae Praerogativae Cant. extracto. 16. Septem. 1619.
Master Sampsons Will.
Item, I give and bequeath these Annuities ensuing to be issuing out of
certain Tenements of mine, viz. twenty shillings yearly for ever to the Master
and Society of Peter house in Cambridge, toward the maintenance of the Library
there: and twenty shillings yearly for ever to the Churchwardens of Saint
Olaves in Southwarke, for the use of the poor of the Parish. And ten shilligs
yearly for ever to the Churchwardens of the Parish of St. Saviors, for the
poor in the precinct of old Parish Garden,

Master Smith has given unto the said Parish of S. Saviors the sum of
twenty eight pounds per Annum, for ever unto the poor of this Parish.

Master Randall Carter, Citizen and Tallow Chandler of London, has given seven
pounds per Annum, for ever unto a poor Scholar that shall be elected out of
the Free School to either of the Universities; and this seven pounds he is to
enjoy for six years, and his time expired to another: and so forward.

Master Edward Hulit, Gentleman, has given forty pounds per Annum, to the
poor of the same Parish for ever, to be received out of certain Tenements,
situate in the Borough of Southwarke.

Hugh Brooker, Esquire, has given unto the Free School the sum of five
pounds per Annum, for ever. And likewise unto the poor of the same Parish five
pounds per Annum, for ever: and lies buried in Saint Saviors Church in the
North I Will by the Quire.

Thomas Marshall gave an hundred pounds for ever to the Parish, for to clothe
six poor boys every Christmasse, who dyed in the year 1625.

Now passing through Saint Mary Overies Close (in possession of the Lord
Mountacute) and Pepper Alley, S. Mary Overies Close.
into Long Southwarke, Pepper Alley.
on the right hand thereof, the Market hill, where the Leather is fold, there
stood the late named Parish Church of Saint Margaret, S. Margaret on the hill
made a Court of Justice.
given to Saint Mary Overies by Henry the first, put down and joined with the
Parish Church of Saint Mary Magdalen, and united to the late dissolved Priory
Church of S. Mary Overy.

A part of this Parish Church of St. Margaret is now a Court, wherein the
Assizes and Sessions be kept, Court of Admiraltie.
and the Court of Admiralty is also there kept. One other part of the same
Church is now a Prison, Compter in Southwarke.
called the Compter in Southwarke, etc.

Farther up on that side, almost directly over against St. Georges Church, was
sometime a large and most sumptuous house, builded by Charles Brandon, late
Duke of Suffolk, in the reign of Henry the eighth, which was called Suffolk
house; Suffolk house, a Mint in Southwark.
but coming afterward into the Kings hands, the same was called Southwarke
Place, and a Mint of Coynage was there kept for the King.

To this place came King Edward the sixth, in the second of his reign, from
Hampton Court, and dined in it. He at that time made John York, one of the
Sheriffs of London, Knight, and then rode through the City to Westminster.

Queen Mary gave this house to Nicholas Heth, Archbishop of York, and to his
successors for ever, to be their Inn or lodging for their repair to London,
in recompense of York house, near to Westminster, which King Henry her father
had taken from Cardinal Woolsey, and from the Sea of York.

Archbishop Heth sold the same house to a Merchant, or to Merchants, that
pulled it down, sold the Lead, Stone, Iron, etc. and in place thereof builded
many small Cottages of great rents, to the increasing of beggars in that
Borough. The Archbishop bought Norwich House, or Suffolk Place, near unto
Charing-Crosse, because it was near unto the Court, and left it to his
succssors. Now on the South side, to return back again toward the Bridge.
Over Against this Suffolk Place, is the Parish Church of Saint George, Parish
Church of S. George.
sometime pertaining to the Priory of Bermondsey, by the gift of Thomas
Arderne, and Thomas his son, in the year 1122.

There lie buried in this Church William Kirton, Esquire, and his wives, 1464.

Lo, A fair Monument in the South wall of the Chancell.
Master William Evans he
whose body lies here,
Bequeathed has by his last will,
for ever by the year
Ten pounds, eight shillings to the poor,
which is a blessed stay,
And must be given them in bread,
on every Sabbath day.
One half to Crekederus poor,
his native soil so dear:
The other moity to the poor
of this our Parish here.
See now all ye that love the poor,
how God did guide his ways,
Ten score and eight are served with bread
in two and fifty days,
More than many would have done,
to yielded any share.
Praise God, ye poor, who gave to him
so provident a care.
He was free of the right Worshipful Company of the Merchant-Taylors, and
deceased the nine and twentieth of July 1590. in the two and thirtieth year of
the most prosperous reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth. Aetatis 67.

Behold, A fair gravestone under the Communion table.
James Savage graciously
has done a godly deed
To the poor of this Parish,
for to relieve their need,
Five pounds a year for evermore,
by will he has bequeathed,
Which must out of the Angel rents,
quarterly be received,
By the Churchwardens of this Church,
whom he has put in trust,
As Fathers in the poores behalf,
to be upright and just.
Which men I doubt not but our God,
who sees all things, shall find
True in dispersing of the same,
according to his mind.
Ye poor, thank Christ for Savage still,
extoil Gods name with praise,
That he to follow his good art,
in time may many raise.
Anno Domini 1588.

Then is the White Lion, White Lion a Goal for Surrey.
a Jail so called, for that the same was a common Hostery for the receipt of
Travelers by that sign. This house was first used as a Jail within this
threescore years last, since the which time the Prisoners were once removed
thence to an house in Newtowne, where they remained for a short time, and were
returned back again to the aforesaid White Lion, there to remain, as the
appointed Jail for the County of Surrey.

Next, is the Jail or Prison of the Kings Bench, Kings Bench.
but of what antiquity the same is, I know not. For I have read, that the
Courts of the Kings Bench and Chancery, have often times been removed from London
to other places, and so has likewise the other Gaoles that serve those Courts,
as in the year 1304. Edward the first commanded the Courts of the Kings Bench
and the Exchequer, which had remained seven years at York, to be removed to
their old places at London. And in the year 1387. the eleventh of Richard the
second, Robert Trisilian chief Justice, came to the City of Coventry, H.
Knighton*
and there sat by the space of a month, as Justice of the Kings Benche, and
caused to be indicted in that Court, about the number of 2000. persons of that
Country, etc.

It seems therefore, that for that time, the Prison or Jail of that Court
was not far off. Also, in the year 1392. the sixteenth of the same Richard,
the Archbishop of York being Lord Chancellor, for good will that he bare to
his City, caused the Kings Bench and Chancery to be removed from London to
York, but ere long they were returned to London.

Then is the Marshalsey another Jail or Prison, Marshalsey in Southwarke.
so called, as pertaining to the Marshals of England. Of what continuance kept
in Southwarke, I have not learned: but like it is, that the same has been
removeable, at the pleasure of the Marshals. For I find, that in the year
1376. the 50. of Edward the third, Henry Percy (being Marshall) kept his
prisoners in the City of London, where having committed one John Prendargest,
of Norwich, contrary to the liberties of the City of London, the Citizens, by
persuasion of the Lord Fitzwalter, their Standard Bearer, took armor, and
ran with great rage to the Marshals Inn, brake up the gates, brought out the
prisoner, and conveyed him away, minding to have burnt the stocks in the
midst of their City; but they first sought for Sir Henry Percy, to have
punished him, as I have noted in my Annals.

More, about the Feast of Easter next following, John Duke of Lancaster, having
caused all the whole Navy of England to be gathered together at London, it
chanced a certain Esquire to kill one of the Mariners, which act the other
Mariners taking in ill part, they brought their suit into the Kings Court of
the Marshalsey, which then as chanced (says mine Author) was kept in
Southwarke: but when they perceived that Court to be so favorable to the
murderer; and further, that the Kings Warrant was also gotten for his pardon;
they in great ^ury ran to the house, wherein the murderer was imprisoned,
Sailors brake up the Marshalsey.
brake into it, and brought forth the prisoner with his Gives on his legs,
they thrust a kni^e to his heart, and sticked him, as if he had been a Hog:
after this they tied a rope to his Gives, and drew him to the Gallows, where
when they had hanged him, as though they had done a great act, they caused the
Trumpets to be sounded before them to their ships, and there in great triumph
they spent the rest of the day.

Also the Rebels of Kent, Rebels of Kent brake up the Marshalsey.
in the year 1381. brake down the houses of the Marshalsey and Kings Bench in
Southwarke, took from thence the prisoners, brake down the house of Sir John
Immorth, then Marshall of the Marshalsey, and Kings Bench, etc. After this, in
the year 1387. the eleventh of Richard the second, the morrow after
Bartholomew day, the King kept a great Council in the Castle of Nottingham,
and the Marshalsey of the King was then kept at Lughborow, by the space of six
days or more. In the year 1443. Sir Walter Many, was Marshall of the
Marshalsey, the two and twentieth of Henry the sixth. William Brandon, Esquire,
was Marshall in the eighth of Edward the fourth. In the year 1504. the
prisoners of the Marshalsey then in Southwark brake out, and many of them being
taken were executed, especially such as had been committed for Felony or
Treason.

From thence toward London bridge, on the same side, be many fair Innes, for
receipt of travelers, by these signs, the Spur, Christopher, Bull, Queens
head, The Tabard in Southwark.
Tabard, George, Heart, Kings head, etc. Amongst the which, the most ancient is
the Tabard, so called of the sign, which as we now term it, is of a lacket
or sleevelesse coat, whole before, open on both sides, with a square collar,
winged at the shoulders: a stately garment, of old time commonly worn of
Noblemen and others, both at home and abroad in the wars; but then (to wit, in
the wars) their Arms embroidered, or otherwise depict upon them, that every
man by his Coat of Arms might be known from others: But now these Tabards
are only worn by the Heralds, and be called their Coats of Arms in
Service. For the Inn of the Tabard, Geffery Chaucer.
Geffrey Chaucer, Esquire, the most famous Poet of England, in commendation
thereof, writes thus:

It befell in that season, on a day,
In Southwarke, at the Tabert, as I ^ay,
Ready to wend on my Pilgrimage
To Canturbury, with full devout courage;
That night was comen into the Hostery
Well nine and twenty in a company,
Of sundry folk, by adventure yfall,
In fellowship and Pilgrims were they all,
That toward Canturbury woulden ride:
The Stables and Chambers werenwide,
And well we were eased at the best, etc.
Within this Inn was also the Lodging of the Abbot of Hide (by the City of
Winchester) a fair house for him and his Train, The Abbot of Hide his Lodging.
when he came to the City to Parliament, etc.

And then Thieves lane, Hospital of Saint Thomas.
by St. Thomas Hospital. The Hospital of St. Thomas first founded by Richard,
Prior of Bermendsey, in the Sellerers ground, against the wall of the
Monastery, in the year 1213. He named it the Almery, or House of Alms, for
Converts and poor Children; for the which ground the Prior ordained, that the
A^moner should pay ten shillings four pence yearly to the Sellerer at
Michaelmas.

But Peter de Rupibus, Li. S. Mary Overy. S. Thomas Hospital the second time
founded.
Bishop of Winchester, in the year 1215. founded the same again more fully
for Canons Regular, in place of the first Hospital: He increased the rent
thereof to three hundred forty four pounds by the year. Thus was this
Hospital holden of the Prior and Abbot of Bermondsey, till the year 1428. at
which time a composition was made between Thomas Thetford, Abbot of Bermondsey,
and Nicholas Buckland, Master of the said Hospital of Saint Thomas, for all
the Lands and Tenements, which were holden of the said Abbot and Covent in
Southwarke, or elsewhere, for the old rent to be paid unto the said Abbot.

There be the Monuments in this Hospital Church, of Sir Robert Chamber,
Knight,

William Fines,

Lord Say,

Richard Chaucer, John Gloucester, Adam Atwood, John Ward, Michael Cambridge,
William West, John Golding, Esquires.

John Benham, George Kirkes, Thomas Knighton, Thomas Baker, Gentlemen.

Robert, Son to Sir Thomas Fleming.

Agnes, wife to Sir Walter Dennis, Knight, Daughter and one of the heirs of
Sir Robert Danver, John Evarey, Gentlemen, etc.

This Hospital was by the Visitors, in the year 1538. valued at 266. l. 17.
s. 6. d. and was surrendered to Henry the 8. in the 30. of his reign.

In the year 1552. the Citizens of London, The third foundation of S. Thomas
Hospital by the Citizens of London.
having purchased the void suppressed Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwarke,
in the Month of July, bebegan the reparations thereof, for poor, impotent,
lame, and diseased people, so that in the Month of November next following,
the sick and poor people were taken in. Gift of E. the sixth to the Mospitall
of S. Thomas in Southwarke.
And in the year 1553. on the 10. of April, King Edward the sixth in the
seventh of his reign, gave to the Mayor, Communaltie, and Citizens of London,
to be a workehouse for the poor and idle persons of the City, his house of
Bridewell, and seven hundred Marks Lands of the Savoy Rents, which Hospital he
had suppressed, with all the beds, bedding, and other furniture belonging to
the same, toward the maintenance of the said workehouse of Bridewell, and of
this Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwarke. This gift, the King confirmed by
his Charter, dated the 26. of June next following, and willed it to be called
the Kings Hospital in Southwarke.

The Church of this Hospital, which of old time served for the Tenements near
adjoining and pertaining to the said Hospital, remains as a Parish Church.

But now to come to S. Olaves street: S. Thomas Parish Church.
on the bank of the river of Thames is the Parish Church of Saint Olave, S.
Olaves street and Parish Church.
a fair and meetely large Church, but a far larger Parish, especially of
Aliens or strangers, and poor people; in which Church, there lies intombed
Sir John Bur^ettur, Knight, 1466.

Here th'earthly pare
of William Benson lies, A small Monument in the North wall of the Chancell.

Whom Robert Benson
had by Mary Lyle,
The Heavenly mounted is
above the Skies
With wings of Faith,
dissolved but for a while:
The Linen which he sold
was nere so white,
As is the Robe
wherein the Soul is dight:
Yes Thomas mourns in black,
his only Son,
And Richard (of whole blood)
his eldest Brother:
But Londons reverend Bishop
this has done,
Which was by Ravis
borne of the same Mother:
And William Lyle,
first cousin to them all,
Long live his Verse,
penned this Memorial.
He departed in the 56.
year of his age.
An. Dom. 1603.
Februar. 1579.
To you that live possessed, A graven Plate in the end of the Quire.

great troubles do befall,
Where we that sleep by death,
do feel no harm at all:
An honest life does bring,
a joyful death at last,
And life again begins,
when death is over-past.
Death is the path to life,
and way to endless wealth,
The door whereby we pass
to everlasting health.
These threescore year and six
have passed here my life,
And thirty seven years thereof,
thou Helen were my wife,
A Citizen also,
and of the Cutlers free,
And Warden of the same,
so worthy thought to be.
My loving wife farewell,
God guide thee with his grace.
Prepare thy self to come,
and I will give thee place:
Acquaintance all farewell,
and be assured of this,
You shall be brought to dust,
as Thomas Malledge is.
Hic jacet corpus Ioannis Thomas, A plated Stone by the Communion Table.
nuper Civis and Groceri Civitatis London. Qui obiit die Mercurii, vid. 23.
Augusti, Anno Domini 1564. Hic tres uxores habuit, vid. Christianam, Matildam,
and Ioannam. Ex Christiana suscepit hos liberos, Rogerum, Ioannem, seu
willielmum, Ioannem inter Richardum, Lambertum, Henricum, Beatricem, and
Petrum. Ex Matilda, Aliciam, Agnetem, and Susannam. Ex Ioanna, Thomam, Martham,
Margaretam, Annam, Richardum and Saram.

Hic jacet corpus Richardi Philip, Another like Stone by it.
Civis and Groceri London. Qui obiit 10. die Mensis Aprilis, Anno Domini 1412.
and Isabella uxor ejus: Quae obiit, etc. Quorum, etc.

Here rests, The like Stone on the other side of the Table.
in the mercy of God, the body of John Eston, Esquire, late Justice of the
Peace, and of Southwarke Steward, leaving behind him Margaret his wife. Which
John died the eight day of May, Anno Domini 1565.

How rich be they certain,
That Heavenly Kingdom gain?
No tongue can well express
Their joys, that be endless.
Hic jacent Robertus Faireford, An ancient Marble Tomb in the Chancell.
quondam Serviens excellentiss. Principis Henrici Reg. Angliae Quarti, ac nuper
Coronator Curiae Marescalciae Hospitii Metuendissimorum Princip. Henrici Regis
Angliae Quinti, and Henrici Sexti. Qui obiit 21. die Augusti, Anno Domini,
1456. etc. Et Agnet. ux. -- Quae obiit --

Over Against this Parish Church, Prior of Lewis his Inn.
on the South side the street, was sometime one great House, builded of Stone,
with arched Gates, which pertained to the Prior of Lewis in Sussex, and was his
Lodging when he came to London: It is now a common Hostery for Travelers, and
has to Sign, the Walnuttree.

Then East from the said Parish Church of Saint Olave, is a Key. In the year
1330. by the license of Simon Swanlond, Mayor of London, it was builded by
Isabell, widow to Hamond Goodcheape. And next thereunto was then a great house
of stone and timber, belonging to the Abbot of S. Augustine, Abbot of Augustines
Inn.
without the walls of Canturbury, which was an ancient piece of work, and
seems to be one of the first builded houses on that side the River, W. Thomas.
over against the City: It was called the Abbots Inn of Saint Augustine in
Southwarke, and was sometime holden of the Earls of Warren and Surrey, as
appears by a deed, made 1281. which I have read, and may be Englished thus:

To all to whom this present writing shall come, John, Earl Warren, sends
greeting. Know ye, that we have altogether remised and quite claimed for us and
our heirs for ever, to Nicholas, Abbot of Saint Augustines of Canturbury, and
the Covent of the same, and their successors, suit to our Court of Southwarke,
which they owe unto us, for all that Message and houses thereon builded, and
all their appurtenances, which they have of our fee in Southwarke, situate upon
the Thames, between the Bridgehouse, and Church of Saint Olave. And the said
Message with the buildings thereon builded, and all their appurtenances to
them and their successors, we have granted in perpetual Alms to hold of us,
and our heirs for the same: saving the service due to any other persons, if
any such be, then to us. And for this remit and grant, the said Abbot and
Covent have given unto us five shillings of rent yearly in Southwarke, and
have received us and our heirs in all Benefices, which shall be in their
Church for ever.

This suit of Court one William Craspeis was bound to do to the said Earl,
for the said Message: and heretofore to acquit in all things, the Church of
Saint Augustine, against the said Earl.

This house of late time belonged to Sir Anthony Sentleger, Sentleger house.
then to Warham Sentleger, etc. And now is called Sentleger house, but divided
into sundry Tenements.

Next is the Bridgehouse, so called, as being a storehouse, for Stone, Timber,
or whatsouer pertaining to the building or repairing of London bridge.

This house seems to have taken beginning, with the first founding of the
Bridge; either of stone or timber: it is a large plot of ground on the bank of
the river Thames, containing diverse large buildings, for stowage of things
necessary, toward reparation of the said Bridge.

There are also diverse Garners, Garners for Come in the Bridge-house.
for laying up of Wheat, and other Grayners for service of the City, as need
requires. Moreover, there be certain Ovens builded, Ovens in the
Bridge-house.
in number ten: of which six be very large, the other four being but half
so big. These were purposely made to bake out the breadcorne of the said
Grayners, to the best advantage, for relief of the poor Citizens, when need
should require. Sir I. Throstone, Knight, sometime an Imbroderer, then
Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs, 1516. gave (by his Testament) toward the
making of these Ovens two hundred pounds, which thing was performed by his
Executors: Sir John Monday, Goldsmith, then being Mayor. A Brew House builded
in the Bridge-house.
There was of late, for the enlarging of the said Bridge-house, taken in an old
Brew House, called Goldings, which was given to the City by George Monox,
sometime Mayor, and in place thereof, is now a fair brew house builded, for
service of the City with Beer.

Next, Abbot of Battle his Inn.
was the Abbot of Battles Inn, betwixt the Bridge-house and Battle bridge,
likewise on the bank of the river of Thames; the walks and gardens thereunto
appertaining, on the other side of the way, before the gate of the said house,
was called the Maze: there is now an Inn, called the Flower de luce, for that
the sign is three Flower de luces. Much other buildings of small tenements are
thereon builded replenished with strangers and other, for the most part poor
people.

Then is Battle bridge, Battle bridge.
so called of Battle Abbey, for that it stands on the ground, and over a
watercourse (flowing out of Thames) pertaining to that Abbey, and was therefore
both builded and repaired by the Abbots of that house as being hard adjoining
to the Abbots lodging.

Beyond this Bridge is Bermondsey street, Bermondsey street.
turning South, in the South end whereof was sometime a Priory or Abbey, of S.
Sauioyr, called Bermonds eye in Southwarke, founded by Ailewin Child, a
Citizen of London, in the year 1081.

Peter, Richard, Obstert, and Vmbalde, Monks de Charitate, came to Bermondsey,
the year 1089. and Peter was made first Prior there, by appointment of the
Prior of the house, called Charity in France: by which means this Priory of
Bermondsey (being a Cell to that in France) was accounted a Priory of Aliens.

In the year 1094. deceased Ailewin Child, founder of this house. Then
William Rufus gave to the Monks, his Manor of Bermondsey, with the
appurtenances, and builded for them there a new great Church.

Robert Blewit, Bishop of Lincoln (King Williams Chancellor) gave them the
Manor of Charleton, with the appurtenances. Also Geffrey Martell, by the grant
of Geffrey Magnaville, gave them the Land of Halingbury, and the tithe of
Alferton, etc.

More in the year Thomas of Arderne 1122. and Thomas his Son, gave to the
Monks of Bermonds Eye, the Church of Saint George in Southwarke.

In the year 1165. King Henry the second confirmed to them the Hide or
territory of Southwarke, Hide of Southwark to the Monks of Bermondsey.
and Laygham, Waddam, with the land of Coleman, etc.

In the year one thousand, three hundred, seventy one, the Priories of Aliens
(throughout England) being seized into the Kings hands, Richard Denten an
Englishman, was made Prior of Bermondsey: to whom was committed the custody of
the said Priory, by the letters patents of King Edward the third, saving to the
King the advowsons of Churches.

In the year 1380. the fourth of Richard the second, this Priory was made a
Denizen (or free English) for the fine of 200. Marks, paid to the Kings
Hanaper in the Chancery. In the year 1399. Attelborough, Prior of Bermondsey,
was made the first Abbot of that house, by Pope Boniface the ninth, at the suit
of King Richard the second.

In the year 1417. Thomas Thetford, Abbot of Bermondsey held a Plea against
the King, and prevailed.
Abbot of Bermondsey, held a Plea in Chauncery against the King, for the
Manors of Preston, Bermondsey, and Stone, in the County of Summerset, in the
which suit the Abbot prevailed, and recovered against the King.

In the year 1539. this Abbey was valued to dispend by the year 474. l. 14.
s. 4. d. ob. and was surrendered to Henry the eighth, the 31. of his reign: the
Abbey Church was then pulled down by Sir Thomas Pope, Knight, and in place
thereof, a goodly house builded of stone and timber, since pertaining to the
Earls of Sussex.

There are buried in that Church Loufstone Provost, John's Baev^w.
Shrive or Domesman of London, 1115.

Sir William Bows, Knight, and Dame Elizabeth his wife.

Sir Thomas Pikeworth, Knight.

Dame Anne Audley.

George, son to John, Lord Audley.

John Winkefield; Esquire.

Sir Nicholas Blonket, Knight.

Dame Bridget, wife to Will. Trussell.

Holgrave, Baron of the Exchequer, etc.

Next unto this Abbey Church stands a proper Church of Saint Mary Magdalen,
Parish Church of S. Mary Magdalen.
builded by the Priors of Bermondsey, serving for resort of the inhabitants
(tenants to the Prior or Abbots near adjoining) there to have their divine
Service: this Church remains and serves as before, and is called a Parish
Church.

Then in Kentstreet is a Lazar house for Leprous people, The Look a Lazar-house
in Kent street.
called the Look in Southwarke: the foundation whereof I find not. Now having
touched diverse principal parts of this Borough, I am to speak somewhat of
government, and so to end.

This Borough at a Subsidy to the King, yields about 1000. Marks, or 800. l.
which is more than any one City in England pays, except the City of London.
Muster of men in Southwark.
And also the Muster of men in this Borough does like wise in number surpass
all other Cities, except London. And thus much for the Borough of Southwarke,
one of the 26. Wards of London, which has an Alderman, Deputies three, and a
Bayliffe. Common Council none. Constables 16. Scavengers 6. Wardmote Inquest
20. And is taxed to the Fifteen, at 17. pounds, 17. shillings, 8. pence.

THE SVBVRBS WITHOUT THE Walls of the said City, briefly touched. As also,
without the Liberties, more at large described.
HAving spoken of this City, the original, and increase by degrees: The walls,
gates, ditch, castles, towers, bridges, schools and houses of learning: Of the
orders and customs, sports and pastimes: Of the honor of Citizens and
worthiness of men: And last of all, how the same City is divided into parts
and Wards: And how the same are bounded. And what Monuments of Antiquity, or
Ornaments of building be in every of them, as also in the Borough of
Southwarke: I am next to speak briefly of the Suburbs, as well without the
Gates and Walls, as without the Liberties, and of the Monuments in them.

Concerning the estate of the Suburbs of this City, in the reign of Henry the
second, Fitz-Stephen has these words: Fitz-Stephen.
Upwards on the West (says he) is the Kings Palace, which is an incomparable
building, rising with a Vawmure and Bulwark, aloft upon the River, two miles
from the Wall of the City, but yet conjoined with a continual Suburb. On all
sides, without the houses of the Suburbs, are the Citizens Gardens and
Orchards, planted with Trees, both large, sightly, and adjoining together. On
the North side are Pastures and plain Meadows, with Brooks running through
them, turning Water-mils, with a pleasant noise. Not far off is a great
Fortest, a well woodded Chase, having good Covert for Hearts, Buches, Does,
Bores, and wild Bulls. The Corn^ fields are not of a hungry sandy mould; but as
the fruitful fields of Asia, yielding plentiful increase, and filling the
Barnes with Corn. There are near London, on the North side, especial Wels in
the Suburbs, sweet, wholesome, and clear. Liber Albo.
Amongst which, Holywell, Clarkenwell, and Saint Clements well are most famous,
and most frequented by Scholars and Youths of the City in Summer evenings, when
they walk forth to take the air.

Thus far out of Fitz-Stephen, for the Suburbs of that time.

The second of Henry the third, Suburb without the Posterne by the Tower of
London.
the Forest of Middlesex, and the Warren of Stanes were disaforested: since
the which time, the Suburbs about London have bin also mightily increased with
buildings: for first, to begin the East, by the Tower of London, is the
Hospital of S. Katharine, founded by Matilde, the Queen, wife to King Stephen,
as is before showed in Portsoken Ward.

From this Precinct of S. Katharine, Wapping in the East.
to Wapping in the East, the usual place of execution for hanging of Pirates
and Sea-Rovers, at the low water mark, there to remain till three tides had
overflowed them, was never a house standing within these 50. years: but since
(the Gallows being after removed farther off) a continual street, or filthy
straight passage, with Alleyes of small Tenements or Cottages is builded,
inhabited by Saylors and Victuallers, along by the River of Thames, almost to
Radcliffe, a good mile from the Tower.

The new Chapel in Wapping Hambler, in the Parish of Whitechappell, was
builded in the year 1617. the charge being about 1600. l. was gathered some
part of it of the several Inhabitants in the same Hamblet; the rest (being the
greater part) was gathered by Letters Patents for collections in several
Counties: the Citizens of London, being worthy Benefactors toward it, procured
by the principal care of Master Rowland Catmore, Robert Bourne, and Robert
Mott, and others of the same Parish: Master Richard Sedgwicke being the first
Minister in that Chapel, and so continues to this year 1631.

Written upon a high beam in the midst of the Chapel.
This Chapel was dedicated to Almighty God, and consecrated to the honor
and glory of his great and wonderful Name, the seventh day of July, 1617. by
the right reverend father in God, John King, then Lord Bishop of London.

A fair Gallery built on the South side of the Chapel, with part of the
benevolence that was given for the use of the Chapel by the Mariners that
went to the East Indies, Anno 1616. in the Royal James, under the command of
Captain Martin Pringe, procured by the care of Master Rowland Catmore, then
Master of the said ship, and now at the building, hereof Warden of the
Chapel, 1622.

Master Richard Gardner being at that time of building of the Chappe, Rector of
Whitechappell, who had to continued 47. years, being 77. years of age, as it
was found in a glass window made at his own charge at the upper end of the
Chancell.

Richardus Gardenerus Whitechappell (...) 1617. An. Resident. suae 47.
Aetatissaae 77. 1617.
A weekly Lecture maintained in the same Chapel by Master who has given ten
pounds yearly for ever toward it.

Friday the 24. of July 1629. King Charles having hunted a Stragge or Heart from
wansted in Essex, killed him in Nightingale lane, in the Hamblee of Wapping, in a
garden belonging to one who had some damage among his herbs, by reason the
multitude of people there assembled suddenly.

In the Hamlet of VVapping, in the Parish of VVhitechappell, was builded in
Anno 1626. a large house of timber by Master William Turner, Gentleman, Master
George Low, Gentleman, and Thomas Jones, Gentleman, and others, for the making
of Allome, which grew to such an inconvenience through the annoyance that was
with ^oyling of Urine and other materials, by reason of the ill savor of it,
and the excrement of it being found to be annoyance to the river of Thames,
that upon the complaint of the Inhabitants to the King and Council, it was
proceeded withal, as appears:

The sixteenth of July 1627. being Monday, and the tide being near a low
water, about eight of the cloak in the evening of the same day, there was a
Lighter of Allome grease lying in the Hermitage Docke, which was taken out of a
ship, lying there overthwart the mouth of the Docke. And upon the emptying of
the water (out of the Lighter) which issued from the grease, there did arise a
most noisome stinking scum of a frothy substance, and did spread all about the
mouth of the Docke, and run down into the Thames: and there was a Vessel
caused to be filled with it, and it did so stink, that we were not able to
endure the sent of it, insomuch that endangered all the Wels and Ponds
thereabouts: This was seen and done in the presence of these under written.

Master Cornelius Godfrey, Merchant. M. George Freeman. M. Joseph Jacques. M.
Leonard Leonard. M. Michael Leech. M. Fulke Wormleighton, M. John Byrkes.
Thomas Pope. Henry Chandler. These will be ready to testify the truth hereof
upon oath*
Thomas Davies. Thomas Knight. Thomas Jones. Augustine Cope. Thomas Powell.
Nicholas Bugden. Tobias Green. George Raymond. William Cook. William
Curteis. John Cope.
To the right worshipful his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of
Meddlesex, and Commissioners for annoyances, and to all other his Majesty's
Officiars, whom in this case it shall concern.
We his Majesty's loving Subjects inhabiting within the Parish of
Whitechappell, in the County of Middlesex, and St. Buttolphs without Ealdgate
London, and in the Hamblets of Stepney, VVapping, East Smithfield, and Saint
Katharines near the Tower of London, finding and being continually choked and
poisoned up with the daily and continual stink and most noisome infectious
smell that is lately begun amongst us, by a worke-house for making of Allome
(as is reported) by Master William Turner, Master George Low, and Master
Thomas Jones, and others, erected at the West end of Wapping; adjoining upon
the River of Thames, and near unto the Tower of London, and to his Majesty's
Storehouse on Tower hill, where the provision for his Highness shipping is
daily provided, do humbly show, that we findo, that the noisome smell that
comes of the making of the said Allome (which we suppose to be Urine and such
other infectious materials) being long kept, and then boiled for the use
aforesaid, do breed and make such an infectious and most noisome smell amongst
us, that we are not able to live in our houses, nor to keep our families at
work about us, the detestable stink thereof is so infectious and intolerable
now this Winter time (much more will it be in the heat of Summer:) So that if
speedy redress thereof be not had, we shall not be able to continue our
habirations there, wherein we have long time lived. And it is generally
thought, it will be a decay and dangerous infection to all inhabitants both on
this side and the other side the water, within two miles compass of the place
it stands; for the stink thereof (as the wind stands) is further smelled,
both by land and water: and daily complaint made thereof. And now there is
begun but two or three Furnaces, but shortly there will be many more Furnaces
made there, to the further great damage and annoyance of his Majesty's
Subjects, which we humbly refer to your Worships grave consideration, humbly
desiring your speedy aid and reformation herein, otherwise we shall be
compelled to leave our houses and dwellings to our utter undoings: for the
noisome smell is so dangerous, that no man will dwell thereabouts, if he might
have his house rent-free: And we as bound, shall daily pray for your Worships:

Richard Maine. Fulke Wormleighton. Thomas Clarke. Thomas Champion. William
Mott. James Ruddam. James Coulyn. Andrew Fursland. John Parsons. Henry Munter.
Henry Bludder. George Preston. Peter Leover. William Winson Hoof^. John
Harrington. Romboult Iacobson. John Wessels. Richard Rolfe. John Weeks.
Richard Pountis. Ienkin Ellis. Robert Haddocke. Richard Studder. John
Vandeford. Robert Thomas. Austin Reinolds. Ieffrey Farmer. William Parsons.
Reinold Thompson. John Green. William Plasse. William Popular. Thomas
VVarton. William Peacocke. John Broocker. Matthew Fallen. George Flood. Thomas
Gray. William Welsh. Cornelius Godfrey. Thomas Cobb. John Dearsley. Joseph
Jacques. William Rayniborowe. Peter March. Richard Cooper. Arion Williams.
William Fox. John Note. Thomas White. William Speering. Michael Vngle.
Richard Cray. Thomas Bercher. Osmond Colchester. William Web. William
Bundrocke. William Evans. Michael Leech. John Cope. Tobias Green. John Birke.
John Harris. John Teabye. Robert Merret. William Clarke.
To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of your Majesty's Liege-people and Subjects, being in
number many thousands, inhabiting within one mile compass of your Majesty's
Tower of London, within Middlesex and Surrey, and the Borough of Southwarke.
Most humbly shows,
THat whereas of late diverse Rooms have been newly erected in the Parish of
St. Mary Matfellon, commonly called White chapel, in the County of Middlesex,
by William Turner, Gentleman, George Low, Gentleman, and Thomas Jones,
Gentleman, and others, near unto many great Brewhouses, which breweth Beer
for the use and service of your Majesty's Navy, and for diverse within London
and Middlesex, which said Rooms have been ever since their first erection
employed for boiling of Urine for making of Allome, which has and does daily
cast so noisome a savor and evil air to all the parts thereabouts, and to
all passengers that way, or by the River of Thames, that they are in no sort
able to endure the same, nor their dwelling houses by reason thereof, and the
same has already cast many of them into extremity of great sicknesses and
diseases, by which evil and unwholesome savor, of late many Fishes in the
Thames there near unto, have been found ready to die, and dead, supposed to
be poisoned by some ill substance issuing into the River of Thames: and all the
Inhabitants thereabouts are much annoyed, and all the pasture ground lying
near thereabouts is tainted and spoiled in such manner, that the Cattle do
refuse to feed on the same. And they further humbly show, that they having
preferred their grievances unto your Majesty's Commissioners of annoyances, and
having caused the same to be presented unto them by Indictment, by several
Jurors, sworn upon oath before your Majesty's Justices of the Peace, in their
general Sessions for Middlesex, upon due proof and the testimony of witnesses
there also sworn and examined, upon which Evidences the said Jurors have given
up several verdicts, and presented upon their oaths the same annoyance to be
exceeding great and intolerable to all inhabitants dwelling thereabouts, and to
all other passengers by the same, or upon the River of Thames: Yet your
Petitioners having no redress thereby, are compelled by extreme necessity to
complain unto your Majesty, and with much grief, and with all humility
beseech your Majesty to take to consideration the speedy redress in that
behalf, the same annoyance being so great and unsavory, that otherwise your
poor Subjects, being many thousands

in number, shall be compelled to forsake their houses, and abandon their
dwellings, to the loss of their trades and lives, and the utter undoing of
them and their families: Wherefore they

Most humbly beseech your Majesty to commit the examination thereof unto the
right Honorable Thomas Earl of Cleveland, Sir Allen Apsley, Knight,
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Henry Spiller, Knight, Thomas Sanderson, and
George Long, Esquires, or any three or two of them, or any others, being
Justices and Commissioners of annoyances within the said County of Middlesex,
who by your Majesty's gracious reference being thereunto required, may examine
and hear the Allegations on all parts, and that upon the Certificate of their
opinions therein, your Majesty will be pleased to vouchsafe your poor
Subjects such relief as the case requires.

And the Petitioners, according to their bounden duties and legiance, shall
daily pray for your Majesty's long and prosperous reign over us.

At White Hall the 25. of July, 1627. Present,
Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Bridgewater. Master
Secretary Cook. M. of the Rolls. M. Chancellor of the Duchy.
WHereas upon a complaint formerly made by diverse Aldermen of the City of
London, on the behalf of the Inhabitants of the Parishes of St. Buttolphs
Ealdgate, and diverse other Parishes thereabouts, concerning a great annoyance
unto the said Inhabitants, caused by certain Allome works, erected
thereabouts by his Majesty's Farmers of the said works: It was by an order of
the twentieth of this present month ordered, that the President of the
College of Physicians, accompanied with six other Doctors of Physic of that
Society, as likewise, that some of the Aldermen should upon view of the said
works, and such observations by them made as falls within their experience,
return Certificate to the Board, of their opinions touching the same:
Forasmuch as those whose names are here underwritten, did this day accordingly
make their Certificate in writing to the Board, as follows; In haec verba:
May it please your Lordships, according to an order of this Honorable Board of
the twentieth of July last; We have viewed and observed the Allome works at
Saint Katharines, and considered the materials therein used and employed. And
thereupon do humbly certify unto your Lordships, and are of opinion, that the
works standing in that place, must necessarily breed great annoyances both to
the near Inhabitants, and by the spreading vapors from thence issuing to many
places more remote, and to all such passengers as either by land or by water
have occasion to frequent those parts, not only by their continual noisome
savours to make all their habitations grievous and unpleasant, but also by
their putrid quality to endanger their healths: And so we humbly rest at your
Lordships commands, July the 24. An. 1627. Signed, John Argent, Pref. John
Gifford, William Harvey, William Clement, Robert Fludd, Samuel Baskernite,
Ottnell Moverell, and by Hugh Hamersley. Their Lordships upon consideration had
thereof, did resolve, that the said Allome works in and about the City, were
fit to be suppressed. Nevertheless, for that a Petition was now presented to
the Board by the Farmers of the said Allome works, showing that it was not
possible for them to erect and finish any new works in the Country before our
Lady day next, and that if they should be restrained from working here in the
mean time, the Kingdom would be unserved of Allome, of which there is great
use, and they likewise disabled to pay his Majesty's rent. And therefore
besought the Board that they might have leave to proceed in their making of
Allome here until our Lady day next as aforesaid. It was thereupon thought fit
and ordered that they should be at liberty to make Allome in those places where
their works are already erected until our Lady day next only and no longer;
and that in the mean time they presume not to erect any other works in any
places in or about this city; Provided nevertheless that they suffer not the
dreggs and excrement proceeding from the boiling and making of the said Allom
to be cast or fall into any places leading into the River of Thames, but that
they cause the same from time to time to be either buried in the night time in
the grounds where their works now are, or otherwise to be carried and buried in
the night time in some other convenient place, where the same may breed no
infection or annoyance to any his Majesty's subjects.

At White Hall the 12. of September, Anno 1627. Present,
Lord President. Earl of Holland. Earl of Kellie. Master Secretary Cook.
Master Chanch. of the Exchequer. Chanc. of the Duchy.
WHereas an humble Petition was this day exhibited to the board in the name of
the inhabitants of the Parishes of S. Buttolphs near Ealdgate, S. Katharine,
White-Chappell, Stepney, Reddriffe, S. Olaves, and others adjacent and near
his Majesty's Tower of London. Showing that whereas it had pleased the board
(on the 27. of July last, after diverse hearings and reports made by six Doctors
of the College of Physicians of London) to order that the Farmer of his
Majesty's Allome works (who had transported themselves out of the Northern
parts of the Kingdom near unto his Majesty's Royal chamber and City of
London) should not presume to erect any other work in or about, nor suffer the
dreggs or excrement of the boiling of Allom to be cast or fall into the river
of Thames, but bury the same in the night time in some convenient place where
it might not breed any infection or annoyance, yet nevertheless that sithence
the making of the said order, and especially on the 16. of August last the said
Farmers, their deputies or assigns, have in contempt of the order, powered or
caused the said filth, dreggs or excreme^ts to fall into the Ponds or ditches
leading to the Thames, whereby some of the Petitioners have found their wells of
water appointed for brewing so tainted with the taste and savor of Allom
excreme^t, as that within a very short space the Fish have been poisoned, and
the water altogether unwholesome, for brewing or any other use, as by
certificate under diverse of the said Petitioners hands the chief officers and
inhabitants of the Tower appeared, and therefore humbly prayed redress of the
growing mischief and dangerous contagion proceeding from the said Allom works,
seconded with a presumptuous contempt of the said order of the Board, to the
end that by a sudden reformation the Petitioners may enjoy the benefit of the
air, and not be suffocated with the horrid and putrid savours occasioned by
the said Allom works. The Board taking this complaint into their due and
serious consideration and finding that the former order of the board was not
observed, as is before mentioned and that the annoyance caused hereby,
extends it self to the extreme parts of the City, and even so far as his
Majesty's Court when the wind sits that way (which cannot but be of
dangerous consequence by corrupting of both the air and the water, whereof
beer is made for his Majesty's service and otherwise:) thought fit and ordered
that the said Allom works: should be presently suppressed from working, and
utterly removed by the Farmers or others whom it may concern within a
convenient time, notwithstanding the former order (which on their parts have
not been observed) and that some one of the Messengers of his Majesty's Chamber
shall be sent with a transcript of this their Lordships order, to the Farmers or
deputies of the said work, and see the same duly executed, and of the
performance thereof to give account to their Lordships within ten or twelve
days after the date hereof. And of this their Lordships order as well the said
Farmers and the Messenger, as others whom it may concern, are to take notice,
and to regulate themselves accordingly, as they will answer the contrary.

To the right Honorable Lords, and others of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council:
The humble petition of the Inhabitants of S. Buttolphs Ealdgate, S.
Katharines, White-Chappell, Stepney, Redriffe, S. Olaves, and others adjacent
and near his Majesty's Tower of London.
WHereas it pleased this honorable Board the 27. of July last, after diverse
hearings and a report made by six Doctors being of the College of Physicians
London, to order that the Farmers of his Majesty's Allom works (who had
transplanted themselves out of the North parts near unto his Majesty's Royal
Chamber and City of London) should not presume to erect any other works in or
about the same, nor suffer the dreggs or excrement proceeding of the boiling of
Allom to be cast or fall into the River of Thames, but to bury the same in the
night time where it might not breed any infection or annoyance.

But so it is right Honorable, that diverse times sithence the order of this
honorable Board, but especially upon the 16. of this instant August, the said
Farmers, their deputy or assigns, have in Contempt of the said order, powered
or caused the said filth, dreggs or excrement to fall into the Ponds or ditches
leading to the Thames, whereby some of your Petitioners have found their wells
of water appointed for brewing so tainted and grownered with the taste and
savor of Allom excrement, as that within three hours after about 40. Fishes
were apparently found poisoned, as by the annexed Certificate appears.

For redress of which growing mischief and dangerous Contagion, seconded with
a presumptuous Contempt of your honorable order, as formerly the Petitioners
fly to this honorable Board, beseeching a sudden reformation: To the end
that your petitioners may enjoy the benefit of the air, and not be suffocated
with the horrid and putrid savours proceeding from the said Allome works.

And the petitioners shall be (as ever) bound to pray for your honors, 1627. We
his Majesty's Subject^ whose Names are subscribed do for a truth certify and
will be ready to depose, that sithence the 25. day of July last, the Allome
farmers or their assigns, have erected new erections at or near Wapping,
where there Allome works are: And that upon the 16. day of this instant month
of August, by means of the excrement or filth falling or being cast and washed
out of the said Allome works, by the flowing of the River of Thames was carried
into wells belonging to Brewers thereabouts; and where diverse poor people for
their means, do resort, and from thence do carry water to diverse houses, and
to dress their meat and diet for their families: As by example, at that time
into one well or pond of one Joseph Jacques, a Brewer near thereunto, where
Ecles, and other fishes to the number of 40. and upwards, which within three
hours after, therein were suffocated and poisoned, in the presence of these
certificats.

Witness our hands hereunto put the day of August, 1627.

At White Hall the 12. of December, Anno 1627.
President,
Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord President. Lord Admiral. Earl of Suff.
Earl of Dorset. Earl of Salisbury. Earl of Exeter. Earl of Bridgwater.
Earl of Carlisle. Earl of Holland. Earl of Banbury. Lord Vis. Grandison. Lord
Bishop of Duresme. Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells. Master Treasurer. Master
Comptroller. Master of the Wards. Master Secretary Coke. Master Chanc. of the
Exchequer. Master Chanc. of the Duchy.
Whereas by an Order of this Board, made in July last, for reasons in the said
order mentioned, the Allome works were suffered to be in those places near
London, where they were then erected, until our Lady day next only and no
longer. And afterward the 12. of September last for contempts, in not pursuing
the said order of the 25. of July, and for prevention of growing mischief that
might come by sufferance of the said Allome works; it was ordered that the said
Allome works should be presently suppressed, and removed; which being not as
yet done, although the Farmers of the said works have sought out other places,
whither to remove the said works. Now the Board upon the petition of the
Company of Diers, being informed that in these times of wars, and danger, the
Dyers and other Artificers using Allome cannot be furnished with that
commodity, from any other persons, or places, but only from the Farmers
aforesaid, and their Magazines. And that the said artificers, for want thereof
shall be forced to give over their Trades to the great damage of the
Commonweal. And the said Farmers informing that by reason of some Shipwracks,
and the danger of passages from out of the North hither, they have failed, nor
cannot bring their Alloms hither to London, as they were wont. In consideration
of all which; and for that their Lordships do conceive that the said works
will be less offensive to the Inhabitants dwelling in those parts in this
winter season, the Board has thought fit and ordered, that the said Farmers,
their Deputies, and Assigns, shall be permitted, until our Lady day next
according to the permission given by the former order of the 25. of July, to
convert the Materials now upon their hands into Allome, at their house in S.
Katharines, erected for that purpose, and to sell the same, for the use of his
Majesty's subjects: And presently upon our Lady day next to remove the said
works to some other place more remote from the City of London, and the Suburbs
thereof. And it is ordered, that in the mean while the said Farmers, their
Deputies and Assigns, or some of them shall seek, and find out some
convenient place for their said works, and signify unto the Board of what
place they have made choice, to the end they may have their Lordships allowance
and approbation, for their Settlement in the same, whereof all persons whom it
may concern, are to take knowledge, and accordingly to govern themselves, as
they and every of them will answer the contrary at their perils. Provided
always, and it is hereby willed and commanded, that all things else required
and set down to be done by the said Farmers, in either of the said Orders,
before mentioned, concerning the excrement of the Allome, and otherwise
whatsoever, be duly observed and performed by the said Farmers of the said
Allome works.

On the East side, and by North of the Tower, lies East-Smithfield,
Nightingall lane.
Hogs street, East Smithfield.
and Tower hill, and East from them both, was the new Abbey called Grace,
founded by Edward the third. From thence Radeliffe, up East Smithfield, by
Nightingall lane, (which runs South to the Hermitage, a Brewhouse so called
of an Hermit sometime being there,) Bramley.
beyond this lane to the Manor of Bramley (called in Record of Richard the
second, Villa East Smithfield, and Villa de Bramley) and to the Manor of
Shadwell, belonging to the Deane of Paul's, there has been of late, in place of
Elm trees, many small Tenements raised, toward Radcliffe: And Radcliffe it
self has been also increased in building Eastward (in place where I have
known a large highway, with fair Elm trees on both the sides) that the same
has now taken hold of Lime-Hurst, Lime Hurst.
Lime-Host, corruptly called Limehouse, sometime distant a mile from Radcliffe.

Having said thus much for building, at Wapping, East Smithfield, Bramley, and
Shadwell, all on the South side of the highway to Radcliffe; now one note on
the North side also, concerning Pirates: I read, that in the year 1440. in
the Lent season, certain persons, with six ships brought from beyond the
Seas fish, to victual the City of London; which fish when they had delivered,
and were returning homeward, a number of Sea-theeves in a Barge, in the night
came upon them, when they were asleep in their Vessels, riding at anchor on
the River Thames, and slew them, cut their throats, east them over-boord, took
their money, and drowned their ships, for that no man should espy or accuse
them. Two of these thieves were after taken and hanged in chains upon a
gallows set upon a raised Hill, for the purpose made, in the field beyond East
Smithfield, so that they might be seen far into the River Thames.

The first building at Radcliffe in my youth (not to be forgotten) was a fair
Free School, Free School and Almeshouses at Radisse.
and Almes-houses, founded by Avice Gibson, wife to Nich. Gibson, Grocer, as
before I have noted. But of late years, Ship-wrights, and (for the most part)
other Marine men, have builded many large and strong houses for themselves, and
smaller for Smylers, from thence almost to Poplar, and so to Black well.

Now for Tower hill, Tower hill without the walls.
the plain there is likewise greatly diminished by Merchants, for building of
small tenements: from thence toward Ealdgate, was the Minories, whereof I have
spoken.

From Ealdgate East again lies a large street, replenished with buildings, to
wit, on the North side the Parish Church of Saint Buttolph, and so other
building to Hoglane, and to the bars on both sides.

Also, Suburb without Ealdgate,
without the Bars, both the sides of the Street be pestered with Cottages and
Allies, even up to White Chapel Church; and almost half a mile beyond it,
into the common field: all which ought to lie open and free for all men. But
this common field (I say) being sometime the beauty of this City on that part,
is so incroched upon, by building of filthy Cottages, and with other
Purprestures, Enclosures, and Laystalls, that (notwithstanding all
Proclamations and Acts of Parliament made to the contrary) in some places it
scarce remains a sufficient highway for the meeting of Cariages and Droves
of Cattle, much less is there any fair, pleasant, or wholesome way, for
people to walk on foot: which is no small blemish to so famous a City, to
have so unsavourie and unseemely an entry or passage thereunto.

Now of White Chapel Church somewhat Of white Chapel.
and then back again to Ealdgate.

This Church is as it were a Chapel of ease to the Parish of Stebunhith, and
the Parson of Stebunhith has the Gift thereof: which being first dedicated to
the name of God, and the Blessed Virgin, is now called Saint Mary Matfellon,
St. Mary Matfellon.
About the year 1428. in the sixth of King henry the sixth, a devout widow of
that Parish had long time cherished and brought up, of Alms, a certain
Frenchman, or Briton borne, A devout widow murdered.
which most unkindly and cruelly in a night murdered the said widow sleeping
in her bed, and after fled with such Jewels and other stuff of hers, as he
might carsie. But he was so freshly pursved; that (for fear) he took the
Church of Saint George in Southwarke, and challenged Privilege of Sanctuary
there, and so abjured the Kings Land. Then the Constables (having charge of
him) brought him into London, intending to have conveyed him Eastward: but so
soon as he was come into the Parish, where before he had committed the
Murder; the wives cast upon him so must filth and ordure of the street, that
(notwithstanding the best resistance made by the Constables) they slew him out
of hand: And for this feat it has been said, that Parish to have purchased
that name of Saint Mary Matfellon; but I find in Record, the same to be called
Villa beatae Mariae de Matfellon, in the 21. of Richard the second.

More, we read, that in the year 1336. the 10. of Edward the third, the
Bishop of Alba, Cardinal and Parson of Stebunhith, Procurator general in
England, presented a Clerk to be Parson in the Church of blessed Mary, called
Matfellon, without Ealdgate of London, etc.

Now again from Ealdgate Northwest to Bishopsgate, Suburb without Bishopsgate.
lies Hounds-ditch, and so to Bishopsgate.

North and by East from Bishopsgate, lies a large street, or highway, having
on the West side thereof, the Parish Church of S. Buttolph.

Then is the Hospital of S. Mary of Bethelem, founded by a Citizen of London,
and as before is showed, up to the Bars, Norton fall gate.
without the which, is Norton fall gate, Priorie of S. John Baptist, at
Holywell.
a liberty so called, belonging to the Deane of Paul's. Thence up to the late
dissolved Priorie of S. John Baptist, called Holywell, a House of Nuns, of
old time founded by a Bishop of London. Stephen Gravesend, Bishop of London,
about the year 1318. was a Benefactor thereunto, reedified by Sir Thomas
Lovel, Knight of the Garter, who builded much there, in the reigns of Henry
the seventh, and of Henry the eight. He endowed this House with fair Lands,
and was there buried in a large Chapel by him builded for that purpose. This
Priorie was ualued, at the suppression, to have of Lands two hundred ninety
three pound by year, and was surrendered 1539. the one and thirtieth of Henry
the eight. The Church thereof being pulled down, many houses have been
build^d for the Lodgings of Noblemen, of Strangers borne, and other.

From Holywell, in the high Street, is a continual building of Tenements to
Sewers ditch, having one small side of a field already made a Garden Plot.
Ouer-against the North corner of this Field, between it and the Church of S.
Leonara in Shore-ditch, A Cross at Shores-ditch, now a Smiths Forge.
sometime stood a Cross, now a Smiths Forge, dividing three Ways: Forthright
the highway is builded upon either side, more than a good flight shoot toward
Kings land, Newington, Totenham, etc.

On the left hand is Ealdestreet, which reaches West to a stone Cross,
over against the North end of Golding lane, and so to the end of Goswell
street. On the right hand of this Ealdestreet not far from Shores-ditch,
Hoxton.
but on the North side thereof is Hoxton, a large street with houses on both
sides, and is a Prebend belonging to Paul's Church in London, but of
Shores-ditch Parish.

On the right hand beyond Shores-ditch Church, toward Hackney, are some late
builded houses upon the common soil, for it was Lay-stall, but those houses
belong to the Parish of Stebunhith.

On the other side of the highway, from Bishopsgate and Hounds-ditch, is the
the Dolphin, a common Inn for receipt of Travelers, then a house builded by
the L. John Powlet, afterward called Fishers-Folly, and so up to the West end
of Berwardes Lane, is a continual building of small cottages, then the
Hospital called Saint Mary Spittle, hard within the Bars, whereof I have
spoken in Bishopsgate Ward.

From the which Bars toward Shores-ditch on that side, Shores-ditch so called
more than 400. years since, as I can prove by record.
was all along, a continual building of small and base Tenements, for the most
part lately erected.

Amongst the which (I mean of the ancient'st building) was one row of proper
small houses, with Gardens for poor decayed people, there placed by the Prior
of the said Hospital: Almes-houses in Shores-ditch.
every one Tenant whereof paid one penny rent by the year at Christmas, and
dined with the Prior on Christmas day. But after the suppression of the
Hospital, these houses for want of reparations in few years were so decayed,
that it was called Rotten Row, Rotten Row or Russell Row.
and the poor worn out (for there came no new in their place) the houses (for
a small portion of money) were sold from Goddard to Russell a Draper, who new
builded them, and let them out for rent enough, taking also large Fines of the
Tenants, near as much as the houses cost him purchase and building: for he
made his bargains so hardly with all men, that both Carpenter, Bricke-layer,
and Plaisterer, were by that Work undone. And yet in honor of his name, it is
now called Russels Row.

Now for the Parish Church of Saint Leonards in Shoresditch, Parish Church of
S. Leonards at Shoresditch.
the Archdeacon of London is always Parson thereof, and the Cure is served by
a Vicar.

In this Church have been diverse honorable persons buried, as appears by
Monuments yet remaining. Sir John Elrington, with Margaret his wife, daughter
and heir to Thomas Lord Itchingham, widow to William Blount, son and heir
to Walter Blount, the first Lord Mountjoy: which Margaret died, 1481.

Orate pro animabus Humfredi Starky, Militis, An ancient Marble Tomb in the
Quire.
nuper Capitalis Baronius de Scaccario Domini Regis Hen. 7. and Isabella uxoris
ejus, and omnium, etc.

This Monument is erected in memory, that within this Church do lie buried
the bodies of the right Honorable and Noble Ladies, A very fair Tomb in the
upper end of the Quire.
Lady Katharine Stafford, daughter to Edward Duke of Buckingha^, and wife to
Ralph, Earl of Westmerland, who dyed 1553. Lady Elianor, daughter to Sir
William Paston, Knight, and wife to the right honorable Lord Thomas, Earl of
Rutland, buried 1551. Lady Margaret Nevell, daughter to Ralph, Earl of
Westmerland, and wife to Henry, Earl of Rutland, who died 1560. And the Lady
Katharine Nevell, wife to Sir John Constable of Holdernes, Knight, and daughter
to Henry, Earl of Westmerland. And Lady Anne Manners, daughter to Thomas,
Earl of Rutland: which Katharine died the seven and twentieth day of March,
Anno Domini 1591.

And that here do lie also the bodies of two right worthy Gentlemen,
honorably descended; namely, of Sir Thomas Manners, Knight, and Oliver
Manners, Esquire, Brethren, being the fourth and fifth sons of the aforesaid
Thomas, Earl of Rutland. The first died about his age of 50. in June, 1591.
after many valiant Services performed by him for his Prince and Country, both
in Ireland and in Scotland, where he was Knighted; and witnessed by sundry
great wounds he therein received. The second died in his younger years, 1563.
about his age of twenty, yet not before good proof made of his valor and
forwardness, in the Service of New Haven, against the French; where he took
the sickness, whereof he died shortly after, in Shores-ditch.

Founded by the Lady Adeline Neuell, at the direction of the said Lady
Katharine Constable, deceased, her Sister, in February, 1591.

Theodosia Vavasour. Oleum effusum nomen tuum, Ideo Adolescentulae dilexerunt
te. Cant. 1. Fallax est gratia, and vana pull. chritudo: mulier timens Deum,
ipsa laudabitur. Pro. 11.

Hac tuleris quicunque gradum sta, perlege, plora,

Hic decor, A comely Monument in the wall, near to the To^be.
hic pietas, Nobilitasque jacet.

Virgo annis animisque Dei (Theodosia) donum

Qua meritis certat fama, decore pudor.

Sed famam meritis superavit, moribus annos,

Ingenio sexum, Religione genus.

Quam neque Nobilitas tumidam, nec forma procacem*

Fecerat, una humilis, clara, pudica, decens.

Flos aevi, florem dixi? dixi ergo dolorem

Vt matura brevi est, heu ita rapta brevi est.

Rapta sed Aethereis Rosa transplantanda viretis,

Laeta ubi perpetui tempora veris aget.

Inter and aeternas Agni comes Agna choreas

Ignotum casto succinet ore melos.

Candida virginei tumulo date Lilia coetus,

Virginis O partus, virginis esto memor. Ereptam Domino sociat lux ultima
faelix. O faelix virgo quod cupit usque tenet.

Anno Domini 1616. Martii 17. Here lies buried Elizabeth, A fair Tomb in the
Chancell.
the wife of the late Reverend Father in God, John Skory, late Bishop of
Hereford. The said Reverend Father, in the reign of King Edward the sixth, was
Bishop of Rochester, and translated from thence to Chichester. He departed
this life at Whitborne, in the County of Hereford, the 26. day of June, Anno
Domini 1585. And the said Elizabeth deceased in Holywell, in this Parish, the
8. day of March, 1592. Beati mortui qui Domino moriuntur.

Her Corpse here lies in Chest,
Her Soul in Heaven now lives;
And she enjoyes that Rest,
Which God to his Saints gives:
For in Christ did she trust,
That he will her restore
Again out of the dust,
To live for evermore.


Here lies the body of Sir Thomas Seymer, An ancient Marble Tomb in the
Chancell.
Knight, late Alderman and Lord Mayor of London, and Dame Mary his wife. The
which Sir Thomas deceased the eleventh day of December, Anno Domini 1532.

Heere-under lie the ashes and the bones
Of Sir Thomas Leigh, An engraven Place in the Northwall of the Quire.
that good and learned Knight;
Whose hasty death (alas) the godly still bemones,
Though his soul always rejoice in Gods sight.
Great was his wisdom, and greater was his wit,
His visage comely, with no sad change dismayed:
A man in all affairs, a King to serve most fit,
Had not death so soon his mortal life betrayed.
He died the 25. day of November, Anno Domini, 1545.
A table made at the costs and charge of Henry Hodge, Citizen and Brewer of
London, containing the names of the Benefactours to the Church, and the poor
of the Parish of S. Leonards in Shore-ditch. Which table hangs up in the
Chancell near the Communion table; set up there, Anno Domini 1623.

William Thornton of this Parish Tailour, gave the Vestry house with a room
under for the Minister to dwell in, and a renement by (...) to this parish for
ever: He likewise (...) the Gallery at the coming in (...) the great door in
the Church, and (...) the ^^ricke wall on the West side of (...) Churchyard at
his own charge, Anno Domini 1581.

John Fuller of Bishops-^^ll Esquire, gave a sum of money for the building of
12. Almes-houses, for 12. poor widows of this parish; which poor women do
receive during the life of the Lady his late wife, and after wife to Sir Thomas
Mansfield the sum of 8. l. per annum. And after the Ladies decease there is
to come 50. l. per annum to the said poor alms women for ever. The Lady being
dead they do now receive it.

William Peake of this Parish Esquire, gave to be dealt in bread unto the poor
of this Parish weekly the sum of 2. s'. on every Sunday for ever.

Robert Brainforth, of this parish Gentleman gave yearly 8. l. for ever unto
the poor of this Parish, viz. upon every S. Thomas day before Christmas to 60.
poor persons 3. l. and upon every Good Friday unto 30. poor persons the sum
of 50. s'. and upon every Sunday for ever the sum of 12. d'. in bread to the
poor of this Parish. This money is to be paid accordingly out of the Hospital
of S. Thomas in Southwarke for ever. He has also given a green Carpet of
broad cloth for the Communion table.

Thomas Russell of London Draper, has given to the poor of this Parish the
sum of 12. d'. weekly to be distributed to the poor of the Parish for ever,
to be paid by the company of the Drapers in London.

George Clarke Citizen and Vintner of London, gave unto the use of the poor of
this Parish the sum of 100. marks in money.

Simon Burton of London Wax-chandler, gave to 30. poor widows of this parish
the sum of 30. groats yearly for ever, to be distributed every S. Thomas day.

George Palin of London Girdler, has given 10. l. in money to the use of the
poor of this parish for ever.

Robert Spence of London Fishmonger, gave 50. s'. a year to the poor of this
Parish for ever, to be paid by the company of Fishmongers.

Thomas Scriven Esquire, has given 10. l. in money to the use of the poor of
this Parish for ever.

Robert Rogers of London Leather seller, gave the sum of 30. pound in money
for a stock for the poor of this parish to buy sea-coles, which is to be laid
out at best time for the benefit of the said poor for ever, reserving the
stock whole.

Steven (...) of London Vintner, gave the sum of 26. every year for ever, to
be given in sagots to the poor of this Parish about Michaelmasse. This is to be
paid by the company of Vintners in London.

John Eomans, alias Tice of this parish tuftafata-weaver, gave to the use of
the poor of this parish the sum of 10. l. in money, to be distributed to the
12. poor Alms women in one chaldron of sea-coles yearly for ever among the^.
Cicely, late wife of the said John Eomans, and after wife to Master John Heath,
gave to the use of the poor, the sum of 20. pound in money, for a stock to
buy sea-coles for the poor of this parish for ever. Likewise she gave 20. pound
to buy a flagon of silver for wine for the Communion. Likewise she gave 20.
pound in money, for the maintenance of two sermons yearly for ever, viz. one
upon the Lady day, in harvest, and the other upon the Lady day, in Lent.

Anne Smith widow late wife of William Nisam deceased, gave weekly to be dealt
in bread to the poor of this parish upon every Sunday 2. s'. for ever, to be
paid out of the company of Drapers in London. Likewise she gave a pulpit cloth
and cushion to this Church.

Nicolas Wilkinson, alias Tooly, Gentlemen deceased, late of this parish, gave
the sum of 80. pound in money, to remain a stock that upon every Sunday
after morning prayer, there should be distributed to 32. poor people 32.
wheaten loaves for ever. And the Vicar, Churchwardens and Vestry-men out of
their provident care, have made a purchase of a rentcharge yearly, issuing
out of the George in Holywell street, for the true performance thereof for
ever.

Besides these benefactours in the table, since we have had these M. Zachary
Elmer, Official to the Archdeacon of London, together with his brother M.
Edmond Elmer, gave a flagon of silver for the wine in the communion; And
William Badger gardener in Shore-ditch gave another; And a parishioner unknown
gave also another, every one cost 20. l. a piece. Also John Leavis Weaver, gave
a chalice, in which the communion wine is delivered; and Isabell Iackson
widow, late wise to William Iackson Grocer, living in this parish, gave a
plate of silver to carry the bread in the communion. William Wood Gardener in
this parish, gave a chalice to the communion table and four pewter flaggons
for the wine.

Ioane Smales widow of this Parish and formerly wife to John Cook of this
Parish, gave allowance for 4. sermons every year on four Holy days: Namely,
the feast day of S. John Baptist, S. Michael, S. Stephen, and the Purification
of the Virgin Mary; and she bequeathed also 40. l. yearly to be given to the
poor of our Parish.

On the North side of the Church a gallery was made at the cost of well
disposed parishioners, in the year 1617. William Badger, and John Clarke,
being Churchwardens. And another on the South part by James Slade, Captain
and servant to the East Indian company, was set up in the year 1630. And a
long seat between, reaching from one galto the other, for the catechizing of
youth out of the pulpit, according to the order then given, John Squire being
Vicar, Thomas Crowther, and Henry Empson, Churchwardens. Under this gallery is
set, Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 7.
24.

He loves our nation and has built us a Synagogue, Luc. 7. 5.

Virgo annis animisque Dei ((...)) donum, Aethereis rosa transplantanda viretis.

A Tomb on the South side of the chancell.
Jane the wife of Ralfe Hansby Esquire, daughter to William Vavasour Esquire,
Grandchild to Thomas Manners Knight, died the 22. day of July, in the year of
our Lord 1617. and of her age the 23. To whose blessed memory her her dear
husband has dedicated this sad monument to signify that with her his joy lies
here interred.

Si genus and virtus, and moribus aucta figura
Pulchra bonis, pietas si quid honoris habent;
Hunc Ianae tumulum spectans venerare Viator,
Cum qua tot bona tam bella sepulta jacent.
Nec minor his aderat victrix patientia victae,
Nec spolium mortis sed pudor illa fuit.
If birth, if virtue,
if fair feature decked
With gifts of mind,
if piety breeds respect;
Her tomb then view,
and grace kind Passenger,
With whom so many graces
buried were:
Conquered, By patience
yet she overcame,
Nor was her youth deaths
triumph but his shame.
In the middle chancell this inscription in brass is placed upon a grave stone.

Georgius Gips, Generosus, fide subjectus, spe erectus, charitate Deo unitus,
vitam mortalem mutavit pro immortali, 12. Iulii 1611. Quatuor genuit filios,
filiasque undecim. Quorum Richardus, Georgius, Thomas, Anna, Maria, and Martha,
Patris clauserunt, reliquorum ipse clausit lumina.

A little below in the same chancell is set upon a grave stone.

May 22. 1618. Richard Leigh, Merchant and Citizen of London, placed this stone
in memorial of his dear wife Anne Leigh; Who lies here interred by the body
of Richard Brattuph her first husband, and of her 3. children, Richard, Sara,
and John, which she bare to the said Richard Brattuph.

In some, sad sickness pain,
and pain impatience,
In thee a patient
penitence it wrought,
Thy sickness joy,
thy tribulation hope,
The bodies death gave life
unto thy soul.
Thus for his lambs
the Lord can honey draw,
From the all devouring
cruel lions jaw.
Vbi tua, O mors, victoria?
Vbi tuus, O sepulchra, tumulus?
And over against this tomb in the wall on the South side of the chancell in a
monument of brass.

Here lies Katharine Liveley, wife of Edward Liveley Gentlemen, and daughter
of Henry Hodge Citizen and Brewer of London, and Ioice his wife, who after she
had run a virtuous and religious course of life 21. years, finished the same
the 15. day of July, Anno Domini, 1623. Proverbs 10. 7.

The memory of the just is blessed.

Furthermore, (of late time) one Vicar there, for covetousness of the Brass,
which he converted into coined Silver, plucked up many Plates fixed on the
Graves, and left no memory of such as had been buried under them. A great
injury both to the living and the dead, forbidden by public Proclamation, in
the reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, but not forborne by many,
that either of a preposterous zeal, or of a greedy mind, spare not to
satisfy themselves by so wicked a means.

One note of Shores-ditch, and so an end of that Suburb.

I read, A Fuller of Shores-ditch, for falsely accusing, hanged and quartered.
that in the year 1440. the eighteenth of Henry the sixth, a Fuller of
Shores-ditch appeached of Treason many worthy Esquires and Gentlemen of Kent:
but he being proved false, was attainted, condemned, and had judgment to be
drawn, hanged, and quartered; which was done, his head set on London Bridge,
and his Quarters on the Gates. This Justice was done, according to the
sixteenth of Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 16.
The Judges shall make diligent inquisition, The reward of a false brother.
and if the witness be found false, and to have given false witness against
his brother, then shall they do unto him, as he had thought to do unto his
brother, etc.

I read of the Kings Manor, called Shores-ditch Place, in the Parish of
Hackney: But how it took that name, I know not; and therefore I will turn
back from Shores-ditch Cross to Bethelem Cross, Bethelem Cross.
and so pass through that Hospital into the Moore-field, which lies without
the Posterne called Moore-gate.

This Field (of old time) was called the Moore; as appears by the Charter of
William the Conqueror to the College of Saint Martin, declaring a running
Water to pass into the City from the same Moore. Also Fitz-Stephen writes of
this Moore, saying thus: When the great Fenne, or Moore, which waters the
Walls on the North side, is frozen, etc.

This Fenne, or Moore-field, stretching from the Wall of the City, betwixt
Bishops-gate and the Posterne called Cripplegate, to Finsbery, and to Holywell,
Finsbery fields and More-fields an unprofitable ground.
continued a waste and unprofitable ground a long time, so that the same was
all letten for four marks the year, in the reign of Edward the second. But
in the year 1415. the third of Henry the fifth, Thomas Fawconer, Mayor, as I
have showed, caused the wall of the City to be broken toward the said Moore,
and builded the Posterne called Mooregate, for ease of the Citizens to walk
that way upon Causies toward Iseldon and Hoxton. Moreover, he caused the
Ditches of the City, and other the Ditches from Shores ditch to Deep ditch,
by Bethelem into the Moore ditch, to be newly cast and cleansed, by means
whereof the said Fenne or Moore was greatly dreined or dried. But shortly
after, to wit, in 1477. Ralph Ioceline, Mayor, for repairing of the Wall of the
City, caused the said Moore to be searched for Clay and Brick to be burnt
there, etc. by which means this field was made the worse for a long time.

In the year 1498. all the Gardens which had continued time out of mind,
Gardens without M^regate, destroyed and made plain ground Ditches cast to
drein the the More-field.
without Mooregate, to wit, about and beyong the Lordship of Finsbury, were
destroyed; And of them was made a plain field for Archers to shoot in. And in
the year 1512. Roger Atchley, Mayor, caused diverse dikes to be cast, and made
to drein the waters of the said Moorefields, with Bridges arched over them, and
the grounds about to be leveled, whereby the said field was made somewhat more
commodious, Sluice to convey the standing water out of the Moore.
but yet it stood full of noisome waters. Whereupon, in the year 1527. Sir
Thomas Seyuor, Mayor, caused diverse Sluices to be made to convey the said waters
over the Town Ditch, into the course of Walbrooke, and so into the Thames: and
by these degrees was this Fenne or Moore at length made maine and hard ground,
which before being overgrowne with Flagges, Sedges and Rushes, served to no
use, Since the which time also, the farther grounds beyond Finsbury Court,
Moorefields raised and wind-Mils set thereon.
have been so everheightned with Laystalls of dung, that now diverse Wind-mills
are thereon set, the Ditches be filled up, and the Bridges ouer-whelmed.

And now concerning the enclosures of common grounds about this City, whereof I
mind not much to argue; Edward Hall sets down a note of his time, Edward
Hall.
to wit, in the fifth or rather 6. of H. the 8.

Before this time (says he) the Inhabitants of the Towns about London, as
Iseldone, Hoxton, Shores-ditch and others, had so enclosed the common fields
with hedges, and ditches, that neither the young men of the City might shoot,
nor the ancient persons walk for their pleasures in those fields; but that
either their bows and arrows were taken away or broken, or the honest persons
arrested or indighted, saying: That no Londoner ought to go out of the City,
but in the Highways.

This saying so grieved the Londoners, that suddenly this year, a great
number of the City assembled themselves in a morning, and a Turner in a fools
coat came crying through the City, shovels and spades, shovels and spades. So
many of the people followed, that it was wonder to behold; and (within a short
space) all the hedges about the City were cast down, Hedges pulled down and
ditches filled up.
and the ditches filled up, and every thing made plain; such was the diligence
of those worke-men.

The Kings Council hearing of this assembly, came to the Gray Friars, and sent
for the Mayor and Council of the City, to know the cause, who declared to
them the injury and annoying done to the Citizens, and to their Liberties,
which though they would not seek disorderly to redress, yet the Communalty
and young persons could not be stayed thus to remedy the same. When the Kings
Council had heard their answer, they dissimuled the matter, and commanded the
Mayor to see that no other thing were attempted, but that they should
forthwith call home the younger sort: who having speedily achieved their
desire, returned home before the Kings Council, and the Mayor departed without
more harm: after which time (says Hall) those fields were never hedged.

But afterward we saw the thing in worse case than ever, Banqueting houses
like Banquerouts, bearing great show and little worth.
by means of enclosure for Gardens, wherein are builded many fair Summer
houses, and as in other places of the suburbs, some of them like Midsummer
Pageants, with Towers, Turrets, and Chimney tops, not so much for use or
profit, as for show and pleasure, and bewraying the vanity of men's minds, much
unlike to the disposition of the ancient Citizens, who delighted in the
building of Hospitals, and Almes-houses for the poor, and therein both
employed their wits, and spent their wealths in preferment of the common
commodity of this our City.

But now to come back again to Moregate, Suburb without Cripplegate.
and from thence West through a narrow passage, called the Posterne, because it
has at either end a door to shut in the night season, betwixt the More-ditch
enclosed with Brick for Tenteryardes, and the Gardens of the said Morefield, to
Morelane: a part of the Suburb without Cripplegate, without this posterne
called Cripplegate, also lay a part of the said More, even to the River of
Wels, as in an other place I have showed, and no houses were there builded,
till the latter end of the reign of William the Conqueror, and his Son
William Rufus, about which times, some few houses were there builded along East
and West, thwart before the said Gate. One Alfune builded for the inhabitants a
Parish Church which is of S. Giles, somewhat West from the said Gate, Parish
Church of S. Giles.
and is now on the bank of the Town ditch, and so was there a street since
called Forestreet, as standing before the Gate.

This Alfune in the reign of Henry the first, became the first Hospiteler of
Saint Bartholomewes Hospital in Smithfield, as in another place I have noted.
And this Parish Church of S. Giles, being at the first a small thing, stood in
place where now stands the Vicarage house, but has been since (at diverse
times) much enlarged, according as the Parish has increased, and was at the
length newly builded in place where now it stands. But the same new Church
being large, strongly builded, and richly furnished with Ornaments, was in the
year 1545. by casualty of fire sore burnt and consumed: not withstanding, it
was again (within short space of time) repaired as now it shows.

Some little distance from the East end of this Church, stands a fair
Conduit castellated in Forestreet. Then had ye a Bosse of sweet water in the
wall of the Churchyard, lately made a Pumpe, but already decayed.

Then had ye a fair Poole of sweet water near to the Church of S. Giles,
wherein Anne of Lodbery was drowned as I have before declared.

In the East end of Forestreet is More lane: Grub street.
then next is Grub street, of late years inhabited (for the most part) by
Bowyers, Fletchers, Bow-string makers and such like, now little occupied;
Archery giving place to a number of bowling Allies, and Dicing houses, which in
all places are increased, and too much frequented.

This street stretches North Everades Well street, Everades Well street.
which thwarteth it to White Cross street: the next from Forestreet North is
White Cross street, likewise extending it self up to the West end of Everades
Well street, and from the end there of to Ealdestreet.

From the West end of Forestreet lies Red Cross street, from the which
Cross, on the right hand East lies Beech lane, Golding lane.
and reaches to the White Cross street. From Red Cross North lies Golding
lane, which stretches up to a Cross in Ealde street, which Golding lane (on
both the sides) is replenished with many Tenements of poor people.

On the left hand, and West of the Red Cross lies a street, of old time
called Hounds-ditch, and of later time named Barbican, of such cause as I have
before noted. And thus have you all the Suburb without Cripplegate, being
almost altogether in the Parish of Saint Giles, which has more than 1800.
Householders, and above 4000. Communicants.

Without Aldersgate, Suburb without Aldersgate.
on the left hand, is the Parish Church of S. Buttolph, on the North side of
the which Church lies a way, called Little Britain street, toward the Priory
of Saint Bartholomew in Smithfield; but the highway without Aldersgate,
runs straight North from the said gate unto Hounsditch, or Barbican street
on the right hand, and Long lane on the left hand, which runs into
Smithfield.

Then from the farther end of Aldersgate street, straight North to the Bar,
is called Goswell street, replenished with small Tenements, Cottages, and
Allies, Gardens, Banqueting houses and bowling places.

Beyond these Bars, leaving the Charter House on the left hand, or the West
side of the way, stretches up toward Iseldon, and on the right hand or East
side (at a red Cross) turns into Ealde-street, Eald street.
so called, for that it was the old highway from Aldersgate street, for the
North-east parts of England, before Bishopsgate was builded, which street
runs East to a Smiths Forge, sometime a Cross before Shores-ditch Church,
from whence the Passengers and Carriages were to turn North to Kings-land,
Totenham, Waltham, Ware, etc.

There was sometime in this Suburb without Aldersgate, Hospital without
Aldersgate.
an Hospital for the poor; but an Alien of Cluny, a French order, and
therefore suppressed by King Henry the fifth, who gave the house with lands and
goods, to the Parish of Saint Buttolph, and a Brotherhood of the Trinity was
there founded, which was afterward suppressed by Henry the 8. or Edward the 6.

There is (at the farthest North corner of this Suburb) a Windmill, which was
sometime by a tempest of wind overthrown, and in place thereof a Chapel was
builded by Queen Katharine The Mount.
(first wife to Henry the eight) who named it the Mount of Calvary because it
was of Christ's Passion, and was in the end of Henry 8. pulled down, and a
Windmill newly see up as before.

Without Newgate li^^h the West and by North Suburb, Suburb without Newgate.
on the right hand or North side whereof (betwixt the said gate, and the Parish
of S. Sepulcher) turns away toward West Smithfield, called, Giltspurre
street, or Knight riders street; then is Smithfield it self, compassed about
with buildings, as I have before declared in Faringdon Ward without.

And without the Bars of West Smith field, S. John's street. Charter house.
lies a large street or way, called of the house of S. John there S. John's
street, and stretches toward Is^ldo^: On the right hand whereof stood the late
dissolved Monastery, called the Charter House, founded by Sir Walter Manny,
Knight, a stranger borne, Lord of the Town of Manny in the Diocese of
Cambrey, beyond the Seas, who for service done to King Edward the third, was
made Knight of the Garter.

This house he founded upon this occasion: Charter House.
A great Pestilence entering this Island, began first in Dorsetshire, then
proceeded into Devonshire, Somersetshire, Glocestershire, and Oxfordshire, and
at length came to London, and overspread all England, so wasting the people,
that scarce the tenth person of all sorts was left alive, and Churchyards were
not sufficient to receive the dead, but men were forced to choose out certain
fields for burials: whereupon Ralph Stratford, Bishop of London, in the year
1348. bought a piece of ground, called No man's land, No man's land.
which he enclosed with a wall of Brick, and dedicated for burial of the
dead, builded thereupon a proper Chapel, which is now enlarged, Pardon
Churchyard by the Charter House.
and made a dwelling house: and this burying plot is become a fair Garden,
retaining the old name of Pardon Churchyard.

About this time, in the year 1349. the said Sir Walter Manny, in respect of
danger that might befall in this time of so great a plague and infection,
purchased 13. Acres and a Rod of ground, adjoining to the said Nomans land, and
lying in a place called Spittle Croft, because it belonged to Saint
Bartholomews Hospital, since that called the New Church Haw, and caused it to
be consecrated by the said Bishop of London to the use of burials.

In this plot of ground, there was (in that year) more than 50000. persons
buried, as I have read in the Charters of Edward the third.

Also I have seen and read an Inscription fixed on a stone Cross, sometime
standing in the same Churchyard and having these words:

Anno Domini, 1349. Regnante magna pestilentia, consecratum fuit hoc
Coemiterium, in quo and infra septa praesentis Monasterii, sepulta fuerunt
mortuorum corpora, plusquam quinquaginta millia, praeter alia multa abhinc
usque ad praesens, quorum animabus propitietur Deus, Amen.

In consideration of the number of Christian people here buried, the said Sir
Walter Manny caused first a Chapel to be builded, where (for the space of
twenty three years) offerings were made: and it is to be noted, that above
100000. bodies of Christian people had in that Churchyard been buried, for
the said Knight had purchased that place for the burial of poor people, Bull
of Pope Clement.
Travailers, and other that were diseased, Charter House.
to remain for ever; whereupon, an order was taken, for the avoiding of
contention between the Parsons of Churches and that house, Churchyard prepared
of the poor of poor, so to remain for ever.
to wit, that the bodies should be had unto the Church where they were
Parishioners, or dyed, and after the funeral service done, had to the place
where they should be buried.

And the year 1371. he caused there to be founded an house of Carthusian
Monks, which he willed to be called the Salutation, and that one of the Monks
should be called Prior, and he gave them the said place of 13. Acres and a Rod
of land, with the Chapel, and houses there builded for their habitation. He
also gave them the three Acres of land, lying without the walls on the North
part, betwixt the lands of the Abbot of Westminster, and the lands of the Prior
of Saint John; which three Acres being purchased, enclosed, and dedicated by
Ralph Stratford, Bishop of London, Use for the Fryery Cart.
as is aforeshewed, remained till our time, by the name of Pardon Churchyard,
and served for burying of such as desperately ended their lives, or were
executed for Felonies, who were fetched thither usually in a close cart, bayled
over and covered with black, having a plain white cross thwarting, and at
the fore-end a S. John's Cross without, and within a Bell ringing by shaking of
the Cart, whereby the same might be heard when it passed, and this was called
the Fryery Cart, which belonged to S. John's, and had the privilege of
Sanctuary.

In this Charter House were the Monuments of the said Sir Walter Manny, and
Margaret his wife, Marmaduke Lumley, Laurence Bromley, Knight, Sir Edward
Hederset, Knight, Sir William Manny, Knight, Dame Johan Borough, John Door,
want Water, Knight, Robert Olney, Esquire, Katharine, daughter Sir William
Babington, Knight, Blanch, daughter to Hugh Waterton, Katharine, wife to John
at Poot, daughter and heir to Richard Lacie, William Rawlin, Sir John
Lenthaine, and Dame Margaret his wife, daughter to John Fray, John Peake
Esquire, William Baron, and William Baron, Esquires, Sir Thomas Thawites
Knight, Philip Morgan, Bishop of Ely, 1434.

In the Cloystrie, Bartholomew Read, Knight, Mayor of London, buried 1505. Sir
John Popham, etc.

This Monastery, at the suppression in the 29. of Henry the 8. was valued at
642. l. 4. d. half penny yearly.

Here now I find fit time, to commend to all succeeding posterity, The worthy
remembrance of M. Thomas Sutton.
the duly deserved praises of that truly worthy (and never to be forgotten)
Gentleman, Master Thomas Sutton, the right Phoenix of Charity in our times.
This late dissolved Charter House, by West Smithfield, belonging then to the
Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Suffolk, after Lord Treasurer of England, is
sufficiently known to be a very large and goodly Mansion, beautified with
spacious Gardens, Walks, Orchards and other pleasures, I have truly set down
all this, as it was delivered me in writing by a Gentleman of good worth and
credit.
enriched with diverse dependencies of Lands and Tenements thereto belonging, and
very aptly seated for wholesome air, and many other commodities. All which
commodiousnesse of situation, and largeness of circuit, gave occasion to this
well-minded Gentleman Master Sutton, to affect that house, as the only place,
whereon to build the foundation of his Religious purpose. For, among other his
Christian determinations, he had formerly intended to build an house at
Hallingbury Bouchers in Essex, to be an Hospital for such poor men and
Children as he himself (in his life time, or future Governors for the same to
be deputed) should think fit to be lodged and relieved there: Also, for a
Schoolmasters and Usher, His first purpose at Hallingburie in Essex
to teach Children to read and write, and instruct them in the Latin and
Greek Grammar: with a Learned Divine likewise to preach the Word of God to
them all, and a Master beside, to govern all those people belonging to that
house.

To this blessed end and purpose, How he intended to t^^rme the Hospital.
he had procured (by earnest suit) power by an Act of Parliament, to build
such an Hospital in the Town of Hallingbury Bouchers, and that the same
should be named, The Hospital of King James, founded in Hallingbury in the
County of Essex, at the humble Petition, and at the only costs and charges of
Thomas Sutton, Esquire: Appointing also such Honorable, Reverend and Worthy
persons, as by the said Act of Parliament were nominated and appointed, to be
the first and instant Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Goods and Reveneues
of the said Hospital.

But afterward, upon more grounded deliberation, The Charter house more
necessary for an Hospital than Hallingbury
and finding this goodly house of the Charter House, to be much more
convenient for the purpose, than that to be builded at Hallingbury could be:
he became an earnest suitor to the Earl of Suffolk, to purchase that house
of him, acquianting his Honor with the alteration of his mind concerning
Hallingbury, and his earnest desire to make the Charter House his Hospital.
The Earl being honorably inclined to so godly a motion, the matter sustained
the less debating between them: but the price being concluded on, the bargain
and sale was assured. The sum disbursed for this purpose, amounted to 13000,
l. which was paid down in hand, before the ensealing of the Conveyance.

Then he became suitor again to his Majesty, to perform all that at the
Charter House, which he had formerly intended at Hallingbury: whereto the King
readily yielded, being graciously affected to so charitable a Work, and
granted his Letters Patents to the same effect. The first Governors appointed
by Letters Patents, of King James his Hospital, founded in the Charter House.
And the right Reverend Father in God, George, Archbishop of Canturburie,
Thomas Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of England; Robert Lord high Treasurer of
England; John the elect Bishop of London; Lancelot Bishop of Ely; Sir Edward
Coke, Knight, chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir Thomas Foster, Knight,
one of his Majesty's Justices of the Common Pleas; Sir Henry Hobard, Knight and
Baronet, Attorney general; John Overall, Deane of Paul's in London; George
Mountain, Deane of Westminster; Henry Thursby, Esquire, one of the Masters of
the Chancerie; Geffrey Nightingale, Esquire; Richard Sutton, Esquire; John Law
Gentleman; Thomas Brown, Gentleman; and the Master of the Hospital of King
James, founded in the Charter House, within the Country of Middlesex, at the
humble petition, and the only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton, Esquire,
were elected, nominated and ordained by the Kings most excellent Majesty in
his Letters Patents granted, to be the first Governors of the Lands,
Possessions, Revenues and goods of the foresaid Hospital, and continual
maintenance thereof in form following.

All his Manors and Lordships of Southminster, The lands made over by Master
Sutton for the maintenance of the said Hospital for ever, in the County of
Essex.
Norton, Little Hallingbury, alias Hallingbury Bouchers, and Much-Stanbridge,
in the County of Essex.

All those his Manors and Lordships of Bastingthorpe, alias, Bustingthorpe and
Dunnesby in the County of Lincoln.

All those his Manors and Lordships of Salthorp, In the County of Lincoln.
alias, Saltrop, alias, Haltrop, Ch^lton and Blackgrove, in the County of
Wilts. In the County of Wilts.
And also all those his Lands and pasture-grounds, called Blackgrove, Lands and
Pasture grounds in Wilts.
containing by estimation 200. Acres of pasture, with the appurtenances in
Balckgrove and Wroughton, in the said County of Wilts. In the Counties of
Cambridge, Essex and Middlesex*
And also in that his Manor of Missenden, otherwise called the Manor of
Missunden, in the Parishes of Wroughton, Lydierde and Tregose, in the said
County.

All that his Manor of Elcombe, and a Park, called Elcombe Park, in the said
County.

All that his Manor of Watelescote, alias Wiglescete, alias Wigleskete, in the
said County of Wilts.

All that his Manor of Westcote, alias, Westcete, with the appurtenances in
the said County of Wilts. And also all those his Lands and Pastures, containing
by estimation 100. Acres of Land, and 60. Acres of pasture, with the
appurtenances in Wiglescote and Wroughton, in the said County of Wilts. And all
that his Manor of Vffcote with the appurtenances. And also those his two
Messuages, and 1000. Acres of Land, 2000. Acres of Pasture, 300. Acres of
Meddowe, and 300. Acres of Wood, with the appurtenances, in Brodehinton, in the
said County of Wilts.

All those the Manors and Lordships of Camps, alias, Camps Castle, otherwise
called Castle Camps, with the appurtenances situate, lying, being, and
extending in the Counties of Cambridge and Essex, or in either of them, or
elsewhere within the Realm of England. His Manor of Balsham, in the County of
Cambridge. And all his Messuages and Lands which are in the Parishes of Hackney
and Totenham in the County of Middlesex, or in either of them. A brief
Rehearsal of the former grants.
And all and singular the Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Reversions, Services, Meddowes, Pastures, Woods, Advowsons, Patronages of
Churches, and Hereditaments of the said Thomas Sutton whatsoever, situate,
lying or being within the said County of Essex, Lincoln, Wilts, Cambridge and
Middlesex, or in any of them, with all and every of their rights, members and
appurtenances whatsoever.

Except all his Manors or Lordships of Littlebury and Haddestocke, Exceptions.
with their appurtenances in the County of Essex.

Beside all this bounty of his Hospital, Legacies given to charitable uses.
behold what Legacies he has given to charitable uses.

To the poor people in Barwicke, 100. Marks.

To the poor of Stoke-Newington. 10. li.

To the poor Fishermen of the Town of Oastend in the Low Countries. 100. li.

To the mending of the Highways between Islington and Newington, All these
works to be done, and the moneys paid within a year after his decease.
in the County of Middlesex, 40. Marks.

To the mending of the Highways between Ashden and Walden, called Walden
lane, in the County of Essex, 100. li.

To the mending of the Highways, between great Lynton, in the County of
Cambridge, and the said Town of Wolden, 60. li. 13. s. 4. d.

Toward the mending of Horseth lane. 60. li.

To the mending of the Bridges and ordinary Highways, between Southminster
and Malden in Essex, 100. li.

To the Chamber of London, To ten poor Merchants.
1000. li. to be yearly lent to ten young Merchants, not having any great
stocks of their own. And those ten men to be appointed by the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen of the City for the time being, and the Deane of Paul's: They are
not to pay any use for the money, nor any to enjoy it above the space of one
year.

To the poor people of Hadstocke, Legades to the poor in sundry Tonnes.
20. li.

To the poor of Littlebury and Balsham, 40. li.

To the Parson and Churchwardens of Balsham, for the time being, toward the
buying a Bell, to be hanged up in the Steeple, to amend the Ring there, 20. li.

To the poor of Southminster, 20. li.

To the poor of Little Hallenbury, 20. li.

To the poor of Dunsby Com. Lincoln. 20. li.

To the poor prisoners in the prisons of Ludgate, The poor Prisoners.
Newgate, the two Compters in London, the King's Bench, and the Marshalsey, 200.
li. to be paid and divided among the same Prisoners by even and equal portions.

To the Master, His love to Learning.
Fellows and Scholars of the Corporation of Jesus College in Cambridge, 500.
Marks.

To the Master, Fellows and Scholars of the Corporation of Magdalen College
in Cambridge, 500. li.

Toward the building of his intended Hospital, To his Hospital.
Chapel and Schoole-house five thousand pounds, if he lived not to see it
performed in his life time. Beside, he has given into the Treasury or
Storehouse of the same intended Hospital, to begin their stock with, and to
defend the rights of the house 1000. l.

To every one of his Feoffees, put in trust about his intended Hospital, 26. l.
13. s. 4. d.

To the Poor of Beverley, a Close in Cottingham.

To the Poor of Lincoln, a remainder of years in the Rectory of Glentham,
Com. Lincoln.

To Master Hutton, Vicar of Littlebury, 20. l.

To the Poor of Camps Castle, 10. l.

To the Poor of Elcombe, 10. l.

To M. Flood, Parson of Newington, 13. l. 6. s. 8. d.

To the Poor of the Parish of Hackney. 10. pounds.

His Hospital consisting of a Master, Governor, a Preacher, a Free-Schoole,
with a Master and Usher, 80. poor people, and 40. Scholars, maintained with
sufficient clothing, meat, drink, lodging and wages: The whole number in the
house, with the attenda^te, in 180.
beside Officers and ministers to attend on them, and the number to increase,
according as the Revenues upon the expiration of the Leases is increased.

This famous Hospital of King James, with the value of the Lands laid unto it,
the purchase of the House, stock laid in, and allowance toward the building:
Also, the remainder of his goods unbequeathed, his large gifts and Legacies to
diverse Honorable and worthy friends, beside, great store of far more
inferior account, The greatest and most commendable that ever was given in
England by one man, and to pious uses.
surpassing my capacity to number, and the residue of 20000. pound left to the
discretion of his Executors, may well and worthily be said to be the very
greatest and most bountiful gift, that ever at any time was given in England,
no Abbey (at the first foundation thereof) excepted, or therewith to be
compared, being the gift of one man only.

But alas, M. Sutton died before he could see his hopes take their effect.
what perpetuity is there to be expected in this life, where there is no other
certainty than of change? While all eyes stand gazing on this hopeful
intention, and every ear listening to hear when it would come to effect: that
enemy to infinite good and godly purposes, Death, takes away the worthy
Master-workeman, yet, not unprovided, as too many are; for he had his needful
occasions, befitting provision for so long a journey, readily sealed up in the
peace of a good Conscience, and that which the tyrant Death had bereft him of,
he left to the performance of his faithful Executors, Master Richard Sutton,
The Executors to M. Sutton.
and Master John Law, men of religious and upright souls, and (God be
thanked) the work is accomplished. And on the Monday after Michaelmas day,
being the third day of October, An. Dom. 1614. the Captains and Gentlemen
entered into their famous prepared Hospital; to the glory of God, honor of the
Kings most Royal Majesty, credit of the Governors, comfort of them appointed
to it, and joy of all good minds to behold it.

Thus, though no tongue or pen can either so amply express, or sufficiently
set down the great deserts of this so good and worthy a man: yet death having
given a period to his life, and laid him in a goodly Tomb, in the Chapel of
his own Hospital; there we must now leave him, with this Inscription thereon
engraven.

Sacred to the Glory of God, in grateful memory of Thomas Sutton, Esquire.
Here lies buried the body of Thomas Sutton, A very costly and beautiful
Tomb in the West side of the Quire.
late of Castle Camps, in the County of Cambridge, Esquire: at whose only
costs and charges this Hospital was founded, and endued with large possessions,
for the relief of poor men and children. He was a Gentleman, borne at
Knayth, in the County of Lincoln, of worthy and honest parentage. He lived to
the age of 79. years, and deceased the 12. day of December, An. Dom. 1611.

Master Hutton was the first Master of this Hospital, Masters that have been
of the Hospital.
according to the mind of M. Sutton.

M. Pearne was the second.

M. Hooker the third, who dyed there in his Mastership, and lies buried in the
Chapel.

M. John Law, one of M. Suttons Executors, lies also there buried in the
Chapel, and has a Monument or remembrance of him, fixed in the East wall of
the said Chapel.

An Epitaph written by a Friend to Goodness.
WHen bad men dye, the memory
remains
Of their corruptions and ungodly
ways: Intended to be hung in a fair Table by the Tomb.

As merit to their mis-applyed
pains,
Out of ill actions forming as ill
praise.
For Virtue wounded by their deep
disgrace,
Leav's Shame to their Posterity and
Race.
When good men dye, the memory remains
Of their true Virtue, and most
Christian ways;
As a due guerdon to their godly
pains,
Out of good actions forming as good
praise:
For Virtue cherished by their deeds
of grace,
Leaves Fame to their posterity and
Race.
Among those good (if goodness may
be said
To be among the seed of mortal
men)
In upright balance of true merit
weighed,
Needs must we reckon famous Sutton
then.
In whom, as in a mirror does appear.
That faith with works did shine in
him most clear.
And let us not, as is a common
use,
Measure him by a many other
more;
In death, to cover their bad life's
abuse,
To lanch out then some bounty of
their store.
No, Sutton was none such, his Hospital,
And much more else beside, speaks
him to all.
For as God blessed him with abundant
wealth,
Like to a careful Steward he employed,
it,
And ordered all things in his best
of health,
As glad to leave it, as when he enjoyed
it.
And being prepared every hour
to dye,
Disposed all his gifts most Christianly.
In Abraham's bosom sleeps he with
the blessed,
His works, they follow him, his
worth survives,
Good Angels guide him to eternal
rest,
Where is no date of time, for years
or lives.
You that are rich, do you as he has
done,
And so assure the Crown that he
has won.
FINIS.
A little without the Bars of West Smithfield, Charter House lane.
is Charterhouse lane, so called, for that it leads to the said plot of the
late dissolved Monastery, in place whereof, first the Lord North, but since,
Thomas Howard, late Duke of Norfolk, have made large and sumptuous buildings,
both for lodging and pleasure. Conduit by the Charter House.
At the gate of this Charter House is a fair water-conduit, with two Cocks,
serving the use of the neighbors to their great commodity.

Saint John's street, from the entering this lane, is also (on both sides)
replenished with buildings, up to Clarken well. On the left hand of which
street, lies a lane called Cow Cross, Cow-Crosse.
of a Cross sometime standing there, which lane turns down to another lane
called Turne-Mill street, which stretches up to the West side of Clarken
well, and was called Turne-Mill street, for such cause as is before declared.

One other lane there is, called Saint Peter's lane, which turns from Saint
John's street to Cow-Crosse.

On the left hand also stood the late dissolved Priory of Saint John of
Jerusalem in England, Prioty of S. John of Jerusalem.
founded about the year of Christ 1100. by Jorden Briset, Baron, and Muriel
his wife near unto Clerks well, besides West Smithfield, which Briset, having
first founded the the Priory of Nuns at Clerks Well, bought of them ten
Acres of Land, giving them in exchange ten Acres of Land in his Lordship of
Welling Hall, in the County of Kent. Saint John's Church was dedicated by
Heraclius, Patriarch of the holy Resurrection of Christ at Jerusalem, in the
year 1185. and was the chief seat in England of the Religious Knights of S.
John of Jerusalem. Whose profession was (besides their daily service of God) to
defend Christians against Pagans, and to fight for the Church; using for their
habit a black upper garment, with a white Cross on the forepart thereof, and
for their good service was so highly esteemed, that when the order of Templers
was dissolved, their Lands and possessions were (by Parliament) granted unto
these, who after the loss of Jerusalem, recovered the I Will of Rhodes, from the
Turk, and there placed themselves, being called thereof (for many years)
Knights of the Rhodes, but after the loss thereof 1523. removed to the I Will of
Malta, manfully opposing themselves against the Turkish invasions.

The Rebels of Essex and of Kent 1381. set fire on this house, causing it to
burn by the space of 7. days together, not suffering any to quenchit: since
the which time, the Princes of that house have new builded both church and
houses thereunto appertaining, which Church was finished by Thomas Docwray,
late Lord Prior there, about the year 1504. as appears by the inscription
over the Gate House, yet remaining. This house at the suppression in the 32. of
Hen. the 8. was valued to dispend in lands 3385. l. 19. s. 8. d. yearly. Sir
W. Weston being then Lord Prior, died on the same 7. of May, on which the house
was suppressed, so that great yearly pensions being granted to the Knights by
the King, and namely to the Lord Prior, during his life 1000. l. but he never
received penny: The King took into his hands all the lands that belonged to
that house, and to that order wheresoever in England and Ireland, for the
augmentation of his Crown.

This Priory, Church and house of S. John was preserved from spoil or down
pulling, so long as King Henry the eight reaigned, and was employed as a
Storehouse for the Kings Toils and Tents for Hunting, and for the wars, etc.
But in the third of King Edward the sixth, the Church for the most part, to
wit, the body and side Isles, with the great Bell-tower, (a most curious piece
of workmanship, graven, gilt, and inameled, to the great beautifying of the
City, and passing all other that I have seen) was undermined and blown up
with Gunpowder, the stone thereof was employed in building of the Lord
Protectors house at the Strand. That part of the Quire which remains, with
some side Chapels, was by Cardinal Poole (in the reign of Queen Mary)
closed up at the West end, and otherwise repaired, and Sir Thomas Tresham,
Knight, was then made Lord Prior there, with restitution of some Lands; but the
same was again suppressed in the first year of Queen Elizabeth.

There was buried in this Church, Brethren of that house, and Knights of that
order, John Botell, William Bagecore, Richard Barrow, John Vauclay; Thomas
Launcelin, John Mallory, William Turney, William Hulles, Hills or Hayles, John
Wesion, Redington, William Longstrother, John, Longstrother, William Tongue, John
Wakeline. Then of other; Thomas Thornburgh, Gentleman, William West, Gent. John
Fulling, and Adam Gill, Esquires, Sir John Mortimor, and Dame Eleaner his wife,
Nicholas Silverston, William Plompton, Esquire, Margaret Tongue, and Isabell
Tongue, Walter Bellingham, alias, Ireland, K. of Arms of Ireland, Thomas Bedle,
Gent. Katharine daughter of William Plompton, Esquire, Richard Turpin, Gent.
Ione wife to Alexander Dikes, John Bottell and Richard Bottle, Esquires,
Rowland Darcy, Richard Sutton, Gent. Richard Bottill, Gent. Sir W. Harpden,
Knight, Robert Kingston, Esquire, and Margery his wife, John Roch, Richard
Cednor, Gent. Simon Mallory, 1442. William Mallory, Robert Longstrother, Ralph
Astely, William Marshall, Robert Savage, Robert Gondall, Esquire, and Margery
his wife, William Babthorpe, Baron of the Exchequer 1442.

North from the house of S. John's was the Priory of ClarkenWell, Priory of
Clarken-Well, called S. James at ClarkenWel.
so called of Clerks well adjoining, which Priory was also founded about the
year 1100. by Jorden Briset, Baron, the son of Ralph, the son of Brian
Briset: who gave to Robert a Priest, foureteen Acres of land, lying in the
field next adjoining to the said Clerks Well, thereupon to build an house of
Religious persons, which he founded to the honor of God, and the Assumption of
our Lady, and placed therein black Nuns. This Jorden Briset, gave also to that
house one piece of ground, thereby to build a Windmill upon, etc. He and
Muriell his wife were buried in the Chapter House there. More buried in this
Church, John VVikes, Esquire, and Isabel his wife, Dame Agnes Clifford, Ralph
Thimbleby, Esquire, Dame Iahan, Baronnesse of Greystocke, Dame Iahan Lady
Ferrar.

And of later time in the Parish Church, Constantius Bennet, a Greek borne, he
gave two houses, the one in Saint John's street, the other in Turnemill street,
the rents of them to be distributed in Coals every year against Christmas, to
the poor of that Parish.

Heereunder lies buried Francis White, An engraven Plate in the South wall of
the Chancell.
the 14. Son of Sir Thomas White of Southwerborne, Knight, deceased, and of
Lady Anne his wife: who dyed at his age of sixteen, the last day of February,
Anno Domini, 1566. he being their nineteenth Child.

Hic jacet Isabella Sackuill, A fair plated Stone in the Chancell.
quae fuit Priorissa nuper Prioratus de Clarkenwell, tempore dissolutionis
ejusdem Prioratus, quae fuit 21. Octobris, Anno Domini, Millesimo Quingentesimo
Septuagesimo, and An. Reg. Elizab. Dei gratia, etc. duodecimo.

Under this Stone lies the body of the good, The like stone close by it.
charitable, and virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistress Anne Blunt, daughter unto Walter
Blunt, of Blunt Hall in the Country of Stafford Esquire, and Sister unto the
right Worshipful, the Lady Paulet, deceased and to the Lady Sidenham, now
living. Which Anne died the 24. day of April, An. Domini, 1504.

Contegit hoc marmor Doctorem nomine Bellum, A fair Stone by the Communion
Table.


Qui been tum rexit Praesulis officiu^.

Moribus, ingenio, vitae pietate vigebat,

Laudatus cunctis, cultus and eloquio.

Anno Domini, 1556. die August. 11.

There is an ancient Marble Tomb in the North wall of the Chancell, A tomb
seeming of great Antiquity.
with the figure of a dead man by in his shroud: and all the plates are stolen
away, only one piece remaining, containing these words:

Hospitalitate inclytus, genere praeclarus:
There an Arms,
Hanc urna officii causu.
Here lies the body of the Lady Elizabeth Ascough, A fair plated Stone by the
Communion Table.
sometime the wife of William Dallyson, and one of the Justices of the Kings
Bench: And afterward wife to Sir Francis Ascough, Knight. The which Lady
departed this life the 6. day of December, Anno Domini, 1570.

And here also lies William Dallison, Esquire, eldest son to the said William
and Elizabeth, which William the Son deceased the 9. day of November, Anno
Domini, 1585.

Here lies the body of Francis Butler, A plated stone in the Chancell.
fourth Son of Sir John Butler, of Hatfield Woodhall in the County of Kent,
Knight. Obiit 4. Martii, 1615.

The Lady Elizabeth Barckley of the Queens Majesty's Bedchamber, A fair
Tomb in the North wall of the Chancell.
and second wife to Sir Maurice Barckley, Knight, deceased (Standard Bearer to
her Majesty, to her Father, and to her Brother) departed this life in this
Parish, the 16. day of June, An. Dom. 1585. (being 52. years old) in the faith
of Jesus Christ, and was buried in the floor under this Tomb. This Lady was
the daughter of Anthony Sonds, Esquire. She had children, two sons and one
daughter, Robert, Margaret and John.

Rogero Wood Armigero, A comely Monument in the same North wall.
Servienti ad Arma, tam Serenissimo Regi, quam honoratissimo conventui
Parliamenti. Rosa Conjunx hoc posuit amoris pii, momoriae perpetuae,
observantiae debitae, Sacrum Monumentum.

Qui legis, qui luges,
Rogerum Wood
Ne perisse putes,
superesse scias,
Extinctus extat,
peremptus perennis est,
Vivit in suorum
desideriis, in bonorum
Praeconiis,
in Coelrum gaudiis.
Obiit 18. Martii, 1609.
Aetatis suae 46.
John Palmer of Clarkenwell, A fair Monument in the South wall of the Cahncel.
Esquire, was buried here the 18. day of February, An. Dom. 1585. He married
Panclin, the daughter of Anthony Sondes of Kent, Esquire: she was also buried
in this Chancell: By whom he had issue Anthony Palmer, Elizabeth Cheiney, Jane
Thursby, and Mary Palmer. Jane Thursby had also one of her daughters here
buried, named Elizabeth.

In obitum Generosissimae, charissimaeque Elizabethae Croftes, nuper uxoris
Caroli Croftes, Armigeri: Christoph. Brook devotissimus, hoc memoriae pignus
posuit. Obiit 20. December. 1597.
GEntle beholder of these doleful
lines, A Table hanging on the wall over her grave.

With careful mutes and mournful
accents sounding,
Resolve to tears, viewing these sad
designs
Of driery sorrow, and hearts deepest
wounding.
Consuming Time, abridging worlds
desire,
Insulting death, fearful, prodigious,
strange,
Eclipsing, waxing heat of Natures
fire,
With wayning forced, and necessary
change:
Since you have done your worst to
date her days,
Whilome the worlds, now heavens
gracious ghest:
I, this sad memory of her lives
praise
Presume to write, in skillful Arts
the least.
She was descended of right gentle
blood,
Kind, courteous, affable and mild
by nature,
Modest her thoughts, her disposition
good,
Her mind Exchequers store to every
creature,
Her Conscience spotles, her Religion
pure,
Her life sincere, her study contemplation:
Her hope was heaven, with life
aye to endure,
Her faith was constant in her souls
salvation.
Her virtuous care her children to
direct,
Conformed to reason in her husbands
will:
Her bounty to her servants, friends
respect,
Desire to help, and wish no neighbor
ill.
Thrice happy then (breath-lesse) in
Tomb that lie:
Earth has but earth, thy better
part survives:
From worldly warfare, summoned
to the highest,
Whose death from life, a second life
derives.
Death life confirms, Heaven earth
unites in one:
Her life in death, and bliss when
world is done.
Here lies the body of Thomas Bedingfield, A fair plated Stone in a comely
Chapel by the Pulpi^.
Esquire, second son unto Sir Henry Beding field, Knight, late of the County
of Norf. and one of the privy Council to Queen Mary. Also this Thomas
Bedingfield, was one of the honorable band of Gentlemen Pensioners unto the
late famous Queen Eli. and Master of the Tents and Pavilions unto the most
mighty King JAMES, Monarch of Great Britain. He departed this life the 11. day
of August, An. Dom. 1613.

This Monument was made and placed here, at the cost and charges of John
Skillicorne, Esquire, being his Executor.

William Herne, a Master of defense, and yeoman of the Guard, 1580. gave Lands
and Tenements to the Clothworkers in London, they to pay yearly for ever, 14.
pound to the Church wardens of Clarken Well, and 14. l. on the Churchwardens of
S. Sepulchers, toward reparation of these Churches, and relief of the poor
men. More he gave after the death of one man, then living, 8. l. the year for
ever, to the mending of Highways.

Thomas Sackeford, Esquire, one of the Masters of Requests, gave to the poor
of that Parish 40. s. the year for ever, out of his Almes-house at Woodbridge
in Suffolk, where he is buried.

Henry Stoke, Gardener, buried there, gave 20. s. the year for ever toward
reparation of that Church.

This Priory was valued to dispend 262. l. 9. s. by year, and was surrendered
the 30. of H. the 8. Many fair houses are now builded about the Priorie,
namely, by the highway toward Iseldon.

So much of the Church which remains: for one great I Will thereof, which fell
down, serves now as a Parish Church of S. James, not only for the Tenements
and near Inhabitants, but also (as is aforesaid) for all up to Highgate,
Moswell, etc.

Near unto this Church, besides Clerks Well lane, were diverse other Wels,
namely, Skinners Well, Fags Well, Tode Well, Loders Well, Read Well, etc. now
damned up.

Now to return to Giltspurre street, where I first began with this Suburb,
there stands the Parish Church of S. Sepulcher in the Bailey, as is before
showed, from this street to Turneagaine lane by Hosier lane, Cow lane, and
Oldboorne Conduit, down Snore hill, to Oldboorne bridge, and up Oldboorne
hill, by Gold lane on the right hand, and Lither lane beyond it, to the Bars;
beyond the which Bars on the same side is Port Poole, Port poole, or Grayes
Inn lane an Inn of Court.
or Grayes Inn lane, so called of the Inn of Court, named Grayes Inn, a
goodly house there situate: by whom builded or first begun I have not yet
learned, but it seems to be since Edward the 3. time, and is a Prebend to
Paul's Church in London.

This lane is furnished with fair buildings, and many tenements on both the
sides, leading to the fields toward Highgate and Hamsted.

On the high street have ye many fair houses builded, and lodgings for
Gentlemen, Innes for Travelers, and such like, up almost (for it lacks but
little) to S. Giles in the fields: amongst the which buildings, for the most
part being very new, one passes the rest in largeness of rooms, lately
builded by a Widow, Widow Alington her building.
sometime wife to Richard Alington, Esquire, which Rich. Alington deceased in
the year 1561. And thus much for that North side of Oldboorne.

Now from Newgate on the left hand or South side, South side of Oldboorne.
lies the Old Bailey, and so down by Seacoale lane end to Oldboorne bridge, up
Oldboorne hill, by Shoo lane, and Fewters lane, to the Bars.

Beyond the Bars had ye (in old time) a Temple, Old Temple.
builded by the Templers, whose order first began in the year of Christ 1118.
the 19. of Henry the first. This Temple was left, and fell to rune since the
year 1184. when the Templers had builded them a new Temple in Fleetstreet,
near to the River of Thames. A great part of this old Temple was pulled down
but of late, in the year 1595.

Adjoining to this old Temple, The Bishop of Lincolnes Inn.
was sometime the Bishop of Lincolnes Inn, wherein he lodged when he repaired
to this City. Robert de Curars, Bishop of L. builded it about the year 1147.
I. Russel, Bishop of Lincoln, Chancellor of England, in the reign of Richard
the third, was lodged there. It has of late years belonged to the Earls of
Southhampton, Southampton house.
and therefore called Southhampton house. Agaster Roper has of late builded
much there, by means whereof, part of the ruins of the old Temple was seen to
remain, builded of Cane stone, round in form as the New Temple by Temple
Bar, and other Temples in England.

Beyond this old Temple and the Bishop of Lincolnes house, is New-streete, so
called in the reign of Henry the third, New street.
when he (of a Jews house) founded the house of Converts betwixt the old
Temple and the new.

The same street has since been called Chancery lane, New street or Chancery
lane.
by reason that King Edward the third annexed the house of Converts by Patent,
to the office of Custos Rotulorum, or Master of the Rolls, in the 15. of his
reign.

In this street, the first fair building to be noted on the East side,
Cursitors Office in Chauncery lane.
is called the Cursitors Office, builded with diverse fair lodgings for
Gentlemen, all of Brick and Timber, by Sir Nicolas Bacon, late Lord Keeper of
the great Seal.

Near unto this Cursitors Office, be diverse fair houses and large Gardens,
builded and made in a ground, sometime belonging to one great house on the
other side the street, there made by Ralph Nevill, Bishop of Chichester. This
ground he had by the gift of Henry the third, as appears.

The King granted to Ralph, Bishop of Chichester, Chauncelor, that place, with
the Garden which John ^erlirum forfeited in that street, called Newstreet,
overagainst the land of the said Bishop, in the same street, which place, with
the Garden and appurtenance, was the Kings Exchete, by the liberty of the
City of London, as it was acknowledged before the King, in his Court of the
Tower of London, in the last Pleas of the Crown of that City, Cart. 11. H. 3.

Then was the house of Converts, wherein now the Rolls of Chancery be kept.
Then the Serieants Inn, etc.

On the West side of Newstreete, Black Friars Church by Oldboorne.
toward the North end thereof, was (of old time) the Church, and house of the
preaching Friars: the which house I find that in the year of Christ 1221. the
Friars Preachers, 13. in number, came into England, and having to their Prior
one named Gilbert de Fraxineto, in company of Peter de la Roch, Bishop of
Winchester, came to Canturburie, where presenting themselves before the
Archbishop Steven, he commanded the said Prior to preach, whose Sermon he liked
so well, that ever after he loved that Order. These Friars came to London, and
had their first house without the Wall of the City by Oldboorne, near unto the
old Temple.

Hubert de Burgo, Earl of Kent burled in the Black Friars.
Earl of Kent, was a great benefactor unto these Friars, and deceasing at his
Manor of Bansted in Surrey, or after some writers, at his Castle of
Barkamsted in Hartfordshire, in the year 1242. was buried in their Church,
unto the which Church he had given his place at Westminster, which the said
Friars afterward sold to Walter Gray, Archbishop of York, and he left it to
his successors in that Sea, for ever to be their house, when they should
repair to the City of London. And therefore the same was called Yorke-place,
which name so continued, until the year, 1529. that King Henry the eight
took it from Thomas Woolsey, Cardinal and Archbishop of York, and then gave
it to name, White Hall.

Margaret, Sister to the King of Scots, Widow to Geffrey, Earl Marshall,
deceased 1244. and was buried in this Church.

In the year 1250. the Friars of this Order of Preachers, thorough
Christendom, and from Jerusalem, were by a Convocation assembled together, at
this their house by Old-boorne, Convocation of Black Friars by Oldboorne.
to entreat of their estate, to the number of 400. having meat and drink
found them of Alms, because they had no possessions of their own. The first
day the King came to their Chapter, found them meat and drink, and dined with
them. Another day the Queen found them meat and drink: afterward the Bishop
of London, then the Abbot of Westminster, of S. Albons, Waltham, and others. In
the year 1276. Gregory Rokesley, Mayor, and the Barons of London, granted and
gave to Robert Kilwarby, Archbishop of Canturburie, two lanes or ways next the
street of Baynards Castle, and the Tower of Mountfichet, to be destroyed. On
the which place the said Robert builded the late new Church, with the rest of
the Stones that were left of the said Tower. And thus the Blackfriars left
their Church and house by Oldboorne, and departed to their new. This old
Frier-house, (juxta Holboorn says the Patent) was by King Edward the first in
the sixteenth of his reign, given to Henry Lacy, Earl of Lincoln. Next to
this house of Friars, was one other great House, sometime belonging to the
Bishop of Chichester, whereof Matthew Paris writes thus:

Ralph de nova villa, Bishop of Chichesters Inn.
or Nevill, Bishop of Chichester, and Chancellor of England, sometime builded a
noble house, even from the ground, not far from the New Temple and house of
Converts, in the which place he deceased, in the year 1244.

In this place after the decease of the said Bishop, and in place of the house
of Blacke-Fryers before spoken of, Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, Constable of
Chester, and Custos of England, builded his Inn, Lincolns Inn.
and for the most part was lodged there: he deceased in this house in the
year, 1310. and was buried in the new work (whereunto he had been a great
benefactor) of Saint Paul's Church, betwixt our Lady Chapel, and Saint
Dunstanes Chapel. This Lincolnes Inn, sometime pertaining to the Bishops of
Chichester, as a part of the said great house, Lincolns Inn an Inn of Court.
is now an Inn of Court, retaining the name of Lincolnes Inn, as before, but
now lately increased with fair buildings, and replenished with Gentlemen,
studious in the Common Laws. In the reign of Henry the eight Sir Thomas
Lovell was a great builder there, especially he builded the Gatehouse and
forefront toward the East, placing thereon as well the Lacies Arms, as his
own. He caused the Lacies Arms to be cast and wrought in Lead, on the Lover
of the Hall of that house, which was in the 3. Escutcheons a Lion Rampant for
Lacie, 7. Mascules voyded for Quincie, and 3. Wheat sheaves for Chester. This
Lover being of late repaired, the said Escutcheons were left out. The rest of
that side, even to Fleetstreet, is replenishd with fair buildings.

Now the high Oldborne street, from the North end of New-streete stretches on
the left hand (in building lately framed) up to S. Giles in the field,
Hospital of S. Giles founded.
which was an Hospital, founded by Matilda the Queen, wife to Henry the
first, about the year 1117. This Hospital, says the Record of Edward the
third, the nineteenth year, was founded without the Bar, Veteris Templi
London and Conversorum.

This Hospital was founded, as a Cell to Burton Lagar of Jerusalem, as may
appear by a deed dated the four and twentieth of Henry the seventh in these
words:

Thomas Norton, Burton Lagar an Hospital in Leicester shire.
Knight, Master of Burton Lagar of Jerusalem in England, and the Brethren of
the same place, keepers of the Hospital of Saint Giles, without the Bars of
the Old Temple of London, have sold to Geffrey Kent, Citizen and Draper of
London, a message or house, with two sollars above edified in the Parish of
Alhallowes Honey lane, in West Cheap, adjoining to the West part of a Tenement,
called the Goat on the Hope, pertaining to the Drapers of London, for 31. l.

At this Hospital, S. Giles bowl.
the Prisoners, conveyed from the City of London toward Teyborne, there to be
executed for Treasons, Felonies, or other trespasses, were presented with a
great Bowl of Ale, thereof to drink at their pleasure, as to be their last
refreshing in this life.

Now without Ludgate, Suburb without Ludgate.
lies the South end of the Old Baily, then down Ludgate hill by Fleet lane,
over Fleet bridge, up Fleet street, by Shoo lane, Fewters lane, Newstreet, or
Chancerie lane, and to Shire lane by the Bar on the right hand. And from
Ludgate, on the left hand or South side, by Bridge-lane, Water-lane,
Crokers-lane Sergeants Inn, and the New Temple by the Bar, all which is of
Faringdon Ward, as is aforesaid showed.

LIBERTIES OF THE DVTCHIE OF LANCASTER.
NExt without the Bar the New Temple, Liberties of the Duchy without Temple
bar, the bounds thereof.
and Liberties of the City of London, in the Suburbs, is a Liberty pertaining
to the Duchy of Lancaster, which begins in the East, on the South side or
left hand by the River Thames, and stretches West to Ivie-bridge, where it
ends. And again, on the North side or right hand, some small distance
without Temple-barre in the high street, from a pair of Stocks there standing,
stretches one large middle row or troop of small Tenements, partly opening to
the South, partly toward the North, up West to a Stone Cross, now headless,
over against the Strand, and this is the bounds of that Liberty; which
sometime belonged to Brian Lisle, since to Peter of Savoy, and then to the
house of Lancaster, Strand street.
as shall be showed.

Henry the third, Rotum cartar. Petri Sabaud.
in the 30. year of his reign, did grant to his Uncle, Peter of Savoy, all
those houses upon the Thames, which sometimes pertained to Brain de Insula, or
Lisle, without the Walls of his City of London, in the way or street called
the Strand, to hold to him and to his heirs, yielding yearly in the
Exchequer, at the feast of Saint Michael the Archangell, three barbed Arrows
for all services. Dated at Reding, etc. This Peter of Savoy, builded the Savoy.

But first amongst other buildings, Monuments of Strand street.
memorable for greatness on the River of Thames, Excester house, so called,
for that the same belonged to the Bishops of Excester, and was their Inn or
London lodging. Who was first builder thereof, I have not read; but that Walter
Stapleton, was a great builder there, in the reign of Edward the second is
manifest: for the Citizens of London, when they had beheaded him in Cheap,
near unto the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, they buried him in a heap of
Sand or rubbiso, Excesser house, since Paget house, Lester house and Essex
house.
in his own house without Temple bar, where he had made great building.
Edmond Lacy, Bishop of Excester, builded the great Hall in the reign of Henry
the sixth, etc. The same has since been called Paget house, because William
Lord Paget enlarged and possessed it. Then Leicester house, because Robert
Dudley, Earl of Leicester, of late new builded there and then Essex house, of
the Earl of Essex lodging there.

Then West, Chapel of the Holy Ghost.
was a Chapel dedicated to the Holy Ghost, called S. Spirit, upon what
occasion founded I have not read.

Next is Milford lane down to the Thames: Mildford lane.
but why so called, I have not read as yet.

Then was the Bishop of Bathes Inn, Bishop of Bathes Inn, or Arundel house.
lately new builded (for a great part thereof) by the Lord Thomas Seamer,
Admiral, which house came sithence to be possessed by the Earl of Arundell,
and thereof called Arundell house.

Next beyond the which, on the street side, was sometime a fair Cemitorie, or
Churchyard, Parish Church of S. Mary at the Strand.
and in the same a Parish Church, called of the Nativitie of our Lady, and the
Innocents of the Strand; and of some, by mean of a Brotherhood kept there,
called of S. Vrsula at the Strand.

And near adjoining to the said Church, Chesters Inn, or Strand Inn, an Inn
of Chancery.
betwixt it and the River of Thames, was an Inn of Chancery, commonly called
Chesters Inn, (because it belonged to the Bishop of Chester,) by others named
of the situation, Strand Inn.

Then was there an house belonging to the Bishop of Landaffe: The Bishop of
Landaffe his Inn.
for I find in Record, the 4. of Edward the second, that a vacant place, lying
near the Church of our Lady at Strand, the said Bishop procured it of Thomas
Earl of Lancaster, for the enlarging of this house.

Then had ye in the high street a fair bridge, Strand bridge.
called Strand Bridge, and under it a lane or way, down to the landing place
on the bank of Thames.

Then was the Bishop of Chester (commonly called of Lichfield and Coventrie)
his Inn, Bishop of^ Chester his Inn.
or London lodging, this house was first builded by Walter Langton, Bishop of
Chester, Treasurer of England, in the reign of Edward the first.

And next unto it adjoining, was the Bishop of VVorcesters Inn: all which, to
wit, the Parish of Saint Mary at Strand, Strand Inn, Strand Bridge, with the
lane under it, the Bishop of Chesters Inn, the Bishop of VVorcesters Inn,
with all the Tenements adjoining, were by commandment of Edward, Duke of
Sommerset, Uncle to Edward the sixth, and Lord Protector, pulled down, and
made level ground, in the year 1549. In place whereof, Sommerset house
he builded that large and goodly house, now called Sommerset house.

In the high street near unto the Strand, Stone Cross at Strand.
sometime stood a Cross of Stone, against the Bishop of Coventrie or Chester
his house, whereof I read, that in the year 1294. and diverse other times, the
Justices Itinerants sat without London, at the Stone Cross overagainst the
Bishop of Coventries house, and sometime they sat in the Bishops house, which
was hard by the Strand, as is aforesaid.

Then next is the Savoy, Savoy house, first builded by Peter, Earl of Savoy
and Richmond.
so called of Peter, Earl of Savoy and Richmond, Son to Thomas Earl of Savoy,
Brother to Boniface, Archbishop of Canturbury, and Uncle unto Heleanor, wife to
King Henry the third.

He first builded this house, in the year 1245. And here is occasion offered
me, for satisfying of some deniers thereof, to prove that this Peter of Savoy
was also Earl of Savoy. Wherefore, out of a Book of the Genealogies of all
the whole house of Savoy, compiled by Phillebert Pingonio, Baron of Guzani,
remaining in the hands of William Smith, alias, Rouge dragon, Officer of Arms,
I have gathered this.

Thomas, Thomas Earl of Savoy, his Pedigree by occasion.
Earl of Savoy, had issue by Beatrix, daughter to Aimon, Earl of Geneva, 9.
Sons, and 3. Daughters: Amadis his first Son, succeeded Earl of Savoy in
the year 1253. Peter his second Son, Earl of Savoy and of Richmond, in
1298. Philip his third Son, Earl of Savoy and Burgundy, 1284. Thomas the
fourth, Earl of Flaunders, and Prince of Piemont. Boniface the eighth
Archbishop of Canturbury. Beatrix, sister to Peter, Earl of Savoy, Mother to
five Queens.
Beatrix his Daughter, married to Reymond Beringarius of Aragon, Earl of
Province and Narbone, had issue, and was Mother to five Queens. The first,
Margaret, wife to Lewis King of France; the second, Eleanor, wife to Henry the
third, King of England; the third, Sanctia, wife to Richard, King of Romans;
the fourth, Beatrix, wife to Charles, King of Naples; the fifth, Iohanna, wife
to Philip King of Navarre.

To return again to the house of Savoy: Fratrees de Monte Iovis, or Priory de
Cornuto by Have ring at the Bower.
Queen Eleanor, wife to King Henry the third, purchased this place afterward
of the Fraternity or Brethren of Mountjoy, unto whom Peter of Savoy (as it
seems) had given it, Henry Knighton.
for her son Edmond, Earl of Lancaster, as Master Camden has noted out of a
Register book of the Dukes of Lancaster. Henry Duke of Lancaster repaired, or
rather new builded it, with the charges of 52000. Marks, which money he had
gathered together at the Town of Bridgerike.

John the French King was lodged there, in the year, 1357. and also, in the
year 1363. for it was (at that time) the fairest Manor in England.

In the year, Henry Knighton.
1381. the Rebels of Kent and Essex burnt this house, unto the which there was
none in the Realm to be compared in beauty and starelinesse, (says mine
Author.) They set fire on it round about, and made proclamation, that none, on
pain to lose his head, should convert to his own use any thing that there was;
but that they should break such plate and vessel of Gold and Silver, as was
found in that house, (which was in great plenty) into small pieces, and threw
the same into the River of Thames. Precious Stones they should bruise in
mortars, Rebels more malicious than covetons, spoil all before them.
that the same might be to no use, and so it was done by them: One of their
companions they burned in the fire, because he minded to have reserved one
goodly piece of Plate.

They found there certain barrels of Gunpowder, Liber Manuscript. French.
which they thought had been Gold or Silver, and throwing them into the fire,
more suddenly than they thought, the Hall was blown up, the houses destroyed,
and themselves very hardly escaped away.

This house being thus defaced, and almost overthrown by these Rebels, for
malice they bare to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, Savoy builded for an
Hospital.
of later time came to the Kings hands, and was again raised and beautifully
builded, for an Hospital of S. John Baptist, by King Henry the seventh, about
the year 1509. For the which Hospital, retaining still the old name of Savoy,
he purchased Lands, to be employed upon the releeving of an hundred poor
people. This Hospital being valued to dispend 529. pound, fifteen shillings,
etc. by year, was suppressed the tenth of June, the seventh of Edward the
sixth: the beds, bedding, and other furniture belonging thereunto, with seven
hundred Marks of the said lands by year, he gave to the Citizens of London,
with his house of Bridewell, to the furnishing thereof, to be a Workehouse for
the poor and idle persons, Hospital of Savoy, suppressed.
and toward the furnishing of the Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwarke,
lately suppressed.

This Hospital of Savoy was again new founded, Hospital of Savoy, a new
foundation thereof.
erected, corporated and endowed with Lands by Queen Mary, the third of
November: In the fourth of her reign, one Iackson took possession, and was
made Master thereof in the same Month of November. The Ladies of the Court,
and Maidens of Honor (a thing not to be forgotten) stored the same of new with
beds, bedding, and other furniture, in very ample manner, etc. and it was by
Patent so confirmed at Westminster, the 9. of May, the 4. and 5. of Philip and
Mary.

The Chapel of this Hospital serves now as a Parish Church to the Tenements
thereof near adjoining, Parish Church of S. John in the Savoy.
and others.

The next was sometime the Bishop of Carliles Inn, which now belongs to the
Earl of Bedford, and is called Russell or Bedford house. It stretches from
the Hospital of Savoy, Bishop of Carlisle his Inn, or Bedford house.
West to Ivy Bridge; where Sir Robert Cecill, principal Secretary to Queen
Elizabeth, did then raise a large and stately house of Brick and Timber, as
also levelled and paved the highway near adjoining, to the great beautifying
of that street, and commodity of passengers. Richard the 2. in the 8. of his
reign, granted license to pave with stone the highway, called Strand street,
from Temple Bar to the Savoy, and Tole to be taken toward the charges: and
again the like was granted in the 42. of Henry the 6.

Ivy Bridge in the high street, which had a way under it, leading down to the
Thames, the like as sometime had the Strand bridge, is now taken down, but the
lane remains as before, or better, and parts the Liberty of the Duchy, and
the City of Westminster on that South side.

Now to begin again at Temple Bar over against it. In the high street, as is
before showed, is one large Middle Row of houses and small Tenements builded,
partly opening to the South, partly toward the North. Amongst the which
stands the Parish Church of S. Clement Danes, Parish Church of S. Clement
Danes.
so called, because Harolde a Danish King, and other Danes were buried there.

This Harolde, whom King Canutus had by a concubine, reigned 3. years, and was
buried at Westminster, but afterward, Hardicanutus, the lawful son of
Canutus, in revenge of a displeasure done to his mother, by expelling her out
of the Realm, and the murder of his brother Alured, Liber Chartsey.
commanded the body of Harolde to be dug out of the earth, and to be
thrown into the Thames, where it was by a Fisherman taken up and buried in
this Churchyard. But out of a fair Leager Book, sometime belonging to the
Abbey of Chartsey, in the County of Surrey is noted, as in Francis thin, after
this sort:

In the reign of King Ethelred, the Monastery of Chartsey was destroyed, 90.
Monks of that house were slain by the Danes, whose bodies were buried in a
place near to the old Monastery. W. Malmes-Danes slain at S. Clement Danes.
William Malmesburie says: They burnt the Church, together with the Monks and
Abbot; but the Danes continuing in their fury (throughout the whole lana)
desirous, at the length, to return home into Denmark, were (by the just
judgment of God) all slain at London, in a place which is called the Church
of the Danes.

This said middle row of houses, stretching West to a Stone Cross now
headless, Headless Cross by the Strand.
by or against the Strand, including the said Parish Church of Saint Clement,
is also wholly of the liberty and Duchy of Lancaster.

Thus much for the bounds and antiquities of this liberty, wherein I have
noted Parish Churches twain, sometime 3. houses of name 6. to wit, the Savoy,
or Lancaster house, now an Hospital, Sommerset house, Essex house, Arundell
house, Bedford or Russell house, and Sir Robert Cecils house; besides of
Chesters Inn, or Strand Inn, sometime an Inn of Chancery, etc.

This liberty is governed by the Chancellor of that Duchy at this present,
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
Sir John Deckam, Knight, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Counselors. There is under him a Steward, that keeps Court and Leete for the
King, he gives the charge, and takes the oaths of every under Officer.

Then is there 4. Burgesses, and 4. Assistants to take up controversies, a
Bayliffe, which has two or three under-Bailiffes, that make arrests within
that liberty, four Constables, four Wardens, that keep the lands and Stock
for the poor, four Wardens for highwayes, a Jury or Inquest of 14. or 16. to
present defaults, four Alecunners, which look to the Affise of weights and
measures, etc. four Scavengers and a Beadle, and their common Prison is
Newgate.

There is in this liberty 50. men, which are always to be at an hours
warning, with all necessary furniture, to serve the King, as occasion shall
require. Their charge at a Fifteen is 13. s. 4. d. Thus much for the Suburb
in the liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster.

THE CITY OF WESTMINSTER, With the Antiquities, Bounds, and Liberties
thereof.
NOw touching the City of Westminster, I will begin at Temple Bar, on the
right hand or North side, and so pass up West, through a back lane or street,
wherein do stand three Innes of Chancery: Clements lane of Chancery.
the first called Clements Inn, Clements Well.
because it stands near to S. Clements Church, but nearer to the fair
fountain, called Clements Well. The second, New Inn of Chancery.
New Inn, so called as latelier made of a common Hostery, and the sign of our
Lady, an Inn of Chancery for Students then the other; namely, about the
beginning of the reign of Henry the seventh, and not so ancient as some have
supposed, to wit, at the pulling down of Strand Inn, in the reign of King
Edward the sixth, for I read, that Sir Thomas More, sometime Lord Chancellor, was
Student in this New Inn, and went from thence to Lincolnes Inn, etc.

The third is Lions Inn, Lions Inn of Chancery. Drury lane.
and Inn of Chancery also. This street stretches up unto Drury lane, so
called, for that there is a house belonging to the Family of the Druries. This
lane turns North toward S. Giles in the field. From the South end of this
lane in the high street, are diverse fair buildings, Hosteries, and houses for
Gentlemen, and men of honor, amongst the which Cecil house is one, Cecil house.
which sometime belonged to the Parson of Saint Martins in the field, and by
composition came to Sir Thomas Palmer, Knight, in the reign of Edward the
sixth, who began to build the same of brick, and Timber, very large and
spacious. But of later time, it has bin far more beautifully increased by
the late Sir William Cecill, Baron of Burghley, Lord Treasurer, and great
Counselor of the Estate.

From thence is now a continual new building of diverse fair houses, even up
to the Earl of Bedfords house, Bedford house.
lately builded nigh to Ivy bridge, and so on the North side, to a lane that
turns to the Parish Church of Saint Martins in the field, Parish Church of S.
Martin in the field.
in the liberty of Westminster. Then had ye one house, wherein sometime were
distraught and lunatike people, of what antiquity founded, or by whom I have
not read, neither of the suppression: but it was said, that sometime a King of
England, An house belonging to Bethlem.
not liking such a kind of people to remain so near his Palace, caused them
to be removed farther off, to Bethlem without Bishops gate of London, and to
that Hospital the said house by Charing Cross does yet remain.

Then is the Mewse, The Mewse by Charing Cross.
so called of the Kings Faulcons there kept by the Kings Faulconer, which of
old time was an office of great account, as appears by a Record of Richard
the 2. in the first year of his reign. Sir Simon Burley, Knight, was made
Constable for the Castles of Windsore, Wigmore, and Gilford, and of the Manor
of Kenington, The Mewse now builded for stabling of the Kings horses.
and also Master of the Kings Faulcons at the Mewse, near unto Charing cross
by Westminster: but in the year of Christ 1534. the 28. of Henry the 8. the
King having fair stabling at Lomsbury (a Manor in the farthest west part of
Oldboorne) the same was fired and burnt, with many great horses, and great
store of Hay. After which time the forenamed house, called the Mewse by Charing
cross, was new builded* and prepared for stabling of the Kings horses, in the
reign of Edward the sixth and Queen Mary, and so remains to that use: and
this is the farthest building West on the North side of that high street.

On the South side of the which street, The Bishop of Durham house.
in the liberties of Westminster (beginning at Ivy bridge) first is Durham
house, builded by Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Durham, who was made Bishop of
that Sea, in the year 1545. and late Bishop there 36. years.

Amongst matters memorable concerning this house, Iusting feast at Durham house.
this is one: In the year of Christ 1340. the 32. of Henry the 8. on May day,
a great and triumphant Iusting was holden at Westminster, which had been
formerly proclaimed in France, Flanders, Scotland and Spain, for all comers
that would undertake the Challengers of England, which were Sir John dudley,
Sir Thomas Seymer, Sir Thomas Poynings, and Sir George Carew, Knights, and
Anthony Kingston, and Richard Cromwell, Esquires. All which came into the Lists
that day richly apparelled, and their horses trapped all in white velvet; there
came against them the said day 46. Defendants, or Undertakers, viz. the Earl
of Surrey foremost, Lord William Howard, Lord Clinton, and Lord Cromwell, son
and heir to Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, and Chamberlain of England, with
other; and that day, after the Iusts were performed, the Challengers rode unto
this Durham house, where they kept open household, and feasted the King, and
Queen, with her Ladies and all the Court.

The 2. day Anthony Kingston, and Richard Cromwell were made Knights there.

The third day of May, the said Challengers did Tourney on horseback with
swords, and against them 49. Defendants: Sir John Dudley and the Earl of
Surrey running first, which at the first course lost their Gauntlets, and that
day Sir Richard Cromwell overthrew Master Palmer and his horse in the field, to
the great honor of the Challengers.

The fifth of May, the Challengers fought on foot at the Barriers, and against
the^ came 50. Defendants, which fought valiantly: but Sir Richard Cromwell
overthrew that day at the Barriers, Master Culpepper in the field; and the 6.
day the Challengers brake up their household.

In this time of their housekeeping, Pensioners.
they had not only feasted the King, Queen, Ladies and all the Court, as is
before showed: but also they cheered all the Knights and Burgesses of the common
house in the Parliament, and entertained the Mayor of London, with the Aldermen
and their wives at a dinner, etc. The King gave to every of the said
Challengers, and their heirs for ever, in reward of their valiant activity
100. marks, and a house to dwell in of yearly (...), out of the lands
pertaining to the Hospital of S. John of Jerusalem.

Now to speak somewhat of later time: A row of old Stables belonging to Durham
house.
concerning this Durham house, it was well known and observed, for how many
years, I know not, that the outward ^art belonging thereto, and standing North
from the houses, was but a low row of Stables, old, ruinous, ready to fall, and
very unsightly, in so public a passage to the Court and to Westminster. Upon
which consideration, or some more especial respect in the mind of the right
honorable, Robert, Earl of Salisbury, Lord high Treasurer of England: it
pleased him to take such order in the matter, that (at his own costs and
charges) that deformed row of Stabling was quite altered, by the erection of a
very goodly and beautiful building in stead thereof, and in the very same
place. The shape of the new ordered work, like the Royal Exchange.
Some shape of the modelling, though not in all respects alike, was after the
fashion of the Royal Exchange in London, with Sellers underneath, a walk
fairly paved above it, and Rows of Shops above, as also one beneath
answerable in manner to the other and intended for the like trades and
mysteries.

This work was not long in taking down, This goodly building erected in a
small space of time.
nor in the erection again; for the first Stone was laid on the 10. day of
June, 1608. and also was fully finished in the next ensuing November after.
Also on Tuesday, being the 10. day of April following, diverse of the upper
shops were adorned in rich and beautiful manner, with wares most curious to
please the eye; so ordered against his Majesty's coming thither, to give a
name to so good a building. On the day following, The King, Queen, etc. come
to name it Britains Bursse.
it pleased his highness, with the Queen, Prince, the Duke of York, and the
Lady Elizabeth, to come thither, attended on by many great Lords, and choice
Ladies. Concerning their entertainment there, though I was no eyewitness
thereof; yet I knew the ingenuity and mind of the Nobleman to be such, as
nothing should want to welcome so great an expectation. And therefore, what
variety of devices, pleasing speeches, rich gifts and presents as then flew
bountifully abroad, I will rather refer to your imagination, than any way
come short of, by an imperfect narration. Only this I add, that it then
pleased his most excellent Majesty, because the work wanted a name before, to
entitle it Britains Bursse or Busse.

Next beyond this Durham house, The Bishop of Norwich his house.
is another great house, sometime belonging to the Bishop of Norwich, and was
his London lodging, which now pertains to the Archbishop of York, by this
occasion: In the year 1529. when Cardinal Wolsey, Archbishop of York, was
indicted in the Praemunire, whereby King Henry the 8. was entitled to his goods
and possessions: he also seized into his hands the said Archbishops house,
commonly called York Place, and changed the name thereof into White Hall:
whereby, the Archbishops of York being dispossed, and having no house of
repair about London, Queen Mary gave unto Nicolas Heth, then Archbishop of
York, and to his successors, Suffolk house in Southwarke, lately builded by
Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, as I have showed elsewhere.

This house the said Archbishop sold, and bought the aforesaid house, of old
time belonging to the Bishops of Norwich, which (of the last purchase) is now
called York house; the L. Chancelors or L. Keepers of the great Seal of
England, have been lately there lodged.

Then was there an Hospital of S. Mary Rouncivall, Hospital of S. Mary
Rouncivall.
by Charing Cross (a Cell to the Priory and Covent of Rouncivall in Navar, in
Pampelone Dioces) where a Fraternity was founded in the fifteenth of Edward the
fourth, Hermitage with a Chapel of S. Katharine.
but now the same is suppressed, and turned into Tenements.

Near unto this Hospital was an Hermitage, Charing Cross.
with a chapel of S. Katharine, overagainst Charing Cross, which Cross
builded of stone, was of old time a fair piece of work, there made by
commandment of Edward the first, in the 21. year of his reign, in memory of
Eleanor his deceased Queen, as is before declared.

West from this Cross, Hospital of S. James.
stood sometime an Hospital of S. James, consisting of two hides of land, with
the appurtenances, in the Parish of S. Margaret in Westminster, and founded by
the Citizens of London, before the time of any man's memory, for 14. Sisters,
Maidens, that were leprous, living chastely and honestly in divine Service.

Afterward, diverse Citizens of London gave 56. l. rent thereunto, and then
were adjoined 8. Brethren to minister divine Service there.

After this also, sundry devout men of London gave to this Hospital, four
Hides of land in the field of Westminster; and in Hendon, Calcote, and Hamsted,
eight Acres of land and Wood, etc. King Edward the first confirmed those gifts,
and granted a Fair to be kept on the Eve of S. James, S. James fair for 7.
days.
the day, the morrow, and four days following, in the eighteenth of his
reign.

This Hospital was surrendered to Henry the 8. the 23. of his reign: the
Sisters being compounded with, were allowed Pensions for term of their lives,
and the King builded there a goodly Manor, annexing thereunto a Park, closed
about with a wall of brick, S. James Park.
now called S. James Park, serving indifferently to the said Manor, and to
the Manor or Palace of White Hall.

South from Charing Cross, on the right hand, are diverse fair houses, lately
builded before the Park: Tilt-yard at Westminster.
then a large Tilt-yard for Noblemen and other, to exercise themselves in
Iusting, Turneying, and fighting at Barriers.

On the left hand from Charing Cross, be also diverse fair tenements lately
builded, till ye come to a large plot of ground enclosed with brick, and is
called Scotland, Scotland, a plot of ground so called.
where great buildings have bin for receipt of the Kings of Scotland, and other
estates of that Country. For, Margaret Q. of Scots, and Sister to King Henry
the 8. had her abiding there, when she came into England, after the death of
her husband, as the K. of Scotland hand in former times, when they came to the
Parliament of England.

Then is the said White Hall, White Hall.
sometime belonging to Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent, and Iusticier of
England, who gave it to the black Friars in Oldboorne, as I have before noted,
King Henry the 8. ordained it to be called an Honor, and builded there a
sumptuous Gallerie, and a beautiful Gatehouse, thwart the high street, to S.
James Park. etc.

In this Gallerie, the Princes, with their Nobility, use to stand, or sit, and
at Windows to behold all triumphant Iustings, and other Military Exercises.

Beyond this Gallerie, on the left hand is the Garden or Orchard belonging to
the said White Hall.

On the right hand be diverse fair Tennis Courts, Tennis courts, Bowling
Alleyes, and Cockpit.
Bowling Alleyes, and a Cocke-pit, all built by King Henry the eight: and then
one other arched Gate, with a way over it, thwarting the street, from the Kings
Gardens to the said Park.

From this Gate, up Kings street, Long-ditch.
to a Bridge over Longditch (so called, S. Stephens Alley.
for that the same almost insulateth the City of Westminster) near which
Bridge, is a way leading to Canon Row, so called, for that the same belonged to
the Deane and Canons of S. Stephens Chapel, who were there lodged, as now
diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen be: whereof, one is belonging to Sir Edw. Hobbey,
one other to Ioh. Thin, Esquire, once stately builded by Anne Stanhop,
Duchess of Somerset, Mother to the Earl of Hart-ford, who now enjoys that
House. Next, a stately House, then in building by William Earl of Darby;
over against the which, is a fair House, builded by Henry Clinton, Earl of
Lincoln.

From this way, up to the Wooll-Staple, and to the high Tower, or Gate, which
enters the Palace Court, all is replenished with Buildings and Inhabitants.

Touching this Wooll-Staple, T. Clifford.
I read, that in the reign of Edward the first, the Staple being at
Westminster, the Parishioners of S. Margaret, and Merchants of the Staple,
builded of new the said Church, the great Chancell excepted, which was lately
before new builded by the Abbot of Westminster. Record.


Moreover, No Silver to be tra^sported.
that Edward the third, in the 17. of his reign, decreed, that no Silver be
carried out of the Realm, on pain of death: And that whosoever transported
Wool, should bring over, for every Sack, four Nobles of Silver Bullion.

In the 25. of his reign, Wooll-Staple at VV. slminster.
he appointed the Staple of Wool to be kept only at Canturbury, for the
honor of S. Thomas. But in the 27. of the same King Edward, the Staple of
Wool, before kept at Bruges in Flanders, was ordained (by Parliament) to be
kept in diverse places of England, Wales, and Ireland; as at New Castle, York,
Lincoln, Canturburie, Norwich, Westminster, Chichester, Winchester, Excester,
Bristow, Caermarden, etc. to the great benefit of the King, and loss unto
strangers and Merchants. For there grew unto the King by this means (as it was
said) the sum of a thousand, an hundred and two pounds by the year, more
than any his predecessors before had received: The Staple at Westminster, at
that time, began on the next morrow after the feast of S. Peter ad Vincula.

The next year was granted to the King by Parliament, Robert de Amesbury.
toward the recoverie of his Title in France, 50. shillings of every Sack of
Wool, transported over Seas, for the space of six year next ensuing: by
means whereof, the King might dispend daily, during those years, more than a
thousand Marks starling: For by the common opinion, there were more than an
hundred thousand Sacks of Wool yearly transported into foreign Lands; so
that during six years, the said grant extended to fifteen hundred thousand
pound starling.

In the 37. of Edward the third, Staple at Callis let to farm.
it was granted unto him for two years, to take six and twenty shillings
eight pence upon every Sack of Wool transported: and the same year, the
Staple of Wool (notwithstanding the Kings Oath, and other great Estates) was
ordained to be kept at Callis, and six and twenty Mercha^ts, the best and
wealthiest of all England, to be Farmers there, both of the Town and Staple,
for three years, every Merchant to have six men of Arms, and four Archers,
at the Kings cost. He ordained there also two Majors, one for the Town, and
one for the Staple, and he took for Mala capta, commonly called Maltorth, 20.
shillings. and of the said Merchants; Guardians of the Town, forty pence upon
every Sack of Wool.

In the 44. of Edward the third, Quinborough, Kingston upon Hull, and Boston,
were made Staples of Wool: which matter so much offended some, that in the
fifty of his reign, in a Parliament at London, it was complained, that the
Staple of Wool was so removed from Callis, to diverse Towns in England, Record.
contrary to the Statute, appointing, that Citizens and Merchants should keep
it there, and that the King might have the Profits and Customs, with the
excha^ge of Gold and Silver that was there made, by all the Merchants in
Christendom (esteemed to amount to eight thousand pound by year) the exchange
only: And the Citizens and Merchants so ordered the matter, that the King
spent nothing upon Soldiers; neither upon defense of the Town against the
Enemies, whereas now he spent eight thousand pound by year.

In the fifty one of Edward the third, Manuscript.
when the Staple was settled at Callis, the Major of the Staple did furnish the
Captain of the Town, upon any Rode, with an hundred Bill-men, two hundred
Arcers, of Merchants and their servants, without any wages. Frenth.


In the year 1388. the twelfth of Richard the second, Wooll-Staples at
Middleborough.
in a Parliament at Cambridge, it was ordained, that the Staple of Woolls
should be brought from Middleborough in Holland to Callis.

In the foureteenth of his reign, there was granted forty shillings upon
every Sack of Wool: and in the one and twentieth, was granted fifty
shillings upon every Sack transported by Englishmen, and three pounds by
Strangers, etc.

It seems, Staple-Merchants the most ancientst of this Realm.
that the Merchants of this Staple be the most ancient Merchants of this
Realm, and that all commodities of the Realm are Staple Merchandises by Law
and Charter, as Woolls, Leather, Wooll-fells, Lead, Tynne, Cloth, etc.

King Henry the sixth had six Woollhouses within the Staple at Westminster:
those he granted to the Deane and Canons of S. Stephen at Westminster, and
confirmed it the 21. of his reign. Thus much for the Staple have I shortly
noted. The eving lane.


And now to pass to the famous Monastery of Westminster at the very entrance
of the Close thereof, is a lane that leads toward the West, called Theeving
lane, for that thieves were led that way to the Gatehouse, while the Sanctuary
continued in force. Foundation of Westminster by Sebert a Christian King not
only in word, but in deed.


This Monastery was founded and builded by Sebert, King of the East Saxons,
upon the persuasion of Ethelbert King of Kent, who having embraced
Christianity, and being baptized by Melitus, Bishop of London, immediately (to
show himself a Christian indeed) built a Church to the honor of God and Saint
Peter, on the West side of the City of London, in a place (which because it was
overgrown with thorns, and environed with water) the Saxons called Thorney,
and now of the Monastery and West situation thereof, is called Westminster.
What further I read, concerning the first foundation of this Church, follows
in this manner:

When the Church of God first began to grow in Great Britain, Ex Sulcard.
at such time (says Sulcardus) as Antoninus Pius, The Temple of Apollo
overthrown by an Earthquake.
was Emperor of Rome, the Temple of Apollo, which was then seated on the West
side of the City of London, where now Westminster stands, fell down by the
violence of an Earthquake. Of the ruins whereof, Lucius (who was King of the
Britains, and reigned here by permission of the Romans) built a small Church
to the honor of Christ, in the year of our Lord 170. which afterward was
utterly defaced, when the heat of persecution (under Dioclesian) wasted
Britain.

This place afterward (for a long time) lay altogether neglected, King Sebert
built a Monastery in the place where the Church stood.
and not regarded, but became all overgrowne with thorns and bushes: in so
much as the English Saxons named it Thornez or Thorney; until Sebert King of
the East Saxons (or of Essex and Middlesex) who was the first that subscribed
to the worship of Christ, built in that place a Monastery to Christ and Saint
Peter, in the year of Christ 605. whereupon, partly from the situation to the
West, and partly, from the Monastery or Minster, it began to take the name of
Westminster: But afterward when this Monastery was destroyed in the furious
wars of the Danes, The Monastery destroyed by the Danes, and repaired by S.
Dunstan.
Dunstane, Archbishop of Canturbury (by the favor of King Edgar) repaired it,
and granted, and gave it to a small company of Monks.

Afterward King Edward, surnamed the Confessor, The Monastery rebuilded by K.
Edward the Confessor.
with the Tenthes of all his revenewes, built it anew, to be a place for his
own Sepulcher, and a Monastery for the Monks of S. Bennets order, and endowed
it with revenewes lying (here and there) in all places of England, and it is an
ancient Fabric and very stately. Since which time this Monastarie has bin
(and yet is) very famous, for the consecration and Coronation of the King of
England, and the burial of many of them and other great Personages, and for
the custody of the Regalia for the Coronation.

But 160. years after, A new Church builded in most goodly and beautiful
manner.
King Henry the third pulled down that ancient Fabric of King Edward, and
(with 50. years work) built a Church of a most goodly frame, with a multitude
of Marble pillars, set in comely order: whereof he himself laid the first
stone, and covered the roof with Lead, in An. 1220. which Church (afterward)
the Abbots did much enlarge to the Westward: King Henry the 7. his Chapel the
Miracle of the world.
And K. Henry the 7. in the year 1502. bestowed 14000. pounds on the East
side, where he built a Chapel of admirable beauty (which Leland calls the
Miracle of the World: for any man that sees it, may well say, that all elegancy
of worship and matter, is couched in it) to be a place of Sepulture for
himself, and all his posterity: wherein (at this day) is to be seen his own
Tomb, most gorgeous and great, made all of solid Brass.

Afterward, The alteration in the time of Henry eight.
when the Monks were expelled by K. Henry the eight, it was eftsoons
converted to diverse governements. First, A Bishop of Westminster.
it had a Deane and Prebendaries: Anon after, a Bishop, and that only one,
named Thomas Thurlbey, in Anno 1541. when the revenues of the Church were
abridged, he departed, and left it to be governed by a Deane.

Within short time after, A Nurserie for the collegiate Church of Westminster,
instituted by Queen Elizabeth.
Queen Mary brought in the Monks again, with their Abbat, who not long after,
being expulsed by Act of Parliament, Queen Elizabeth (of blessed memory)
converted it unto a Collegiate Church, or rather a Nurserie for the Church, in
the year 1560. For there she ordained (to the glory of God, and the
propagation of true Religion and good Literature) a Deane, twelve Prebendaries,
an upper Master, and an Usher for the School, forty Scholars, termed the
Queens or Kings Scholars; who (at their due times) are preferred to both the
Universities: besides Ministers, Singers, and Organists, ten Quiristers, and
twelve poor Soldiers, etc.

The first Deane then of that Foundation, The first Deane, according to the
foundation.
was Master William Bill; who being taken away within two years, had for his
successor, Master Gabriel Goodman, Doctor of Divinity: who, when he had
governed this Collegiate Church (with great commendation) the space of forty
years, died in the year of our Lord God, 160^. And then Master Lancelot
Andrews, Doctor also in Divinity, succeeded him: next, Doctor Neale; and
after him, Doctor Mountain.

Sebert was buried in this Church, with his wife Athelgoda; whose bodies, many
years after, to wit, in the reign of Richard the second (says Walsingham)
were translated from the old Church to the new, Walsingham.
and there interred.

Edgar, King of the West- Saxons, repaired this Monastery about the year of
Christ, 958. Edward, the Confessor builded it of new; whereupon T. Clifford
writes thus: T. Clifford.


Without the Walls of London (says he) upon the River of Thames, there was in
times passed a little Monastery, builded to the honor of God and S. Peter,
with a few Benedictine Monks in it, under an Abbot, serving Christ: very poor
they were, and little was given them for their relief. Here the King intended
(for that it was near to the famous City of London, and the River of Thames,
that brought in all kind of Merchandises from all parts of the world) to make
his Sepulcher: He commanded therefore, that of the tenthes of all his Rents,
the Work should be begun, in such sort, as should become the Prince of the
Apostles.

At this his commandment, the Work was nobly begun, even from the foundation,
and happily proceeded, till the same was finished: The charges bestowed, or to
be bestowed are not regarded. He granted to this Church great privileges,
above all the Churches in this Land, as partly appears by this his Charter.

(...) etc.

Edward, King, greetes William Bishop, and Leosstane and Aeliffe Portreeves,
and all my Burgesses of London, friendly: and I tell you, that I have this
given and granted to Christ and S. Peter, the holy Apostle at Westminster, full
freedom over all the land that belongs to that holy place, etc.

He also caused the Parish Church of Saint Margaret to be newly builded,
Parish Church of Saint Margaret.
without the Abbey Church of Westminster, for the ease and commodity of the
Monks, because (before that time) the Parish Church stood within the old Abbey
Church in the South I Will, somewhat to their annoyance.

King Henry the third, in the year of Christ, 1220. and in the fifth of his
reign, began the new work of our Ladies Chapel, whereof he laid the first
stone in the foundation, and in the year 1245. the walls and steeple of the old
Church (builded by King Edward) were taken down, and enlarging the same Church,
caused them to be made more comely. For the furtherance whereof, in the year
1246. the same King (devising how to extort money from the Citizens of London
toward the charges) appointed a Mart to be kept at Westminster, Matthew Paris.
the same to last fifteen days, A Mart at Westminster.
and in the mean space all trade of Merchandise to cease in the City, which
thing the Citizens were feign to redeem with two thousand pound of silver.

The work of this Church, with the houses of office, was finished to the end
of the Quire, in the year 1285. the 14. of Edward the first.

All which labor of 66. years, Westminster with the Palace burned.
was in the year 1299. defaced by a fire, kindled in the lesser Hall of the
Kings Palace, at Westminster, the same with many other houses adjoining, and
with the Queens Chamber were all consumed, the flame thereof also (being
driven with the wind) fired the Monastery, which was also consumed with the
Palace consumed.

Then was the Monastery again repaired by the Abbots of that Church, King
Edward the first and his successors, putting to their helping hands.

Edward the second appropriated unto this Church, the Patronages of the
Churches of Kelueden and Sabritswarth in Essex, in the Diocese of London.

Simon Langham Abbot (having been a great builder there in the year 1362.
gave four hundred pound to the building of the body of the Church: but
(amongst others) Abbot Islip was (in his time) a great builder there, as may
appear in the stone work, and glassewindowes of the Church. Since whose
decease, that work has stayed as he left it, unperfected, the Church and
Steeple being all of one height.

King Henry the seventh, New Chapel at Westminster.
about the year of Christ 1502. caused the Chapel of our Lady builded by
Henry the third, with a Tavern also called the White Rose near adjoining, to
be taken down: in which plot of ground on the 24. of January, the first stone
of the new Chapel, was laid by the hands of Abbot Islip, Sir Reginald Bray,
knight of the Garter, Doctor Barnes, Master of the Rolls, Doctor Wall, Chaplen
to the King, Master Hugh Aldham, Chaplen to the Countess of Darby and Richmond
(the Kings Mother) Sir Edward Stanhop, knight, and diverse other: upon the which
stone was engraven the same day and year, etc.

The charges in building this Chapel amounted to the sum of 14000. pound.
The stone for this work (as I have been informed) was brought from
Huddlestone Quarry in Yorkshire.

The Altar and Sepulcher of the same King Henry the seventh, wherein his body
rests in this his new Chapel, was made and finished in the year 1519. by
one Peter a Painter of Florence: for which he received 1000. pound sterling,
for the whole stuff and workmanship, at the hands of the Kings executors
Richard, Bishop of Winchester, Richard, Bishop of London, Thomas, Bishop of
Durham, John, Bishop of Rochester, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, Treasurer of
England, Charles, Earl of Worcester, the Kings Chamberlain, John Fineaux,
Knight, chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Robert Read, Knight, chief Justice
of the Common pleas.

This Monastery being valued to dispended by the year 3470. pounds,
Westminster a Bishops Sea.
etc. was surrendered to Henry the eight in the year 1539. Benson then Abbot,
was made the first Deane: and not long after, it was advanced to a Bishops Sea,
in the year 1541. Thomas Thurleby, being both the first and last Bishop there,
who, when he had impoverished the Church, was translated to Norwich, in the
year 1550. the fourth of Edward the sixth, and from thence to Ely, in the year
1554. the second of Queen Mary. Richard Cox, Doctor in Divinity (late
Schoolmasters to King Edward the 6.) was made Deane of Westminster, whom
Queen Mary put out, and made Doctor Weston Deane, until the year 1556. and
then he being removed from thence on the 21. of November, John Feckenham (late
Deane of Paul's) was made Abbot of Westminster, and took possession of the
same, being installed, and 14. Monks more received the habit with him that
day, of the order of S. Benedict: but the said John Feckenham, with his Monks,
enjoyed not that place fully three years: for in the year 1559. in the Month
of July, they were all put out, and Queen Elizabeth made the said Monastery a
College, instituting there a Deane, twelve Prebends, a Schoolmaster, and
Usher, 40. Scholars called commonly the Q Scholars, 12. Alms men, and so it
was called the Collegiat Church of Westminster, Westminster made a Collegiat
Church.
founded by Queen Elizabeth, who placed Doctor Bill, first Deane of that new
erection, after whom succeeded Doctor Gabriel Goodman, who governed that Church
forty years, and after him Doctor L. Andrews.

Kings and Queens crowned in this Church. Kings and Queens crowned at
Westminster.
William, surnamed Conqueror, and Matilda his wife, were the first, and since
them all other Kings and Queens of this Realm, have been there crowned.

Kings and Queens buried in this Church in order following, are these: Sebert
of the East Saxons, and Middle Saxons, Buried in the Chapel appointed for
Kings.
that is, Essex and Middlesex, King, the Son of Sledde, by Ricula, Sister to
Ethelbert, King of Kent, first King of the East Saxons: by the persuasions of
Ethelbert, received and embraced the Christian faith, and the Church of
Westminster, which then was termed Thorney; erected to blessed Saint Peter,
wherein, with his wife Athelgoda he lies buried. He dyed the last day of
July, in the year of our Redemption, 616. And 691. years after, to wit, 1307.
The Monks of Westminster translated his body out of the old Church into the new
Kings Chapel, and placed it therein a Sepulcher of Stone, at the South part
of the Lords Table, with this Epitaph:

Labilitas, brevitas
mundanae prosperitatis,
Coelica, praemia, gloria,
gaudia danda beatis
Sebertum ceytum
jure dedere satis.
Hic Rex Christicola
verax fuit hac regione,
Qui nunc coecolica
gaudet mercede coronae:
Rex humilis, docilis,
scius, and pius, inclytus iste
Solicit, nitide, tacit,
placide (bone Christ)
Vult servire tibi
perficiendo sibi.
Ornat mores, spernit
flores, lucis avarae
Gliscens multum, Christi
cultum laetificare,
Ecclesiam nimiam nimio
studio sabricavit,
Haec illaesa manus
quae fundamenta locavit.
Hic sepringentis annis
terra cumulatus,
Christi clementis
instinctibus inde levatus,
Isto sub lapide
nunc jacet ipse, vide.
Atque domum Christo,
quia mundo fecit in isto,
Nunc pro mercede coeli
requiescit in aede.
Respice mortalis,
promisso sit tibi talis:
Accipies si des,
nil capies nisi des;
Es Christo qualis,
Christus erit tibi talis.
Dapsilis esto sibi,
largus eritque tibi.
Effectus non affectus,
si reddere possis,
Debet censeri;
si nihil reddere possis,
Tunc bonus affectus
pro facto debet haberi.
Sicut de lignis per aquam
depellitur ignis;
Sic mala commissa
fiunt donando remissa.
Reddet ad usuram quod quis
dat nomine Christi,
Nam vitam puram
pro parvo dat Deus isti.


The forenamed King Sebert died the last day of July, Anno Domini, 619. Whose
wife, named Aetheloda, closed up her latest day of life before the said Sebert.
viz. the 13. day of September, Anno Domini, 615. And with her husband Sebert
(as already we have said) lies in this Church, which himself founded, in a
Tomb of Lead honorably buried.

Upon the wall by this Tomb, are these Verses painted: Hic Rex Seberte plausus,
mihi condita per te
Haec loca lustravi,
demum lustrando dicavi.
Edward, He lies also buried in the said Chapel, appointed for Kings.
King of England, for his singular piety numbered among the Confessors, was the
Son of King Aetheldred. The annual pension of four thousand pound, called
Dangelt, he remitted to the English Legates (as Matthew. West. writes) He sent
to Rome to Pope Damasus, to be absolved of a Vow which he had promised by a
journey to Rome, if he obtained his Paternall Kingdom. which Pope absolving
his said Vow, wrote back unto him, That the Expenses prepared for his
travail, he should bestow upon the poor; and a Monastery (in the honor of
Saint Peter) he should either newly build, or repair some old one. The
Legates being returned, Vlfinus, sometime a Monk, persuading, and all the
Council of the Kingdom approving, he repaired Westminster again. He died
Anno 1066. and there lies honorably interred in a Marble Tomb, checquered
with variety of beautiful colors, in the midst of the Chapel, with these
Verses:

Omnibus insignis virtutum
laudibus haeres,
Sanctus Edwardus Confessor,
Rex venerandus,
Quinto die Iani moriens
Iuper aethera scandit.
Sursum Corda.
Obiit, Anno Dom. 1065.
Editha, She lies buried at the North side of S. Edwards Tomb, in the same
Chapel*
Queen of England, Daughter to Goodwine Earl of Kent, and wife to S. Edward,
King and Confesser, a woman of singular piety and modesty, Edward her husband
(as Matthew Westminster. avoucheth) did not move this Edith by marriage rites, to
know the manners of men, but whether in hatred to her father, or love to
Chastity he did it, it remains uncertain. Some do affirm, that this holy
King was not willing to beget any heirs, that should succeed him out of a
treacherous race.

Matilda, She is buried at the South side S. Edwards Tomb in the same
Chapel.
Queen of England, Daughter to Malcolme, King of Scots, and wife to King Henry
the first, brought unto him children, William, Richard, and Mary, which
perished by shipwreck, and Maude Empress, who was wife to Henry the fifth,
Caesar Augustus, and Mother to King Henry the second. This Queen (as Will.
Malmesbury avoweth) every day in the Lent time went to Westminster, barefoot
and bare-legd, He is buried in the South side of the Chapel in a goodly
Tomb, brought out of France by his Son Edward.
and wearing a garment of hair. She died 1118. and lies without any Tomb.

Henry the third, King of England, etc. Son of King John, by Isabell,
Daughter to the Earl of Angolesme, a very pious Prince, and most hightly
commended for his virtues. In An. 1220. he began the new work of the Chapel
of our blessed Lady at Westminster, and himself laid the first Stone. And in
An. 1245. after, the Conventuall Church of B. Peter the greater, he pulled
down, and new builded it, and on the day of the Apostles Peter and Paul, he
caused it to be fully and decently built and enlarged. He gave also to the said
Church very Royal gifts, of Copes, Jewels and rich vessels, that it might
equal in riches all the Cisalpine Churches. He died, An. 1273. 11. Kalend.
December. when he had reigned fifty six years, and eighteen days: upon his
Tomb are these verses,

Tertius Henricus jacet
hic, pietatis amicus,
Ecclesiam stravit istam,
quam post renovavit,
Reddet ei munus qui regnat
trinus and unus,
Tertius Henricus
est Templi conditor hujus.
Dulce Bellum
inexpertis.
The Friend of pity
and Almes-deed,
Henry the third,
whilome of England King,
Who this Church brake,
and after his meed,
Again renewed
into this fair building;
Now rests here
which did so great a thing.
He yielded his meed
that Lord of Deity,
That as one Godreignes
in Persons three.
Edward the first, He lies in a Marble Tomb at his Fathers head in the same
Chapel.
King of England, Duke of Normandy, and Aquitaine, Lord of Ireland, Son to
King Henry the third, by Eleanor daughter to the Earl of Provence. He took
to wife Eleanor, daughter to Ferdinand the third, King of Castile, and Lions.
He warred with the Scots, won Barwicke, etc. He dyed in Anno 1308. and has
this Epitaph on his Tomb.

Mors est moesta nimis,
magnos quae jungit in imis,
Maxima mors minimis,
conjungens ultima primis:
Nullus in Orb fuit homo vivens,
nec valet esse,
Qui non morte ruit;
est hinc exire necesse.
Nobilis and fortis,
tibi tu confidere noli,
Omnia sunt mortis,
sibi subdit singula soli.
De mundi medio
magnum mors impia movit,
Anglia prae tedio satis
anxia plangere novit:
Corruit Edwardus vario
veneratus honor,
Rex nuper ut Nardus
fragrans virtutis odore,
Cord Leopardus,
invictus and absque pavore,
Ad rixam tardus,
discretus and eucharis ore,
Viribus Armorum
quasi Gigas ardua gessit,
Colla superborum Prudens
per praelia pressit,
Inter Flandrenses fortuna
sibi been favit,
Vt quoque Wallenses
and Scotos suppeditavit,
Rex bonus absque pari strenue
sua regna regebat:
Quod na tura dare potuit
bonitatis habebat,
Actio justitiae, pax regni,
sanctio legis,
Et fuga nequitiae premunt
praecordia Regis,
Gloria tota ruit,
Rege capit haec modo fossa,
Rex quandoque fuit,
nunc nil nisi pulvis and ossa:
Filius ipse Dei quem cord
colebat, and ore,
Gaudia fecit ei nullo
permista dolor.
Dum vixit Rex and valuit sua
magna potestas,
Fraus latuit, Pax magna fuit,
regnavit Honestas.


Edwardus primus Scotorum malleus hic est. Pactum serva.
Death is too doleful,
which does join
The highest estate
full low;
Which coupleth
greatest things with least,
And last
with first also.
No man has bin
in world alive,
Nor any
may there be;
Which can escape
the dint of Death,
Needs hence
depart must we.
O Noble
and victorious man,
Trust not
unto thy strengh;
For all are subject
unto Death,
And all
must hence at length.
Most cruel Fate
from worldly Stage
Has wrest
a worthy wight;
For whom all England
mourned loud.
To see
his doleful plight.
Edward is dead,
which was adorned
With diverse
graces here:
A King, or fragrant
Nardus hight
A gracious
Princely Peer.
In heart the which
was Leopard like,
Right puissant,
void of fear.
Most slow to strife,
discreet and wise,
And gracious
every where.
In Arms, a Giant
fierce and fell,
Attempting
famous facts:
Most prudent,
did subdue the proud
By feate
of Martial acts:
In Flanders,
Fortune gave to him,
By lot, right
good success:
In Wales he wanne;
the Scottish rout
With Arms
he did suppress.
This King
without his like alive
Did firmly guide
his Land:
And what good
nature could conceive,
He had it plight
at hand.
He was in Justice,
and in Peace
Excelling:
Laws took place,
Desire to chase
all wicked works,
Did hold this Kings
good Grace.
He now does lie
entombed here,
Which furthered
each good thing:
Now, naught he is
but dust and bones,
Which was
a worthy King.
The very SON of GOD,
whom erst
This King did love
right dear:
Has given to him
immortal bliss,
For his good
living here.
Otherwise:
Whilst lived this King,
by him all things
Were in most
goodly plight:
Fraud lay hid,
great Peace was kept,
And Honesty
had might. Her image lies on the Tomb in Brass richly gilded in the same
Chapel.

Eleanor, Queen of England, first wife of Edward the first, the only daughter
to Ferdinand the third, K. of Castile and Lions, by Ioane his second wife,
Heir to Guydo, Earl of Ponthieu. This Earldom of Ponthieu, by right, became
devolved to the Kings of England, by the mother to Edward the second, She
departed this life Anno Domini, 1298. and lies at the feet of Henry the
third, in a Marble Tomb, having these Verse:

Nobilis Hispani jacet
hic soror inclyta Regis,
Eximii consors
Eleanora thori,
Edwardi primi Wallorum
Principis uxor,
Cui Pater Henricus tertius
Anglus erat.
Hanc ille uxorem gnato petit:
omnie Princeps
Legati munus
suscepit ipse bono.
Alfonso fratri placuit
felix Hymenaeus,
Germanam Edwardo
nec sine dote dedit,
Dos praeclara fuit,
nec tali indigna marito,
Pontino Princeps
munere dives erat.
Femina consilio prudens,
pia, prole beata,
Auxit amicitiis,
auxit honor virum.
Disce mori.
Queen Eleanor
is here interred,
A worthy
Noble Dame:
Sister unto
the Spanish King,
Of Royal blood
and fame.
King Edwards wife,
first of that name,
And Prince of Wales
by right;
Whose father Henry,
just the third,
Was sure
an English Wight;
Who craved her wife
unto his Son:
The Prince himself
did go
On that embassage
luckily,
As chief
with many more.
This knot
of linked marriage,
Her brother
Alphonse liked,
And so'tweene Sister
and this Prince,
The marriage
up was strik'd:
The Dowry rich
and Royal was,
For such a Prince
most meet;
For Pontine was
the marriage gift,
A Dowry rich
and great.
A Woman both
in Counsel wise,
Religious, fruitful,
meek:
Who did increase
her husbands friends,
And larg'd
his honor eke.
Learn to Dye.
Edward the third, He lies buried in the South part of the Kingly Chapel,
with his figure in Brass richly gilded.
King of England, etc. Son to Edward the second, by Isabell, daughter to
Philip the fair, King of France, a most Martial man. When the brother by her
Mother dyed, no Heirs Males being left, and the French pretended their Salique
Law, which admitted much less the Female Issue to succeed: He denounced war
against them, which very sharply he pursued. Callis he conquered, recovering
Aquitaine and Normandy by his forces. John King of France, and David King of
Scots he took in war, and kept them prisoners. The Arms the Title of
France he added to his own: and when (like a Triumphant Monarch) he had
reigned fifty years, he yielded to the stroke of Death in Ann. 1377. And
these verses are annexed by the Tomb.

Hic decus Anglorum,
flos praeteritorum,
Forma futurorum,
Rex clemens, pax populorum,
Tertius Edwardus:
regni complens Iubilaeum,
Invictus Pardus,
pollens bellis Machabeus;
Prospere dum vixit
regnum pietate revixit,
Armipotens rexit:
jam Coelo Coelice Rex sit.
Tertius Edwardus
fama super aethera notus.
Pugna pro Patria.
In every part of this Tomb, The Sons and daughters of K. Edward the third.
are all the Sons and Daughters of this Kings expressed in solid Brass. On
the right side, Edward Prince of Wales; Ioane of the Tower, given in marriage
to the King of Spain; Lionel, Duke of Clarence; Edmund, Duke of York; Mary,
Duchess of Britain; and William of Hatfield. On the left side, Isabell, Lady
of Coucy; William of Windsor; John Duke of Lancaster; Blanch, of the Tower of
London; Margaret Countess of Pembrooke; and Thomas Duke of Glecester.

Of English Kings
here lies the beautiful flower,
Of all before passed,
and a mirror to them shall show;
A merciful King,
of peace conservatour;
The third Edward,
the death of whom may rue
All English men;
for he by Knighthood due
Was Libard invict,
and by feat Martial:
To worthy Macabe
in virtue perregall.
The Sword, which this most Potent and warrelike King Edward the third used in
war, is to be seen by his Tomb, weighing eighteen pound, and seven foot
in length.

Philip, She has a beautiful Tomb and her Figure in Alablaster upon it.
Queen of England, wife to Edward the third, daughter to William of Bavaria,
Earl of Henault, a woman of singular Piety, and a Mother of most Noble
Children, dyed Anno Domini, 1369. And lies at the feet of Edward her husband,
and these Verses annexed:

Gulielmi Hannonis
soboles posterma Philippa,
Hic Roseo quondam
pulchra decore jacet.
Tertius Edwardus
Rex ista conjuge laetus
Materno suasu
Nobiliumque fuit:
Frater Johannes
Comes Mavortius Heroes,
Huic illam voluit
consociare viro.
Haec junxit Flandors
conjunctio sanguinis Anglis:
In Francos venit hinc
Gallica dira leus.
Dotibus haec raris viguit
Regina Philippa,
Forma praestanti,
Religione, Fide.
Foecunda nata
est proles numerosa parenti,
Insignes peperit
magnanimosque Duces,
Oxonii posuit
studiosis optima Nutrix
Regineas aedes,
Palladiamque Scholam.
Conjux Edwardi
jacet Regina Philippa.
Disce Vivere.
Fair Philip,
William Henaults child,
And youngest
daughter dear;
Of Roseate hue,
and beauty bright,
In Tomb lies
hilled here.
Edward the third,
through Mothers will,
And Nobles
good consent,
Took her to wife,
and joyfully
With her his time
he spent.
His Brother John,
a Martial man,
And eke a
valiant Knight,
Did link this woman
to this King
In bonds of
Marriage rite.
This Match and Marriage
thus in blood,
Did bind
the Flemings sure
To Englishmen,
by which they did
The Frenchmens
wrack procure.
This Philip flowr'd
in gifts full rare,
And treasures
of the mind;
In Beauty bright,
Religion, Faith,
To all and each
most kind.
A fruitful Mother,
Philip was
Full many a Son
she bred:
And brought forth many
a worthy knight,
Hardy, and full
of dread:
A careful Nurse
to Students all;
At Oxford
she did found
Queens College; she,
Dame Pallas School,
That did her
fame resound.
Learn to live.
About this Tomb are round placed the Images of these Princes, Royal
ornaments there placed, to illustrate the beauty of the Tomb.
and their Arms to express them, as in an old Manuscript Book they were
found.

At the feet, the King of Navarre, the King of Bohemia, the King of Scotland,
the King of Sicily, and the King of Spain.

At the head, Willia Earl of Henault, father to the said Queen; John, King of
France; Edward the third, King of England, and her Husband, Lodowicke, the
Emperor; and Edward, Prince of Wales, her first begotten Son.

On the left side of the Tomb, Ione, Queen of Scotland, John of Eltham, Earl
of Cornwall; Ione, Princess of Wales; Lionel, Duke of Clarence; Isabel,
Countess of Bedford; John, Duke of Lancaster; Ione, Duchasse of Clarence;
Edmurd, Earl of Cambridge; Ione, Duchess of Lancaster, Thomas, Earl of
Buckingham.

On the right side, the Empress, mother to the said Queen; her Brother also,
Marcus Duke of Gelderland, Eleanora, Duchess of Gelderland; John, Earl of
Henault; Mary Duchess of Britain, Lodowicke, Duke of Bavaria; the Countess
of Prembrooke; Chorles, Son to the King of France, Duke of Brabant.

Henry the fifth, He lies in the uppermost part of that Kingly Chapel, with
a Statue of gilt Plates.
King of England, Son of Henry the fourth, vanquished the French in many
battles, and at length was created Regent of France. He took to wife
Katharine, daughter to Charles the sixth. He dyed, Anno Dom. 1422. And these
verses are fixed there in memory of him.

Gallorum mastix jacet
hic Henricus in urna.
Domat omnia Virtus
Pulchrum virumque suum
sociat tandem Katharina.
O merciful God,
what a Prince was this,
Which his short time
in martial Acts spent
In honor of conquest,
that wonder to me it is,
How he might compass
such deeds excellent.
And yet for that
his mind nothing deten^t,
All ghostly counsel
for his Soul to provide,
Out of this world,
ere he fatally should slide.
So though I had Tully
his eloquence,
Or of Seneca
the grave morality,
Or of Salmon
the perfect Sapience,
Or the sweet Ditties
of Dame Calliope;
Yet might I not
in Prose or other dittie,
Accordingly advance
this Prince his fame,
Or with due honor
to enhaunce the same.
Considering his acts,
whereof parcel appear
In this rude work,
with many more left out:
The time also was
less than ten year,
That he so shortly
brought all things about,
By Divine grace
furthered no doubt:
That mighty Lord he help
his ghostly Knight;
With grace and honor
to pass this worlds fight.
And to have reward
double and condign,
And first for Martial acts
by him done.
To be advanced amongst
the worthies nine,
And for his virtue used
by him eftsoone,
With many good deeds
which he on earth had done.
Above the Hierarchies,
he is (I trust) now stall'd,
That was in earth
the King of Kings called.
katharine Valois, Her body now lies in a small place by her husband unburied.
Daughter to Charles the sixth, King of France, and wife to Henry the fifth,
who (he being dead) took in marriage Owen Teudor, borne in Wales, his race
descending from King Cadwallader. Of her he begot Edmund Earl of Richmund,
Jasper, Duke of Bedford, and another that took on him a Monastical habit at
Westminster. She dyed in An. 1437. and was buried by K. Henry 5.

Hic Katharina
jacet, Francorum filia Regis
Haeres and Regni
(Carole Sexte) tui,
Henrici Quinti thalamo
bis laeta jugali,
Nam sic vir duplici
clarus honor fuit:
Iure suo Anglorum,
Katharinae jure triumphans
Francorum obtinuit jus,
decus imperii.
Grata venit laetis
felix Regina Britannis,
Perque dies celebrant
quatuor ore Deum.
Edidit Henricum gemibunda
puerpera Regem,
Cujus in imperio
Francus and Anglus erat,
Non sibi nec Regno
felici sidere natum,
Sed patri and matri
Religione parem.
Post ex Owneo Tiddero
tertia proles,
Nobilis Edmundus te
Katharina beat:
Septimus Henricus
quo non praestantior alter,
Filius Edmundi,
Gemma Britanna fuit:
Felix uxor ergo, matter,
ter filia felix,
Ast Avia haec felix
terque quaeterque fuit.
Otium fuge.
Here lies Queen Katharine
closed in grave,
The French Kings
Daughter fair,
And of thy Kingdom
(Charles the sixth,
The true
undoubted Heir.
Twice joyful wife
in marriage matched
To Henry fifth
by name:
Because, through her,
he nobled was,
And shined
in double Fame.
The King of England
by descent,
And by Queen
Katharins right:
The Realm of France
he did enjoy,
Triumphant King
of might.
A happy Queen
to Englishmen,
She came right
grateful here:
And four days space
they honored God,
With mouth
and reverend fear.
Henry the sixth
this Queen brought forth
In painful
labor plight:
In whose Empire
a Frenchman was,
And eke an
English wight.
Under no lucky
Planet borne
Unto himself
nor Throne:
But equal
with his Parents both,
In pure
Religion.
Of Owen Tedder
after this,
The next Son
Edmund was,
O Katharine,
a renowned Prince,
That did
in glory pass.
Henry the seventh,
a Britain Pearl,
A Gemme of
Englands joy:
A peerless Prince
was Edmunds Son
A good and
gracious Roy:
Therefore a happy wife
this was,
A happy
mother pure:
Thrice happy Child,
but Grandame she,
More than thrice
happy sure. His own and his wives figures are in gilt Brass curiously done
upon the Tomb.

RICHARD the second, of England and France King, Lord of Ireland, Son to
Edward Prince of Wales, by Ioane Daughter to the Earl of Kent. He made new
the hall at Westminster, and when he had reigned 22. years, Anno dom. 1399. he
was bereaved of his kingdom, by Henry of Lancaster (and not long after)
murdered, and buried at Langley among the Dominicans. Afterward, An. 1414. (as
Thomas Walsingham says) his body was brought to Westminster, and laid in a
Royal Tomb, builded of gilded brass, at the great charges of King Henry the
fifth, with theseverses added: Prudens and mundus
Richardus, jure Secundus,
Per Fatum victus,
jacet his sub marmore pictus,
Verax sermon
fuit and plenus ratione:
Corpore procerus,
animo prudens ut Homerus:
Ecclesiae favit,
elatos suppeditavit,
Quemvis prostravit
regalia qui violavit.
Obruit haereticos,
and eorum stravit amicos:
o clemens Christ,
tibi devotus fuit iste,
Votis Baptistae
salves quem protulit iste.
His jacet immiti consumptus
morte Richardus.
Fuisse Felicem
miserrimum.
Perfect and prrudent Richard,
by right the second,
Vanquished by Fortune,
Iyes here now graven in stone:
True of his word,
and thereto well resound,
Seemly in person,
and like to Homer, as one,
In worldly prudence,
and ever the Church in one
Vpheld and favored,
and casting the proud to ground,
And all that would
his royal estate confound.
Anne, She lies in the same Tomb with the King het Husband.
Queen of England, first wife to Richard the Second, Daughter to Wenceslaus,
King of Bohemia, and Emperor of the Germans, dyed in Anno 1394. and at
Westminster is buricd, having this Epitaph. Sub petralata nunc Anna
jacet tumulata,
Dum vixit mundo
Richardo nupta secundo,
Christo devota
fuit haec, facilis been nota,
Pauperibus prona
semper sua reddere dona.
Iurgia sedavit,
and praegnantes relevavit.
Corpore formosa,
vultu miti speciosa,
Praebens solamen,
viduis, aegris medicamen.
Anno milleno,
ter centum quarto nonageno,
Iulii septeno
mensis migravit amoeno.
Hoc jacet Anna
loco Britonum redimita corona,
Cui vir Richardus
jure secundus erat:
Cui pater illustris,
gnata, genero que superbus,
Romaeter felix,
induperator erat.
Winceslaus illam magna
comitante caterva,
Londinum misit laetus
eua^nsque pater:
Cujus in adventu ludi,
spectacula fiunt,
Regali pompa
regia virgo venit.
Sed bona sunt hominum
tenni pendentia filo
Reges, Reginas mors capit,
omne rapit.
Haec Regina fuit
magna de stripe Quiritum,
Omnibus illa fuit femina
chara viris.
Larga, coloratis virtutum
splendida gemmis:
Nunquam laeta parens,
nam sine prole jacet.
Forma fragilis.
Queen Anne,
Richard the Seconds wife,
Lies buried
in this place:
Adorned with
the Britains Crown,
With whom she
found much grace.
Whose Noble Sire,
of Daughter proud,
Of Son in Law,
full glad:
Of Rome, thrice happy
Emperor was
And that large
Empire had.
Winceslaus so called
by name,
Who thus
in joyful plight,
Sent her to London,
guarded well,
With valiant men
of might.
Against whose coming
Plays were made,
And sights and shows
were seen:
With Princely pomp
to gratify
This Noble
Virgin Queen.
But all men's treasures
last not long,
They hang
but on a twine
Or slender thread:
Death, Kings and Queens
Does all catch
up in fine.
This Queen
was of the Royal race
Of Romans
by descent:
Of all beloved,
most dear to most,
In honor
relucent.
Full liberal
and bountiful,
Adorned with
virtues rare:
No child she had,
but issuelesse,
She lies
without such care.
Margaret, She lies also in the Royal Chapel of Kings.
daughter and fifth child to Edward the fourth, King of England, and France,
and Lord of Ireland, and Lady Elizabeth his royal Queen and wife, was borne
the 19. day of April, Anno Dom. 1472. and dyed the 11. day of December.

Nobibitas and forma,
decorque, tenella juventus
In simul hic ista
mortis sunt condita cista,
Vt genus and nomen, sexum,
tempus quoque mortis
Noscas, cuncta tibi
manefestat margo sepulchri.
Thomas of Woodstocke, He lies under Marble, adorned with Brass in the
pavement by his Father
Duke of Gloucester, sixth Son to King Edward the third, a man of great
Nobility and authority; whom King Richard the second, his Nephew, suddenly and
forcibly took and sent to Callis, where endighted upon a capital cause, he
was beheaded, Anno Dom. 1397.

Ecce, nunc in pulvere dormio.

Henry, His heart is buried in the Coffin with S. Edward.
son to Richard, King of the Romans, and Earl of Cornwall, returning from
the Holy Land, while he was hearing Mass at Viterbium in Italy, by Simon and
Guydo, sons to Simon Mountfort, Earl of Leicester: He was slain in Anno
1269. His body lies buried in the Monastery of Hailes: Math. Westmonast.

Elizabeth, She lies at the feet of King Henry the third.
daughter to King Henry the seventh, is buried in a Tomb of black Marble,
having also this Inscription.

Elizabetha, illustrissimi Regis Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Henrici
Septimi, and Dominae Elizabethae Reginae serenissimae confortis suae filia and
secunda proles, quae nata fuit secundo die mensis Iulii, Anno Dom. 1492. and
obiit decimo quarto die mensis Novembris, An. Dom. 1495. Cujus animae
propitietur Deus.

Hic post fata jacet
proles Regalis in isto
Sarcophago, juvenis,
Nobilis Elizabeth,
Princeps illustris,
Henr. Sept. filia Regis,
Qui bini Regni florida
Sceptra tenet.
Atropos hanc rapuit
saevissima nunci a mortis,
Sit super in Coelo
vita perennis ei.
The Chair of the Kings of Scotland.
King Edward the first, having subdued the Scots in An. 1297. triumphantly
returned, with the Scepter and Crown of the Kings of Scots, as also the
Chair, wherein those Kings used to be crowned, In a Table hanging by are these
verses set down.
bringing it into the Church of Westminster: which Chair as yet remains in
the Royal Chapel, with Jacobs Stone, as they callit, placed in it.

Siquid habent very
vel Chronica cana fidusve,
Clauditur hac cathedra
nobilis ecce lapis.
Ad caput eximius Jacob
cuondam Patriarcha,
Quem posuit cernens
numina mira poli;
Quem tulit ex Scotis spolium
quasi victor honoris,
Edwardus primus,
Mars velut armipotens,
Scotorum domitor,
noster validissimus Hector,
Anglorum decus,
and gloria Militiae.
In the great and Kingly Chapel of King HENRY the seventh.
Henry the seventh, He lies in a small Chapel made all of richly gilded
Brass.
King of England, France, and Lord of Ireland, the first begotten Son of
Edmund, Earl of Richmund, by Margaret, daughter and heir to John, Duke of
Somerset: When he had justly deprived (both of Crown and life) Richard the
third at Bosworth: He was enstalled in the Kingdom in An. 1485. and before
he was 23. years aged, he qualified the loud and grievous garboyles,
between the Families of Lancaster and York, resting in the Lord, Anno 1509.
And in this magnificent Chapel, which he himself builded, with Elizabeth
his Queen and wife: He lies in a most glorious Tomb of solid Brass,
compossed about with these verses:

Septimus Henricus
Tumulo requiescit in isto,
Qui Regum splendour,
lumen and orbis erat.
Rex vigil, and sapiens, comis,
virtutis amator,
Egregius formae,
strenous atque potens.
Qui peperit pacem regno,
qui bella peregit
Plurima, qui victor
semper ab host redit.
Qui naras binis conjunxit
Regibus ambas,
Regibus and cunctis
foedere junctus erat.
Qui sacrum hoc struxit Templum,
statuitque sepulchrum,
Pro se, proque sua
conjuge, prole, domo.
Lustra december, atque annos tres
plus compleverat annis,
Nam tribus octenis
Regia Sceptra tulit.
Quindecies Domini
centenus fluxerat annus,
Currebat nonus,
cum venit atra dies.
Septim^^termensis
lux t^ cot^. fulgebat Aprilis,
Cum clau^lit summum
tanta corona diem.
Nulla dedere prius
tantum tibi saecula Regem
Anglia, vix similem
posteriora dabunt.
On the other side, under the Queens Image.
Hic jacet Regina Elizabetha, This Queen died in the Tower of London.
Edwardi Quarti quondam Regis filia; Edwardi Quinti Regis quondam nominati
Soror; Henrici Septimi olim Regis Conjux; atque Henrici octavi Regis matter
inclyta. Obiit autem suum diem in Turre Londoniarum die 11. Feb. Anno Domini,
1502. 37. Annorum aetate functa.

Edward the sixth, He lies at the head of his Grandfather, K. Henry the seventh.
King of England, France, and Ireland, etc. Son to King Henry the eight by
Jane Seymour, was crowned King the 28. day of January, 1546. He dyed
(over-soone) in his younger years the 6. day of July, 1553. and lies under
the Brass richly gilded Altar, most curiously wrought with good workmanship.

Mary, Queen of England, France and Ireland, She Has buried in the North part
of the great Royal Chapel.
Daughter to King Henry the eighth, by Katharine, Daughter to Ferdinand, King
of Spain, suceeded her Brother Edward, An. 1553. The Romish Religion, which
her Father and Brother had expelled, she again restored, marrying with Philip,
King of Spain: And died when she had reigned 5. years, 1558.

Elizabeth, Upon her gloriou. and goodly Tomb made by King James is this
ensuing inscription.
Queen of England, France and Ireland, Daughter to King Henry the eight, by his
second wife Anne Bullen, and Sister to Mary; succeeded her in Anno 1558. She
was a most potent Princess, and (for all virtues) to be compared with the
greatest Kings or Queens whatsoever. Having reigned 44. years, four Months,
and eight days in highest glory (to foreign admiration, and love of her own
people, England, acknowledging her rather a Mother than a commander) she
yielded her Soul to Christ both piously and contentedly, the 24. day of March,
Anno Domini. 1602.

Memoriae Sacrum.
Religione ad primaeuam sinceritatem restaurata, In the great and Royal
Chapel of King Henry the seventh.
Pace fundata, Moneta ad justum volorem reducta, Rebellione domestica
vindicata, Gallia malis intestinis praecipiti sublevata, Belgio sustentato,
Hispanica class profligata, Hibernia pulsis Hispanis, and Rebellibus ad
deditionem coactis pacata, Redditibus utriusque Academiae lege annonaria
plurimum adauctib. Tota denique Anglia Ditata, Prudentissimeque annos XLV.
administrata; Elizabetha Regina victrix, triumphatrix, pietatis studiosissima,
felicissima, placida morte septuagenaria soluta, mortales reliquias dum Christo
jubente resurgant immortales, in hac Ecclesia celeberrima ab ipsa conservata,
and denuo fundata, deposuio.

Obiit 24. Martii, Anno salutis, MDCII. Regni XLV. Aetatis LXX.
Upon the remove of her body from Richmond (where she dyed) to White Hall, by
water, these lines were written.

The Queen was brought
by water to White Hall,
At every stroke
the Oars tears let fall.
More clung about the Barge,
Bish under water
Wept out their eyes of Pearl,
and swom blind after:
I think the Barge-men
might with easier thighs,
Have rowed her thither
in her peoples eyes,
For howsoever, thus much
my thoughts have scanned,
Sh'ad come by water,
had she come by land.
Sophia, This young Infant lived not above 3. or 4. days.
daughter to JAMES, King of great Britain, borne at Greenwich, the 22. day of
June, 1606. the 3. day after ended her life, and is buried in the same
Chapel, where the Queens, Mary and Elizabeth do rest in the Lord.

Margaret, She is buried in the South part of the Chapel in a goodly
Monument.
Countess of Richmond and Darby, daughter, and only Heir to John, Duke of
Somerset, by Margaret, daughter to the Lord Bellocampe, or Beauchampe of
Powicke: first married to Edmund the Son of Owen Tedder, who begat Henry the
7. King of England; and afterward, to Thomas Stanley, Earl of Darby: Two
Colleges (namely, of Christ, and Saint John Baptist) she erected for Students
in Cambridge. She instituted also two divinity Lectures, one at Cambridge, and
the other at Oxford, etc. This Epitaph was made for her.

Aspirate meis Elegis
pia turma sororum,
Et Margaretam
collacrimate piam.
Haec sub mole latet Regis
celeberrima matter
Henrici magni,
quem locus iste fovet,
Quem locus iste sacer celebri
celebrat Polyandro,
Illius ingenitrix
hac tumulatur humo.
Cui cedat Tanaquil
(Titus hanc super astra reportet)
Cedat Penelope
charus Vlyssis amor;
Haec Abigail, velut Hester
erat pietate secunda,
En tres jam proceres
nobilitate pares:
Pro Domina precor implora,
pro Principe tanta
Flecte Deum precibus
qui legis hos aspices.
Plura refer piget,
calamus corpore rigescit,
Dormit Moecenas,
negligitur probitas:
Nec juvat aut modicum
prodest nunc ultima versu
Fata recensere
(mortua mors reor est)
Quaeris quid decus est?
decus est modo dicier hircus:
Cedit honos hirco,
cedit honorque capro.
Falleris ipse Charon,
iterum surrexit Abyron,
Et Stygios remos
despicit ille tuos. (...)
Vivitur ex voto,
mentis praecordia tangunt
Nulla sepulchra Ducum,
nec monumenta patrum,
Non Regum, non ulla
hominum labentia fato
Tempora, nec toties
mortua turba ruens.
Hinc statuo certe
periturae parcere chartae,
Seu Iuvenalis ovat
eximius Satyrus.
Margaret, She lies buried in a goodly tomb of Alabaster in the same Chapel.
Countess, of Levenox, daughter to Archibald Dowglasse, Earl of Angus, by
Margaret, Queen Dowager of Scotland, daughter to Henry the seventh, King of
England; wife also to Matthew Stuart, Earl of Levenox, to whom she brought
Henry, Lord of Darnly, father to James the sixth, King of Scotland, Charles,
Earl of Levenox, and other children that died in their younger years. She
departed this life the 10. day of March, Anno Domini, 1577. and has this
Epitaph:

Here lies the Noble Lady Margaret, Countess of Levenox, daughter and sole
heir of Archibald, Earl of Angus, by Margaret Queen of Scots his wife, that
was eldest daughter to K. Henry the 7. who bare unto Matthew, Earl of Levenox
her husband, four sons, and four daughters. This Lady had to her great
Grandfather, King Edward the fourth; to her Grandfather, King Henry the
seventh; to her Uncle, King Henry the eight; to her Cousin Germane, King Edward
the sixth, to her Brother King James, of Scotland the fifth, to her Son, King
Henry the first; and to her Grandchild, King James the sixth.

Having to her great Grandmother, and Grandmother, two Queens, both named
Elizabeth; to her Mother, Margaret Queen of Scots; to her Aunt, Mary, the
French Queen; to her Cousins Germans, Mary and Elizabeth, Queens of England;
to her Niece and Daughter in law, Mary, Queen of Scots.

Henry, second son to this Lady, was King of Scots, and father to James the
sixth, now King. This Henry was murdered at the age of 21. years: Charles her
youngest Son, was Earl of Levenox, father to the Lady Arbella, he dyed at
the age of 21. years, and is here entombed.

Charles his Son, He lies buried in the vault with his mother.
and Earl of Levenox, who took in marriage the daughter of William Cavendish,
Knight, and had Arbella to his only daughter, dyed in Anno 1576.

Henry, A child of two months old.
first Son to King Henry the 8. by Queen Katharine of Spain, lies buried
at the door of the Royal Chapel.

Queen Anne, She lies in the South part of the vestry.
wife to King Richard the third, daughter to Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick,
dyed in Anno Domini, 1484. not without suspicion of poisoning.

Anne of Cleve, She lies in a Tomb as yet not finished.
Sister to William, Duke of Cleve, and Gulich, whom King Henry the eighth
repudiated, when he took to wife Katharine Howard, died in Anno 1557. and
lies buried at the head of King Sebert.

Anne of Somerset, wife to the most Noble Prince Edward, Duke of Somerset, and
the daughter to Sir Edward Stanhop, Knight, by his wife Elizabeth, daughter to
Fulke Bourchier, Lord Fitzwaren, died the 16. of the Calends of May, Anno 1580.
etc. with this inscription on her Tomb:

Here lies intombed the Noble Duchess of Somerset, She lies in a goodly
Tomb in S. Nicholas Chapel, the Tomb being 24. foot in height.
Anne, Spouse unto that renowned Prince Edward, Duke of Somerset, Earl of
Hertford, Vicount Beauchamp, and Baron Seymour, Companion of the most famous
Knightly Order of the Garter, uncle to King Edward the sixth, Governor of his
Royal Person, and most worthy Protector of all his Realms, Dominions, and
Subjects; Lieutenant General of all his Armies, Treasurer and Earl Marshall
of England, Governor and Captain of the Isles of Garnesey and Iersey. Under
whose prosperous Conduct, glorious Victory has been so often and so
fortunately obtained at Edenborough, Leith, and Muscleborough field.

A Princess descended of Noble Lineage, being daughter to the worthy Knight,
Sir Edward Stanhop, by Elizabeth his wife, that was daughter to Sir Foulke
Bourchier, Lord Fitzwaren, from whom our Modern Earls of Bathe are sprung.
Son he was to William, Lord Fitzwaren, that was Brother to Henry Earl of
Essex, and John Lord Berners, whom William their Sire (sometime Earl of Ewe in
Normandy) begat on Anne, the sole heir of Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of
Gloucester, younger Son to the mighty Prince, King Edward the third, and of
his Wife Eleanora, coheire unto the tenth Humphrey de Bohun, that was Earl of
Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, High Constable of England.

Many children bare this Lady unto her Lord of either sort, to wit, Edward
Earl of Hertford, Henry, and younger Edward; Anne, Countess of Warwick,
Margaret, Jane, Mary, Katharine, and Elizabeth: And with firm faith in Christ,
and in a most mild manner, rendered she this life at 90. years of age, on
Easter day, the 16. of April, Anno, 1587.

The Earl of Hertford, Edward, her eldest son, in this doleful duty
careful and diligent, does consecrate this Monument to his dear Parent: not
for her Honor, wherewith (living) she did abound, and now departed,
flourishes; but, for the dutiful love he bears her, and for his last
testification thereof.

Lady Wenefrid, She lies in a fair Tomb of of Alabaster in S. Nicholas
Chapel.
Marchioness of Winchester, sprung of the worthy Family of Bruges, who first
married with Richard Sacvile, Knight, and Chancellor of the Exchequer: by her
he had Thomas, Lord Buckhurst, and the Lady Dacres of the South, beside other
children. Afterward, she married with John Powlet, Marquess of Winchester, and
at length, well in years, and a Widow, died, Anno Domini, 1586.

Hic jacet in tumulo
clarissima femina, primum
Fortunata bonis
clarisque Parentibus: illi
Solicit aetatem
tenerae flexere puellae
Ad studium verae virtutis,
and optima facta,
Externo addentes
internum lumen honori,
Post adolescentis
feliciter extitit aetas:
Cum matura, viro
veteri de stemmate nupsit,
Qui genus a proavis
long ante Trophaea Guilielmi
Normanasque acies,
patria de gente trahebat:
Quocum jucunde
transegit tempora vitae,
Donec mors illum rapuit:
post fata mariti
Moesta diu vitam
tenebris luctuque trahebat.
Sed melior tandem
viduam fortuna revisit,
Nobilitate potens ubi
Marchio amabilis illam
Connubio accepit firmo
propriaroque dicavit:
At nunc ter felix
transcendit spiritus astra,
Cumque suo regnat, coluit
quem ante omnia, Christo.
Anne, They lie buried in S. Nicholas Chapel, in a goodly Tomb.
Countess of Oxenford, Daughter to William Cecill, Baron of Bourghley, with
Mildred her Mother, in one Sepulcher, with Magnificent Collumnes of Porphyrie
and let Stone, 24. foot in height, lie buried together, which the said Baron of
Bourghley caused to be there erected.

Elizabeth Cecill, She lies at the door of the same Chapel.
Daughter of William Brook, Baron Cobham, the wife dearly affected of Robert
Cecill, Knight, one of the Privy Council to the illustrious Queen Elizabeth,
upon her Tomb has these Dialogue Verses: 1591.

Vxor.
Regina a Cameris,
Baronis filia, chari
Fida Equitis conjux
Elizabetha fui:
Vnus amor nobis,
una indivulsa voluntas,
Cor unum, una fides
inviolata fuit:
Ille mei si quando potest
deponere curam,
Ille potest animae
non memor esse suae.
Maritus.
Si lachrimis constaret amor
(charissima conjux)
Prosequere lachrimis
funera saepe tua.
Nam mihi quam fueris redamata,
tuum pia sponsa
Testatur meritum,
conscius ipse mihi:
Sed nec amor patitur
socia regnante dolere,
Et Christi major
te sibi strinxit amor.
Ergo tuo dilecta
bono cum pace fruare:
Spero mihi tecum
portio pacis erit.
A Brook by name,
the Baron Cobhams child,
A Newton was she
by her Mothers side:
Cecill her husband
this for her did build,
To prove his love
did after death abide:
Which tells unto the world
that after come,
The worlds conceit
whilst here she held a room:
How nature made her wise
and well beseeming,
Wit and condition,
silent, true and chaste:
Her virtues rare
wan her much esteeming,
In Court with Sovereign
still with favor graced.
Earth could not yield
more pleasing earthly bliss,
Blessed with two Babes,
the third brought her to this.
William of Windsore, They lie buried in Saint Edmund Chapel.
Son of King Edward the third, so called, because he was borne at Windsore
with his Sister, named Blanch of the Tower, because in the Tower of London her
Mother was delivered of her, lie both together under a Marble Tomb.

John of Eltham, Buried also in the same Chapel.
Earl of Cornwall, second Son to King Edward the second, by Isabel,
daughter to Philip le Bell, King of France: his Tomb of Alabaster is on the
left hand the door, without any inscription.

Frances, She lies buried also in the same Chapel.
Duchess of Suffolk, daughter to Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, and
Mary, Queen of France, daughter to King Henry the seventh. She was first
married to Henry Gray, Marquess Dorset, who was created Duke of Suffolk by
King Edward the sixth: And after to Adrian Stokes, Esquire, who raised this
Alabaster Monument to her living remembrance.

Anno. 1563.
Nil decus aut splendour,
nil regia nomina prosunt,
Splendida divitiis
nil juvat ampla domus.
Omnia fluxerunt,
virtutis sola remansit
Gloria, Tartareis
non abolenda rogis:
Nupta Duci prius est,
uxor post Armigeri Stokes,
Funere nunc valeas
consociata Deo.
The noble Lady Jane Seimour, She was honorably buried in the floor of the
Chapel.
daughter to the renowned Prince Edward, Duke of Sommerset, Earl of Hertford,
Vicount Beauchamp, Baron Seymour; And to the right noble Lady Anne, Duchess of
Sommerset his wife, departed this life in her Virginity, at the age of 19.
years, the 19. of March, Anno. 1560. in the second year of the most happy
reign of Queen Elizabeth-Edward, Earl of Hertford, and Baron Beauchampe, her
dear brother, caused this Monument to be made in her memory:

Ingenio praestans,
and vultu Iana decore,
Nobilis art fuit
vocis, and art manus.
Hinc Venus and Pallas
certant utra debet babere:
Vult Venus esse suam,
Pallas and esse suam:
Mors vero in virgineo
figens in pectore telum:
Neutrius (inquit) erit,
sed mihi praeda jacet.
Corpore Iana jacet,
tellurem terra subibit,
Sed pius in Coeli
spiritus arce sedet.
The Right Honorable Lady Katharine Knowles, She lies also buried in the
floor of the same Chapel.
chief Lady of the Queens Majesty's Bedchamber, and wife to Sir Francis
Knowles, Knight, Treasurer of her Highness household, departed this life the
15. day of January, 1568. at Hampton Court, and was honorably buried in the
floor of this Chapel. This Lady Knowles, and the Lord Hunsdon her brother,
were the children of William Carey, Esquire, and of the Lady Mary his wife, one
of the Daughters and heirs of Thomas Bullen, Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond:
which Lady Mary was Sister to Anne, Queen of England, wife to King, Henry the
eight, Father and Mother to Elizabeth, Queen of England.

Quae Francisce fuit tibi
conjux en Katharina,
Mortua sub gelido
marmore Knolle jacet.
Excidet ex animo tibi mortua,
sat scio nunquam,
Viva tibi vivo
semper amata fuit.
Illa tibi proles sex
and bis quinque Marito
Protulit, aequalis
foemina masque fuit,
Haec tecum multos
utinam vixisset in annos,
Et tua nunc conjux
facta fuisset anus:
Noluit at Deus, hoc voluit
sed sponsa maritum
In Coelis maneas,
o Katharina, tuum.
Here lies entombed the noble Frances, A goodly Monument is made where she is
buried in the Chapel of S. Benedict.
Countess of Hertford, dear spouse unto the noble Edward, Earl of Hertford,
and Baron Beauchampe, Son of the renowned Prince Edward, Duke of Sommerset,
Earl of Hertford, Vicount Beauchampe, and Baron Seymour. A Lady descended of
right noble lineage, being daughter of the noble Lord William, Baron Howard of
Effingham, companion of the most famous order of the Garter, High Admiral to
Queen Mary, and Lord Chamberlain of the household, and Lord Privy Seal to
Queen Elizabeth. Son was he to the right noble Prince Thomas, Duke of
Norfolk, and Earl of Surrey, Earl Marshall of England, etc.

This Lady, highly Renowned for her many virtuous gifts and graces both of mind
and body, greatly favored by her gracious Sovereign, and dearly beloved of
her Lord, after long sickness, in firm faith in Christ, and constant patience,
departed this life at 44. years of age, the 24. day of May, An. 1598. in the
40. year of the most happy reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth.

To whose memory, the said Earl her loving Lord and husband, much lamenting
her death, in testification of his great love toward her, and of his careful
diligence in this doleful duty, does consecrate this Monument.

Foy Pour Devoir. Desir N'a Repos.

Here lies the most honorable Lady Frances, She lies in a goodly Tomb of
Alabaster, and various Marbles polished, in the Chapel of S. Paul.
sometimes Countess of Sussex, daughter to Sir William Sidney of Pensehurst,
Knight, wife and Widow to that most noble, most wise, and most Martial Gent.
Thomas Ratcliffe, Earl of Sussex. A woman while she lived, adorned with many
and most rare gifts, both of mind and body; toward God truly and zealously
religious, to her friends and kinsfolks most liberal; to the poor prisoners,
to the Ministers of the Word of God always most charitable. By her last will
and Testament, she instituted a Divinity Lecture, to be read in this
Collegiate Church. And by the same her testament, gave also 5000. pound,
toward the building of a new College in the University of Cambridge, with
sufficient yearly revenue, for the continual maintenance of one Master, ten
Fellows, and 20. Scholars, either in the same College, or else in another
house in the said University already builded, commonly called Clare Hall. She
lived 58. years, and died the ninth of March, and was buried the 15. day of
April, 1589.

Misericordia and Charitate.
Beati mortui qui Domino moriuntur.
Omnia plena malis,
fert Deus unus opem,
Veni Domine Jesus, veni cite.
Pietate and Prudentia.
Fide conjugali.
Henry Carey, He lies buried in the midst of S. John Baptists Chapel, with a
goodly Monument.
Baron of Hunsdon, Lord Chamberlain of the household to Q. Elizabeth, and
allied to her in blood, Lord Governor, or Commander of the Town of Barwicke,
Knight of the noble Order of the Garter, and one of her Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, died in Anno, 1596.

Sepulturae familiae de Hunsdon Consecratum.
In Domine hic obdormit Henricus Carey, Baro de Hunsdon, villae Berwici
limitisque tam orientalis quam medii versus Scotiam olim Praefectus:
Pentionarorum Generosorum Capitaneus; Forestarum cis Trentam Iusticiarius
summus; Garteriani ordinis Eques Auratus; Dominae Reginae Camerarius; a sacris
Consiliis, eidemque consobrinus. Vna cum illo conditur uxor charissima, filia
Thomae Morgan Equitis aurati, quae plures illi liberos peperit, e quibus sunt
superstites, Georgius, Johannes, Edmundus, Robertus, equites aurati: Catharina,
Comitissa Nottinghamiae, Philadelphe, Baronissa Scroope, and Margareta, Domina
Hoby. Obiit 23. Iulii, 1596. Aetatis LXXI. Patri optimo Georgius Carey filius,
Baro de Hunsdon, ordinis Garterii Socius, Vectae Insulae Praefectus, Reginae
Elizabethae Camerarius, and a sacris consiliis: Maritoque charissimo Anna uxor,
honoris and memoriae ergo sibique and suis mortalitatis memores posuerunt.

In Australi plaga Ecclesiae.
Galfridus Chaucer, He lies buried in the South part of the Church.
Poeta celeberrimus, qui primus Anglicam Poesin ita illustravit, ut Anglicus
Homerus habeatur. Obiit 1400. Anno vero 1555. Nicholaus Brigham, Musarum nomine
hujus ossa transtulit, and illi novum tumulum ex marmore, his versibus
inscriptis posuit:

Qui fuit Anglorum Vates
ter maximus olim,
Galfridus Chaucer,
conditur hoc tumulo.
Annum si quaeras Domini,
si tempora mortis;
Ecce notae subsunt,
quae tibi cuncta notant.
25. Octobris, 1400.
Aerumnarum requies, Mors.
N. Brigham hos fecit
Musarum nomine sumptus.
Si rogitas quis fueram,
forsan te fama docebit:
Quod si fama neget,
mundi quia gloria transit,
Haec Monumenta lege.
The works of this famous Poet Geffrey Chaucer, were partly published in Print
by William Caxton, Mercer, that first brought the incomparable Art of Printing
into England; which was in the reign of King, Henry the sixth: Afterward,
increased by Master William Thin, Esquire, in the reign of King Henry the
eight. Since then, corrected and twice increased through mine own painful
labors, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, to wit, in the year, 1561. And
again, beautified with diverse ample notes, by me collected out of sundry
Records and Monuments, which I delivered to my loving and learned friend,
Master Thomas Speight. And he (having drawn them into a good form and
method, as also, explained most of the old and obscure words) published the
same work again, in Anno, 1597.

Edmundus Spencer, He lies also buried in the same South part of the Church.
Londinensis, Anglicorum Poetarum nostri saeculi facile Princeps, quod ejus
Poemata, faventibus Musis, and victuro genio conscripta comprobant. Obiit
immatura morte, Anno salutis, 1598. and prope Galfridum Chaucerum conditur, qui
felicissime poesin Anglicis literis primus illustravit. In quem haec scripta
sunt Epitaphia.

Hic prope Chaucerum
situs est Spenserius, illi
Proximus ingenio,
proximus ut tumulo.
Hic prope Chaucerum
Spensere Poeta poetam
Conderis, and versu,
quam tumulo proprior,
Anglica te vivo vixit,
plausitque Poesis;
Nunc moritura timet,
te moriente, mori.
Mary, A Magnificent Monument made by our most Royal Sovereign K. James, for
his Mother.
Queen of Scots, and Dowager of France, her body was translated from
Peterborough to Westminster, and on her Tomb are these inscriptions:

D. O. M.
Mariae Stuartae, Scotorum Reginae, Franciae Dotariae, Iacobi V. Scotorum Regis
Filiae, and haeredis unicae Henrici VII. Ang. Regis ex Margareta majori natu
filia (Iacobo IIII. Regi Scotorum matrimonio copulata) proneptis, Edwardi IIII.
Angliae Regis ex Elizabetha filiarum natu maxima abneptis, Francisci II.

Gallorum Regis conjugis, Cornae Angliae, dum vixit, certae and indubitatae
haeredis, and Iacobi Magnae Britanniae Monarchae potentissimi Matris.

Stripe vere regia and antiquissima prognata erat, maximis totius Europe
Principibus agnatione and cognatione conjuncta, and exquisitissimis animi and
corporis dotibus and ornamentis cumulatissima. Verum ut sunt variae rerum
humanarum vices, postquam annos plus minus viginti in custodia detenta,
fortiter and strenue (sed frustra cum malevolorum obtrectationibus, timidorum
suspicionibus* and inimicorum capitalium insidiis conflictata esset, tandem
inaudito and infesto Regibus exemplo securi percutitur.

Et contempto mundo, devicta morte, lassato carnifice, Christo Servatori animae
salutem, Iacobo filio spem regni and posteritatis, and universis caedis
infaustae spectatoribus exemplum patientiae co^mendans, pie, and intrepide
cervicem Regiam securi maledictae subjecit, and vitae caducae sortem cum
coelestis regni perennitate commutavit.

Vlt. Idus Februaril. Anno Christi, MDLXXXVII. Aetatis, XXXXVI.
Obruta frugifero sensim
sic cespice surgunt
Semnia, per multos
quae latuere dies.
Sanguine sancivit foedus
cum plebe Iehova,
Sanguine placabant
numina sancta patres:
Sanguine conspersi
quos praeterit ira Penates;
Sanguine signata est
quae modo credit humus.
Parce Deus, satis est,
infandos siste dolores,
Inter funestos
pervolet illa dies.
Sit Reges mactare nefas,
ut sanguine posthac
Purpureo nunquam
terra Britanna fluat.
Exemplum pereat
caesae cum vulnere Christae;
Inque malum praeceps
author and actor eat.
Si meliore sui
post mortem part triumphet,
Carnifices sileant,
tormina, claustra, cruces.
Quem dederant cursum
superi Regina peregit:
Tempora laeta Deus,
tempora dura dedit.
Edidit eximium
fato properante Iacobum;
Quem Pallas, Musae,
Delia fata colunt.
Magna viro, major natu,
sed maxima partu,
Conditur hic regum
filia, sponsa, parens.
Det Deus ut nati
and qui nascentur ab illa
Aeternos videant
hinc sine nube dies.
Although that famous and worthy HENRY, A Monument all of pure gold were too
little for a Prince of such high hope and merit.
eldest Son to our dear Sovereign Lord King JAMES, has (as yet) no Tomb
or Monument made for him there in Westminster, but lives still in the love and
memory of all true English hearts: yet this excellent Epitaph was purposely
made for him.

Reader, wonder
think it none,
To hear me sp^ake,
that am a Stone.
Here is shrin'd
Celestial dust,
And I keep it
but in trust;
Should I not
my Treasure tell,
VVonder then thou
might as well,
How this stone
could choose but break,
If it had not
learned to speak.
Hence amazed,
and ask not me,
Whose these
Sacred Ashes be.
Purposely
it is concealed,
For, if that
should be revealed,
All that read,
would by and by
Melt themselves
to tears and dye.
Another.
Within this Marble Casket lies,
A matchless Jewel of rich price,
Which Nature (in the worlds disdain)
But showed, and then shut up again.
This Church has had great privilege of Sanctuary within the precinct
thereof; Sanctuary at Westminster.
to wit, the Church, Churchyard and Close, etc. from whence it has not been
lawful for any Prince or other, to take any person that fled thither for any
cause. Which privilege was first granted by Sebert, King of the East Saxons;
since increased by Edgar, King of the West Saxons; renewed and confirmed by
King Edward the Confessor, as appears by this his Charter following:

Edward, by the grace of God, King of Englishmen: I make it to be known to
all generations of the world after me, that by especial commandment of our
holy Father Pope Leo, I have renewed, and honored the holy Church of the
blessed Apostle, Saint Peter of Westminster, and I order and establish for
ever, that what person, of what condition or estate soever he be, from
whencesoever he come, or for what offense or cause it be, either for his
refuge into the said holy place, he be assured of his life, liberty and limbs.
And over this, I forbid (under the pain of everlasting damnation) that no
Minister of mine, or of my Successors, intermeddle them with any the goods,
lands or possessions of the said persons, taking the said Sanctuary: for I have
taken their goods and livelode into my special protection; and therefore I
grant to every each of the^ (in as much as my terrestrial power may suffice)
all manner freedom of joyous liberty, and whosoever presumes or does contrary
to this my grant; I will he lose his name, worship, dignity and power, and that
with the great traitor Judas, that betrayed our Savior, he be in the
everlasting fire of hell. And I will and ordain, that this my grant endure as
long, as there remains in England either love or dread of Christian name.

More of this Sanctuary ye may read in our Histories, and also in the Statute
of Henry the eighth the 32. year.

The Parish Church of Saint Margaret, Parish Church of S. Margaret.
sometime within the Abbey, was by Edward the Confessor removed, and builded
without, for ease of the Monks.

This Church continued till the days of Edward the first, at what time the
Merchants of the Staple, and Parishioners of Westminster builded it all of new,
the great Chancell excepted, which was builded by the Abbots of Westminster,
and this remains now a fair Parish Church, In the reign of Edward the sixth.
though sometime in danger of down pulling.

In the South I Will of this Church, is a fair Marble Monument of Dame Mary
Billing, the heir of Robert Nesenham of Conington, in Huntington shire, first
married to William Coton, to whose Issue her inheritance alone descended,
remaining with Robert Cot^o at this day, heir of her and her first husbands
family. Her second husband was Sir Thomas Billing, Chief Justice of England;
and her last, whom likewise she buried, was Thomas Lacy, erecting this Monument
to the memory of her three husbands, with whose Arms she has garnished it,
and for her own burial, wherein she was interred in the year 1499.

Next to this famous Monastery, is the Kings principal Palace, of what
Antiquity it is uncertain: but Edward the Confessor held his Court there, as
may appear by the testimony of sundry; and namely, of Ingulphus, as I have
before told you. The said King had his Palace, and for the most remained there:
where he also ended his life, and was buried in the Monastery which he had
builded. It is not to be doubted, but that K. William the first, as he was
crowned there, so he builded much at this Palace, for he found it far
inferior to the building of Princely Palaces in France.

And it is manifest by the testimony of many Authors, Great Hall at
Westminster.
that William Rufus, builded the great Hall there, about the year of Christ,
Matthew Paris.
1097. Amongst others, Roger of Windover and Matthew Paris, do write, that K.
William (being returned out of Normandy into England) kept his feast of
Whitsontide very royally at Westminster in the new hall which he had lately
builded, the length whereof (say some) was 270. foot, and seventy four foot
in breadth. And when he heard men say, that this Hall was too great, he
answered and said: Liber Woodbridge.
This Hall is not big enough by the one half, and is but a Bedde-chamber, in
comparison of that I mean to make.

A diligent searcher (says Matthew Paris) might find out the foundation of the
Hall, which he had supposed to have builded, stretching from the river of
Thames, to the common high way.

This Palace was repaired about the year, Palace repaired.
1163. by Thomas Becket, IV. Fitzslepho^.
Chancellor of England, with exceeding great celerity and speed, which before
was ready to have fallen down. This has been the pricipall seat and Palace
of all the Kings of England, since the Conquest: for here have they in the
great Hall kept their Feasts, of Coronation especially, and other solemn
Feasts as at Christmas and such like most commonly. For proof whereof, I find
recorded, Record Tow.
that in the year, 1236. and the twentieth of Henry the third, on the 29. of
December, William de Haverhull, the Kings Treasurer, was commanded, that upon
the day of the Circumcision of our Lord, he should cause 6000. poor people to
be fed at Westminster, for the state of the King, The use of the great Hall was
to feed the poor.
the Queen, and their children. The weak and aged to be placed in the great
Hall, and in the lesser those were more strong and in reasonable plight: In the
Kings Chamber the children, and in the Queeues: and when the King knew the
charge, he gladly allowed it in the accounts.

In the year 1238. the same King Henry kept his Feast of Christmas at
Westminster in the great Hall, Matthew Paris great feasts in VVestmister Hall.
so did he in the year 1241. where he placed the Legate in the most honorable
place of the table; to wit, in the midst, which the Noblemen took in evil
part.

The King sat on the right hand, and the Archbishop on the left, and then all
the Prelates and Nobles, according to their estates: for the King himself did
set the guests.

The year 1242. he likewise kept his Christmas in the Hall, etc.

Also, in the year 1243. Richard, Earl of Cornwall, the Kings brother,
married Cincia, daughter to Beatrice, Countess of Provence, and kept his
marriage Feast in the great Hall at Westminster, with great royalty and company
of Noble men: in so much, that there were told (triginta millia) 30000. dishes
of meats at that dinner.

In the year 1256. King Henry sat in the Exchequer of this Hall, Henry the 3.
sat in the Exchequer, and amerced the Sheriffs.
and there set down order for the appearance of Sheriffs, and bringing in of
their accounts: there was 5. Marks set on every Sheriffs head for a fine,
because they had not distrained every person, that might dispend 15. l. land by
the year, to receive the order of Knighthood, according as the same Sheriffs
were commanded.

Also, the Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs of London, being accused of oppression
and wrongs done by them, and submitting themselves in this place before the
King, sitting then in judgment upon that matter; they were condemned to pay
their fines for their offenses committed, and further, every one of them
discharged of assise and ward.

In the years 1268. and 1269. the same King kept his Christmas Feasts at
Westminster, as before: and also in the same year 1269. he translated (with
great solemnity) the body of King Edward the Confessor, Translation of Edward
the Confessor,
into a new Chapel, at the back of the high Altar: which Chapel he had
prepared of a marvailous workmanship, bestowing a new Tomb or Shrine of gold.

And on the day of his translation, he kept a Royal Feast in the great Hall of
the Palace: Thus much for the Feasts of old time in this Hall.

We read also, Marshes about VVoolwitch drowned.
that in the year, 1236. the River of Thames overflowing the banks, caused
the Marshes about Woolwitch to be all on a Sea, wherein Boats and other
Vessels were carried with the stream, so that besides cattle, the greatest
number of men, women and children, Inhabitants there, were drowned.

In the great Palace of Westminster, Wherries rowed in Westminster Hall.
men did row with Wherries in the midst of the Hall, being forced to ride to
their chambers.

Moreover, in the year 1242. the Thames overflowing the banks about Lambith,
drowned houses and fields, by the space of 6. miles, so that in the great Hall
at Westminster, men took their horses, because the water ran over all.

This Palace was (in the year 1299. the 27. of Edward the first) burnt by a
vehement fire, T. Walsingh. Palace at Westminster burn.
kindled in the lesser Hall of the Kings house, the same with many other houses
adjoining, and with the Queens Chamber, were consumed, but after that repaired.

In the year, 1313. the 31. of Edward the first, The Kings treasury at
Westminster robbed.
the Kings treasury at Westminster was robbed, for the which Walter, Abbot of
Westminster, with 49. of his Brethren, The Abbot and Monks sent to the Tower.
and 32. other were thrown into the Tower of London, and indighted of the
robbery of an hundred thousand pound: but they affirming themselves to be
clear of the fact, and desiring the King of speedy justice, a Commission was
directed for inquiry of the truth, and they were freed.

In the year 1316. Edward the second did solemnize his Feast of Pentecost at
Westminster, Edward the 2. keeping his feasts at Westminster hall, was
presented with a complaint of not rewarding Soldiers.
in the great Hall, where sitting Royally at the table, with his Peers about
him, there entered a woman adorned like a Minstrell, sitting on a great horse,
trapped as Minstrels then used, who rode round about the tables, showing
pastime, and at length came up to the Kings table, and laid before him a
Letter, and forthwith turning her horse, saluted every one, and departed. The
Letter being opened, had these contents.

Our Sovereign Lord the King, has nothing courteously respected his Knights,
that in his Fathers time, and also in his own have put forth their persons to
diverse perils, and have utterly lost, or greatly diminished their substance,
for honor of the said King, and he has enriched abundantly such as have not
borne the weight (as yet) of the business, etc.

This great Hall was begun to be repaired in the year 1397. by Richard the
second, Great Hall at Westminster repaired.
who caused the walls, windows and roof, to be taken down, and new made, with
a stately porch, and diverse lodgings of a marvailous work, and with great
costs. All which he levied of Strangers banished, or flying out of their
Countries, who obtained license to remain in this Land by the Kings Charters,
which they had purchased with great sums of money, John Boterell being then
Clarke of the works.

This Hall being finished in the year 1399. the same King kept a most royal
Christmas there, with daily Iustings, Great feasts at Westminster Hall.
and runnings at Tilt, whereunto resorted such a number of people, that there
was every day spent twenty eight, or twenty six Oxen, and three hundred
sheep, beside foul without number.

He caused a Gown for himself to be made of Gold, To. Iuelefe.
garnished with Pearl and precious Stones, to the value of three thousand
Marks. He was guarded by Cheshire-men, and had about him commonly thirteen
Bishops, besides Barons, Knights, Esquires, and other more than needed: in so
much, that to the household came every day to meat, ten thousand people; as
appears by the messes told out from the Kitchen to three hundred Servitors.

Thus was this great Hall, for the honor of the Prince, oftentimes furnished
with ghests, not only in this Kings time (a prodigal Prince) but in the time
of other also, both before and since, though not so usaully noted. For when it
is said, the King held his Feast of Christmas, or such a Feast at Westminster;
it may well be supposed to be kept in this great Hall, as most sufficient to
such a purpose.

I find noted by Robert Fabian (sometime an Alderman of London) that King Henry
the seventh, To. Fabian.
in the ninth of his reign, King Henry the 7. feasted the Mayor of London, etc.
(holding his Royal Feast of Christmas at Westminster) on the twelfth day,
feasted Ralph Austry, then Mayor of London, and his brethren the Aldermen, with
other Commoners in great number, and after dinner, dubbed the Mayor, Knight,
caused him with his brethren, to stay and behold the disguisings and other
disports in the night following showed in the great Hall, which was richly
hanged with Atras, and staged about on both sides. Which disports being ended,
in the morning, the King, the Queen, the Ambassadors, and other Estates, being
set at a table of stone, 60. Knights and Esquires served 60. dishes to the
Kings Mess, and as many to the Queens (neigher flesh nor fish) and served the
Mayor with 24. dishes to his Mess, of the same manner, with sundry wines in
most plenteous wife.

And finally, the King and Queen being conveyed with great lights into the
Palace; the Mayor with his Company in Barges, returned and came to London, by
break of the next day. Thus much for building of this great Hall, and feasting
therein.

It moreover appears, Parliaments kept in Westminster Hall.
that many Parliaments have been kept there: for I find noted, that in the
year 1397. the great Hall at Westminster, being out of reparations; and
therefore, as it were, new builded by Richard the second (as is before showed)
the same Richard in the mean time having occasion to hold a Parliament, caused
(for that purpose) a large house to be builded in the midst of the Palace
Court, betwixt the clocke-Tower, and the gate of the old great Hall.

This house was very large and long, made of Timber, covered with Tyle, open on
both the sides, and at both the ends, that all men might see and hear what was
both said and done.

The Kings Archers (in number 4000. Cheshire men) compassed the house about
with their bows bent, I find of Record the 50. of Ed. the 3. that the
Chapter House of the Abbot of Westminster. was then the usual house for the Commons
in Parliament. Bouch of Court.
and Arrows nocked in their hands, always ready to shoot: they had Bouch of
Court (to wit, meat and drink) and great wages, of six pence by the day.

The old great Hall being new builded, Parliaments were again there kept as
before: namely, one in the year 1399. for the deposing of Richard the second.
A great part of this Palace at Westminster was once again burnt in the year,
1512. the fourth of Henry the eight; since the which time, it has not been
reedified: only the great Hall, with the offices near adjoining, are kept in
good reparations, and serves as before, for Feasts at Coronations,
Arraignements of great persons charged with treasons, keeping of the Courts of
Justice, etc. But the Princes have been lodged in other places about the City,
as at Baynards-Castell, at Bridewell, and White Hall, sometime called York
place, and sometime at S. James.

This great Hall has been the usual place of pleadings, and ministration of
Justice, whereof some what shortly I will note.

In times past, Magna Charta.
the Courts and Benches followed the King, wheresoever he went, as well since
the Conquest, as before, which thing at length being thought cumbersome,
painful, and chargeable to the people; it was in the year 1224. the 9. of
Henry the third agreed, that there should be a standing place appointed, where
matters should be heard and judged, which was in the great Hall at Westminster.
Common pleas in Westminster Hall. T. Smith.


In this Hall he ordained three judgment seats, to wit, at the entry on the
right hand, the Common Pleas, where civil matters are to be pleaded,
specially such as touch Lands or contracts. At the upper end of the Hall, on
the right hand, or South East corner, the Kings Bench, where Pleas of the
Crown have their hearing: Court of the Chancerie.
And on the left hand or Southwest corner, sits the Lord Chancellor,
accompanied with the Master of the Rolls, and other men, learned for the most
part in the Civil law, and called Masters of the Chancery, which have the
Kings fee.

The times of pleading in these Courts are four in the year, which are called
Terms.

The first is Hilarie Term, which begins the three and twentieth of
January, if it be not Sunday, and ends the twelfth of February.

The second is Easter Term, and begins seventeene days after Easterday,
and ends four days after Ascension day.

The third Term begins six or seven days after Trinity Sunday, and
ends the Wednesday fortnight after.

The fourth is Michaelmas Term, which begins the ninth of October, if it
be not Sunday, and ends the 28. of November.

And here is to be noted, Kings of this Realm have sat on the Kings Bench
in Westminster Hall.
that the Kings of this Realm have used sometimes to sit in person in the
Kings Bench: namely, King Edward the fourth, in the year, 1462. in Michaelmas
Term, sat in the Kings Bench three days together, in the open Court, to
understand how his laws were ministered and executed.

Within the Port, or entry into the Hall, on either side are ascendings up into
large Chambers, without the Hall adjoining thereunto, wherein certain Courts
be kept, Court of the Exchequer.
namely, on the right hand, is the Court of the Exchequer, a place of account,
for the revenewes of the Crown: the hearers of the account have Auditors under
them; but they which are the chief for accounts of the Prince, are called
Barons of the Exchequer, whereof one is called the Chief Baron. The greatest
officer of all, is called the High Treasurer. In this Court be heard those that
are delators, Informers.
or informers, in popular and penal actions, having thereby part of the profit
by the law assigned unto them.

In this Court, if any question be, it is determined after the order of the
Common Law of England by twelve men, and all Subsidies, Taxes and Customs, by
account: for in this office, the Sheriffs of the Shire do attend upon the
execution of the commandments of the Judges, which the Earl should do, if he
were not attending upon the Prince in the wars, or otherwise about him. For,
the Chief Office of the Earl was, to see the Kings Justice to have course,
and to be well executed in the Shire, and the Princes Revenewes to be well
answered, and brought into the Treasury.

If any Fines or Amerciaments be extracted out of any of the said Courts upon
any man, or any Arrerages of accounts of such things as is of Customs, Taxes,
and Subsidies, or other such like occasions; the same the Sheriff of the Shire
does gather, and is answerable therefore in the Exchequer.

As for other ordinary Rents of Patrimoniall Lands, and most commonly of Taxes,
Customs and Subsidies, there be particular Receivers and Collectors, which do
answer it into the Exchequer.

This Court of the Exchequer has of old time, and as I think, since the
Conquest, been kept at Westminster, notwithstanding, sometimes remooved thence
by commandment of the King, and after restored again; as namely, in the
year, one thousand two hundred and nine, King John commanded the Exchequer to
be remooved from West-minster to Northhampton, etc.

On the left hand above the staire, is the Duchy Chamber, Duchy court.
wherein is kept the Court for the Duchy of Lancaster, by a Chancellor of
that Duchy, and other there Officers under him.

Then is there in another Chamber, Office of Receipt.
the Office of the receipts of the Queens Revenewes for the Crown. Star
Chamber.


Then is there also the Star Chamber, where, in the Term time, every week
once at the least, which is commonly on Fridaies and Wednesdaies, and on the
next day after the Term ends, the Lord Chancellor and the Lords, and other
of the Privie-Councell, and the chief Justices of England, from Nine of the
Clock, till it be Eleven, do sit.

This place is called the Star Chamber, because the Roof thereof is decked
with the likeness of Stars gilt: there be plaints heard, of Ryots, Rowts,
and other misdemeanors, which if they be found by the Kings Council, the
party offender shall be censured by these persons, which speak one after
another, and he shall be both fined and commanded to prison.

Then at the upper end of the great Hall by the Kings Bench, The court of Wards
and Liveries.
is a going up to a great Chamber, called the White Hall, Court of Requests. S.
Stephens Chapel.
wherein is now kept the Court of Wards and Liveries, and adjoining thereunto
is the Court of Requests.

Then is S. Stephens Chapel, of old time founded by King Stephen, King John
in the seventh of his reign, granted to Baldwinus de London, Clarke of his
Exchequer, the Chappleship of Saint Stephens at Westminster, etc.

This Chapel was again since (of a far more curious workmanship) new
builded by King Edward the third, in the year 1347. for thirty eight persons
in that Church to serve God, to wit, a Deane, twelve secular Canons, thirteen
Vicars, four Clarks, six Chorists, two Servitors, to wit, a Verger, and a
keeper of the Chapel. He builded it for them from the house of receipt, along
nigh to the Thames, within the same Palace, there to inhabit: and since that,
there were also buildings for them, betwixt the Clock-house, and the
Wool-staple, called the Wey-house.

He also builded to the use of this Chapel (though out of the Palace Court)
some distance West, Little Sanctuary.
in the little Sanctuary, a strong Clochard of Stone and Timber, covered with
Lead, and placed therein three great Bells, since usually rung at Coronations,
Triumphs, Funerals of Princes, and their Obits. Of those Bells men fabuled, that
their ringing sowred all the drink in the Town. More, that about the biggest
Bell was written:

King Edward made me
thirty thousand and three,
Take me down and weigh me,
and more shall ye find me.
But these Bells being taken down indeed, were found all three not to weigh
twenty thousand.

True it is, that in the City of Roane, in Normandy, there is one great Bell,
that has such an Inscription as follows:

Ie suis George d'Ambois,
Qui trente cinq mill pois:
Mes lui me pesera,
Trente six mill me trovera.
I am George of Ambois,
Thirty five thousand in pois:
But he that shall weigh me,
Thirty six thousand shall find me.
The said King Edward endowed this Chapel with lands to the yearly value of
five hundred pound. Doctor John Chambers, Cloister of Saint Stephens Chapel
builded.
the Kings Physician, the last Deane of this College, builded thereunto a
Cloister, of curious workmanship, to the charges of eleven thousand Marks.
This Chapel, or College, at the suppression, was valued to dispend in lands
by the year one thousand eighty five pound, ten shillings five pence,
Parliament House.
and was surrendered to Edward the sixth: since the which time, the same
Chapel has served as a Parliament House.

By this Chapel of S. Stephen, Chapel of our Lady in the Piew.
was sometime one other smaler Chapel, called our Lady of the Piew; to the
which Lady, great Offerings were used to be made: Amongst other things I have
read, that Richard the second, after the overthrow of Wat Tilar, and other the
Rebels, in the fourth of his reign, went to Westminster, and there giving
thanks to God for his victory, made his Offering in this Chapel. But as
diverse have noted, namely, John Pigot, in the year 1252. on the seventeenth of
February, by negligence of a Scholar, appointed by his Schoolmaster to put
forth the Lights of this Chapel, the Image of our Lady richly decked with
Jewels, precious Stones, Pearls, and Rings, more than any Ieweller could judge
the price, for so says mine author; was with all this Apparel, Ornaments, and
Chapel it self, burnt: but since again reedified by Anthony, Earl Rivers,
Lord Scales, and of the Isle of Wight, Uncle and Governor to the Prince of
Wales, that should have been King Edward the fifth, etc.

The said Palace, Clocke-house at Westminster.
before the entry thereunto, has a large Court, and in the same a Tower of
Stone, containing a Clock, which strikes every hour on a great Bell, to be
heard into the Hall in sitting time of the Courts, or otherwise: for the same
Clock, in a calm, will be heard into the City of London. King Henry the
sixth gave the keeping of this Clock with the Tower, called the Clock-house,
and the appurtenances, unto William Walsby, Deane of Saint Stephens, with the
wages of six pence the day out of his Exchequer. By this Tower stands a
fountain, Fountain in the Palace Court.
which at Coronations, and great Triumphs is made to run with Wine out of
diverse spouts.

On the East side of this Court, Westminster Bridge or common landing place*
is an Arched Gate to the River of Thames, with a fair Bridge and landing
place for all men that have occasion.

On the North side, is the South end of Saint Stephens Alley, or Canon-Row, and
also a way into the old Wool staple: and on the West side is a very fair
Gate, begun by Richard the 3. in the year 1484. and was by him builded a great
height, High Tower at Westminster.
and many fair lodgings in it, but left unfinished, and is called the high
Tower at Westminster.

Thus much for the Monastery and Palace may suffice. And now will I speak of
the Gate House, and of Totehill-streete, stretching from the West part of the
Close.

The Gate House is so called of two Gates, Gate House at Westminster.
the one out of the College Court toward the North, on the East side whereof
was the Bishop of Londons Prison, for Clerks convict, and the other Gate
adjoining to the first; but toward the West, is a Jail or Prison for
offenders thither committed. Walter Warfield, Celerer to the Monastery, caused
both these Gates (with the appurtenances) to be builded in the reign of Edward
the third.

On the South side of this Gate, Almes-houses of Henry the seventh.
King Henry the seventh, founded an Almes-house for thirteen poor men: one of
them to be a Priest, aged five and forty years, a good Grammarian, the other
twelve to be aged fifty years, without wives, every Saturday the Priest to
receive of the Abbot, or Prior, four pence by the day, and each other two
pence half penny by the day for ever, for their sustenance, and every year to
each one a Gown and a Hood ready made. And to three women that dressed their
meat, and kept them in their sickness, each to have every Saturday sixteen
pence, and every year a Gown ready made. More to the thirteen poor men
yearly fourscore quarters of Coals, and one thousand of good Fagots to their
use: In the Hall and Kitchen of their Mansion, a discreet Monk to be
over-seer of them, and he to have forty shillings by the year, etc. and
herunto was every Abbot and Prior sworn.

Near unto this house Westward, Chapel of Saint Anne.
was an old Chapel of Saint Anne, over against the which, the Lady Margaret,
Mother to King Henry the seventh erected an Almes-house for poor women,
Almes-house founded by Lady Margaret.
which is now turned into lodgings, for the singing men of the College: the
place wherein this Chapel and Almes-house stands, was called the
Eleemosinary or Almory, Almory at Westminster.
now corruptly the Ambry, for that the Alms of the Abbey were there
distributed to the poor. And therein I slip, Abbot of Westminster, Printing of
Books at Westminster. the first in England.
erected the first Press of Book Printing that ever was in England, about the
year of Christ, 1471. W. Caxton, Citizen of London, Mercer, brought it into
England, and was the first that practiced it in the said Abbey; after which
time, the like was practiced in the Abbeys of S. Augustine at Cant. S. Albans,
Totehill-street.
and other Monasteries. From the West gate runs along Totehill street,
wherein is a house of the Lord Gray of Wilton, and on the other side, at the
entry into Totehill field, Stourton house, which Giles, the last Lord Dacre of
the South, Hospital founded by Lady Anne Dacre.
purchased and built new, whose Lady and wife Anne sister to T. the Lord
Backhurst, left money to her Executors, to build an Hospital for twenty poor
women, and so many children to be brought up under them, for whose maintenance
she assigned lands, to the value of one hundred pounds by the year, which
Hospital, her Executours have since begun in the field adjoining.

From the entry into Totehill field, Petty France.
the street is called Petty France, in which, and upon S. Hermits hill, on
the South side thereof, Cornelius van Dun (a Brabander borne, Yeoman of the
Guard to King Henry the eighth, King Edward the sixth, Almes-houses for poor
women.
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth) built twenty Houses, for poor women to
dwell rent-free: Chapel of Mary Magdalen.
And near hereunto was a Chapel of Mary Magdalen, now wholly ruinated.

In the year of Christ 1256. the 40. of Henry the third, Matthew Paris.
John Mansell, the Kings Counselor, and a Priest, did invite to a stately
Dinner, the Kings and Queens of England and Scotland, Edward the Kings son,
Earls, Barons and Knights, the Bishop of London, and Diverse Citizens: whereby
his guests did grow to such a number, that his house at Totehill could not
receive them, Seven hundred Mess of Meat at one Dinner in Totehill.
but that he was forced to set up Tents and Pavillions, to receive his guests;
whereof there was such a multitude, that seven hundred Mess of Meat did not
serve for the first Dinner.

The City of Westminster, Government of Westminster City.
for Civil Government, is divided into twelve several Wards, for the which,
the Deane of the Collegiate Church of Westminster, or the high Steward, do
elect twelve Burgesses, and as many Assistants, that is, one Burgess and one
Assistant for every Ward: out of the which twelve Burgesses, two are nominated
yearly, upon Thursday in Easter week; for chief Burgesses, to continue for
one year next following, who have authority given them by the Act of
Parliament, 27. Elizabeth, to hear, examine, determine, and punish, according
to the Laws of the Realm, and lawful Customs of the City of London,
matters of Incontinencie, common Scolds, Inmates, and common Annoyances, and
likewise to commit such persons as shall offend against the Peace, and thereof
to give knowledge within four and twenty hours, to some Justice of Peace, in
the County of Middlesex.

Not far from Westminster, by the River, there is erected a goodly Building,
not yet finished, for Students in Divinity commonly known by the name of
Chelsey College, whereof I thought fit to make mention, because I find an Act
of Parliament made in the seventh year of King, James, in the behalf of the
same College, as also a Declaration published by Authority in the year 1616.
containing the Reasons that moved his Majesty and the State to erect the same
which here follows.
WHereas his Majesty, of his most Royal and zealous care for the defense of
true Religion now established within this Realm of England, The cause of the
erection of the College there.
and for the refuting or Errors and Heresies repugnant unto the same, has been
graciously pleased, by his Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, to
found a College at Chelsey, near London, and therein to place certain
learned Divines, and to incorporate the same by the name of the Provost and
Fellows of the College of King James in Chelsey, The name of that corporation.
near London, of the foundation of the same James King of England, and has of
his most gracious bounty and goodness, not only endowed the same with
certain Lands, Privileges, and Immunities, but has also for their further
maintenance and sustentation, given unto them a capacity and ability to receive
and take from his Majesty, or any of his loving Subjects, The ability thereof
to receive (...)
any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Gifts, Benefits, and Profits whatsoever,
not exceeding in the whole the yearly value (...) three thousand pounds, as in
and by (...) Letters Patents does more at large appear. And whereas also it is
manifest and evident, that the bringing in of fresh streams of running water
into the City of London, is very convenient, necessary, and profitable, as well
for the private use of such as shall rent the same, as a help for cleansing
the said City in the time of sickness, and preserving the same against all
sudden adventures of fire: It is therefore enacted, etc. that it shall and may
be lawful to the said Provost and Fellows, their Successors, Deputies, and
Assigns, at all and every such place and places in the open Fields or Marshes
lying between the Bridge called Lock-Bridge, in or near the Parish or
Hackney, in the County of Middlesix, and the Bridge called Bow-Bridge, at
Stratfort-Bow in the Parish of Stepney, in the said County, The Provest, etc.
may dig a trench out of the River Lee.
(As by the said Provost and Fellows, their Successors, Deputies or Assigns,
by and with the consent and allowance of the occupiers and owners of the soil
in the said place or places, and in default of such assent and allowance, by
such composition first to be made with the said occupiers and owners of the
said soil, as by the Commissioners, by virtue of this Act to be in this
behalf appointed, shall be thought fit and convenient) to dig or cut from and
out of the maine River of Lee, on that side or bank of the same River which is
next unto the City of London, Of what quantity.
a ditch or trench not exceeding in breadth ten foot, or to scour, cleanse, or
enlarge unto the breadth aforesaid, any old ditch or trench there already made:
and the same ditch or trench either old or new, so to be made or to be
cleansed, to convey by and through the said Fields and Marshes, in all places
convenient, in such sort as the same may again be returned, and made to open
it self into the maine River, within some such convenient distance from the
mouth thereof, as to the said Commissioners shall (for the intents and purposes
hereafter expressed) be thought fit: Upon which ditch or trench, or places
near adjoining thereunto, it shall and may be lawful to the said Provost and
Fellows, their Successors, Deputies, or Assigns, to erect or cause to be
erected, certain Engines, They may erect engines, etc.
Waterworkes, or Waterwheeles, as also houses or couerings requisite for the
same, where by the assent of the said Commissioners, the same shall be agreed
upon, to be no let or hinderance to the ordinary passage of Barges, Boats, or
other such Vessels upon the said River of Lee, and by and through the said
ditch or trench, to carry and convey so much of the water of the said maine
River, as by the said Provost and Fellows, their Successors, Deputies, or
Assigns, shall be thought requisite and necessary to be used for the working
or motion of the said Engines or Waterwheeles, and shall also by the said
Commissioners be thought to be no prejudice or hinderance to the ordinary
passage of Barges, Boats, or such other Vessels upon the same River. And that
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Provost and Fellows, their
Successors, Deputies, and Assigns (in all places apt and convenient, within a
convenient distance of the said Engines or Waterworkes) to dig for the taking
and further opening of Springs of fresh water there found, They may open
Springs, etc.
or to be found on the West side of the said River next unto the City of
London, and the water of the said Springs to carry and convey by and through
certain little Gutters or Trenches, or Pots or Pipes under the ground, into
one Pit, Pond, or head of convenient largeness, to be made by the said
Provost and Fellows, their Successors, Deputies, or Assigns, in some places
apt for the same. And that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Provost and Fellows, their Successors, Deputies, and Assigns, having by Art
and sleight of Engines and Waterworkes, or by any other means or devise raised
the water of the said Springs, and so much of the water there running in the
said Ditch or Trench as shall be thought necessary, to such height, and into
such place, Pond, Head, or recept, (as to them shall seem in that behalf
requisite) to convey and carry the same in close Pipes under the ground from
the said Waterworkes, They may convey Pipes under ground.
and the said other places of receipt, unto the City of London and the Suburbs
thereof, for the perpetual maintenance and sustentation of the said Provost
and Fellows, and their successors by the rent to be made of the said waters
conveyed as aforesaid. And that for the convenience of the said water, it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said Provost and Fellows, their Successors,
Deputies and Assigns, (in all places convenient between the said Waterworkes
and the said City of London) to dig, They may dig and open ground to make
conduit heads.
cut, and open the ground, to such depth and breadth as shall be convenient for
the laying in of the said Pipes or Pots, through which the said water shall
pass, and for making little Conduit heads for vents unto the same, for the
better passage of the said waters, and the same ground so opened for the
purpose aforesaid, (after the said Pipes or Pots are laid in and placed) the
said Provost and Fellows, their Successors, Deputies and Assigns, shall with
Turfe, Earth, Gravel, and other materials, again fill up and cover. And be
it, etc. that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Provost and
Fellows, their Successors, Deputies, and Assigns, from time to time, and at
all times convenient, with their men, horses, carts, or other carriages, to
have free entry and passage, by, over, and through any ground or land, in
places, and at times meet and convenient, for the doing and performing of any
thing requisite, They may hare free passage to make, and after to preserve the
things rade.
for the making of the said several passages of waters, or for the doing of
any other act or thing concerning the same, authorized by this Act, as also for
the continual preservation and reparation of the said works, as often as need
shall require. And be it, etc. that the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the
great Seal of England for the time being, by Commission under the great Seal
of England, at the request and charges of the said Provost and Fellows, their
Successors, Substitutes and Deputies, or upon the complaint or petition of any
person or persons whom it may concern, shall nominate, appoint, and authorize
by Commission or Commissions, under the great Seal of England, seven discreet
and sufficient persons, whereof two shall be lustices of Peace of the County
of Middlesex, and two of the City of London, and three others at the choice and
appointment of the said Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, every of the said
persons having Lands and Tenements, of the clear yearly value of xl. li. at
the least, which said seven persons, or any four, or more of them, What
recompense the owners of the ground shall have.
shall have power to order and set down what rate or rates, sum or sums of
money shall be paid by the said Provost and Fellows, as well for satisfaction
and recompense of damages, in making the fore-recited works, or any thing
belonging to the same, as also for any manner of damages to be sustained, in
the mending or reparation thereof, from time to time, or any other costs or
charges sustained by reason of the same, to the Lords, owners, and occupiers of
the ground and soil, or to others interessed in the said River or Waters, for
which, composition is to be made by the intent of this Act, if the parties
cannot of themselves agree, and in what manner the same shall be paid. How
they may recever it.
And that for the recovery of such money, as shall be so ordered and set down
by the said Commissioners, or any four, or more of them, the party or parties
to whom the same money shall be due and payable, by the true intent of the said
Order, shall or may recover the same, together with the reasonable costs and
damages for the forbearance thereof, against the said Provost and Fellows, by
action of Debt, Bill, or Plaint, in any his Majesty's Courts at Westminster,
wherein no Essoine or Protection shall be allowed. What grounds may not be
dug*
Provided always, and it is further enacted, etc. that the said water shall
not be conveyed through the House, Garden, or Orchard of any person or persons,
or through any part thereof, or through any Cornefields, while the Corn is
growing or standing in the same, without the consent first had of the owners
and occupiers of the said Houses, Gardens, Orchards, and Corne-fields. Anno 7.
Iac. cap. 9.

A brief Declaration of the reasons that moved his MAJESTY and the STATE to
erect a College of Divines, and other Learned men, at CHELSEY, together with
the Copy of his Majesty's Letters in favoring the same; and an addition of
some Motives forcible to excite good Christians zeal to a voluntary and
liberal contribution.
Understanding by experience, that want of information has much hindered men's
devotion in contributing toward the erection and dotation of Chelsey College,
we have thought it very fit, together with his Majesty's Letters, seconded by
my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, to declare the reasons that caused this work
to be undertaken, and to add such Motives, as we have supposed may be most
effectual to give satisfaction to his Majesty's desire, and perfection to this
honorable design.

First it was considered, that the Popes Agents traveled Sea and Land, wrote
books in favor of their faction, devised lies and slanders, to bring Religion
and the Professors thereof into hatred, and not sparing any standing in their
way, by falsehood and treachery oppugned Kings and Princes, that could not endure
the Popes tyrannical government. And for this end, men of ready wits, good
speech, long experience, and competent learning, have been maintained in
Colleges, furnished with Books, helped with Counsel and directions, bound
with Laws and Oaths, to uphold the Papal Hierarchy and Heresy, and which
moves much, encouraged with great promises and large rewards.

Whereunto albeit private men piously affected have from time to time opposed
themselves, yet because they wanted encouragement to undertake so great a
labor, counsel of their Ancients to direct them, Books and Libraries to
instruct them, forms of proceeding to keep them in compass, and rewards to
maintain them, those excepted that are due for Ecclesiastical cures, it was
further advised, that to make a sufficient defense for the truth of Religion,
and honor of the State, and a strong and continual opposition against the
continued lies, slanders, errors, heresies, sects, idolatries, and blasphemies
of our Adversaries, it was necessary to unite our forces, and to appoint
special men, that without other distraction might attend the cause of Religion
and the State, being furnished with Directions, Instructions, Counsel, Books,
Presses, competent maintenance, and other necessaries.

This then was the reason why this College by his Majesty and the State was
first designed, and a corporation granted with large privileges, viz. That a
select number of Divines and others should be gathered together into one body,
and united with one form of Laws, and there maintained, who being furnished
with Books, and directed by men of experience and action, might always be
ready to maintain our Christian faith, to answer the Adversaries Calumniations
as well against Religion as the State, to defend the Majesty of Kings and
Princes, against the usurpation of Popes, the liberty of Christians, against
the yoke of Superstition, to supply the defect of teaching where Appropriations
have devoured the Ministry, by teaching and conference to convince the
obstinate Papists and Atheist, and by all lawful means to maintain truth,
and discover falsehood.

This is the College commended by his Majesty, and intended by the State, and
easily to be perfected if it please all true Christians to further it with
their help and favor, according to some proportion of their means. His
Majesty's Letters directed to my Lord of Canterbury, follow in these words:

Right trusty and well-beloved Counselor, we greet you well.
WHereas the enemies of the Gospel have ever been forward to write, and
publish books for confirming of erroneous doctrine, and impugning the truth,
and now of late seem more careful then before to send daily into our Realms
such their writings, whereby our loving Subjects, though otherwise well
disposed might be seduced, unless some remedy thereof should be provided. We
by the advice of our Council, have lately granted a corporation, and given our
allowance for erecting a College at Chelsey, for learned Divines to be
employed to write as occasion shall require for maintaining the Religion
professed in our Kingdoms, and confuting the impugners thereof. Whereupon
Doctor Suteliffe designed Provost of the said College, has now humbly
signified unto us, that upon diverse promises of help and assistance toward
the erecting and endowing the said College, he has at his own charge
begun, and well proceeded in the building, as does sufficiently appear by a
good part thereof already set up in the place appointed for the same. We
therefore being willing to favor and further so religious a work, will and
require you to write your Letters to the Bishops of your Province, signifying
unto them in our Name, that our pleasure is, they deal with the Clergy, and
other of their Diocese, to give their charitable benevolence for the
perfecting of this good work so well begun. And for the better performance of
our desire, we have given order to the said Provost and his Associates to
attend you and others unto whom it may appertain, and to certify us from time
to time of their proceeding. Therford the 5. of May 1616.

These Letters my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury sends abroad to the Bishops
of his Province, and secondeth them in these terms:
NOw because it is so pious and religious a work, conducing both to Gods
glory, and the saving of many a soul within this Kingdom, I cannot but wish
that all devout and well affected persons should by your self and the
Preachers in your Diocese, as well publicly as otherwise, be excited to
contribute in some measure to so holy an intendment now will began. And
although these and the like motions have been frequent in these latter times,
yet let not those whom God has blessed with any wealth be weary of welldoing,
that it may not be said that the idolatrous and superstitious Papists be more
forward to advance their falsehoods, then we are to maintain Gods Truth.
Whatsoever is collected, I pray you Lordship may be carefully brought unto me;
partly that it pass not through any difrauding hand, and partly that his
Majesty may be acquainted what is done in this behalf.

Your Lordships very loving Brother G. Canterb.

The like Letters are written to my Lord Chancellor, and my Lord Mayor of
London.
By these Letters it may appear, that this College is not an idle project of
any private man, but a pious work projected by the King and State, and that
all that profess Religion, and desire the continuance and advancement thereof,
yea, all that honor his Majesty, and wish the prosperity of the State, and
desire the increase of learning, have interest therein, and I hope shall
receive contentment, and good satisfaction by the same.

Being then a work of piety for the maintenance of true Religion, who can be
accounted truly pious and religious, and yet yield no help to advance it?
being a project to maintain the honor of the State, what good Subject will
not contribute to set forward this project? but to touch only the point of
Gods honor, let us remember the words of the Wise man, Prove. 3. Honor the
Lord with thy substance. Let us also consider what the Lord himself says, 1 Samuel 2. Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be
despised. Now who can say, he honors God that suffers him by idolatry,
superstition, and blasphemy to be dishonored, and will give nothing to
suppress Baals Priests, and is content that the Pope be worshipped like the
Idol Bell? can Gods honor stand with the superstition, heresy, idolatry, and
blasphemy of Papists, prophannesse of Atheists, fanaticall doctrine of
Schismatickes, and idle Novelists?

It is not sufficient for true Christians to profess true Religion, but they
must with zeal maintain it, and with heart abhor, and with hand suppress
idolatry and superstition, Who will rise up with me against the wicked, says
the Prophet, Psalm. 94. And Psalm. 139. he says, He hated those that hated the
Lord with an unfeigned hatred. The Law Deuteronomy. 13. is direct against such as
entice us to serve other gods, our eye may not pity them, nor may we show mercy
unto them, no although they be our brothers, or our wives that lie in our
bosom.

An odious thing also it is, either to suffer truth to be suppressed, or lies
to be received. Saint Augustine in Epist. ad Casulanum, says, It is a fault to
hide truth, as well as to tell lies; Vterque reus est, and qui veritatem
occultat, and qui mendacium dicit. Chrysostom Homil. 25. in Math. does charge
him to be a Traitor unto Truth, that dare not boldly utter it or defend it; Non
ille solum est proditor veritatis qui veritatem transgrediens pro veritate
mendacium loquitur, sed etiam qui non libere veritatem pronuntiat quam
pronuntiare tenetur, aut non libere veritatem defendit quam libere defendere
convenit.

Some suppose that Christianity and Popery may stand together, and themselves
as Newters stand between both, or as Mediators would reconcile both. But can
Christ be reconciled to Antichrist? there is no concord betwixt Christ and
Belial, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. Elias told us there is no halting between
two Religions: no man that honors any Creature can say he truly honors
God, for God gives not his honor to Creatures, As^ 1 King. 15. was a good
King, yet it is imputed to him that he took not down the high places. The
Bishop of the Church of Pergamus, Apocal. 2. is reproved for suffering them
that taught the doctrine of Balaam; and the Bishop of Thyatira, for permitting
Iesabel to teach and deceive the people; and shall the Church of England any
longer suffer the Romish Balamites, and the false Priests of Baal maintained by
the Romish Iesabel and her Consorts to seduce Gods people? The false Priests of
Bell used all art and cunning practices to deceive, and now will not suffer any
Religion but that of their god Bell, the Pope; and shall not true Christians use
equal diligence to maintain truth, and suppress Popery, and all other
idolatrous and false Religion? Ingemui fateor (says Hierome) minus nobis
inesse voluntatis ad propugnandam veritasem, quam inest illis cupiditatis ad
inculcandum mendacium: I sighed (says he) seeing less desire in us to defend
truth, then in our adversaries to maintain lies.

This College then being erected for maintenance of truth and Gods true
service, and a resoiute opposition against errors and false worship of God, it
cannot but please God and content godly men. The same will also be a means to
increase learning, and to supply the defects of places haunted with the spirits
of Antichrist, the Jesuits, and Mass Priests, and therefore cannot choose but
be well approved of all, that either desire a learned Ministry, or love
learning. Finally, seeing the Church has received no greater dishonor by any,
then by unsufficient and unlearned Churchmen, I hope this may be a means to
recover some part of their lost honor.

Wherefore, whether we regard the service of God, or the honor we owe to our
King, or the love we bear to our Country and the State, let us not show our
selves sparing or backward in yielding our aid to set forward a work so
religious and profitable for the Church, so honorable for the State, so
necessary in regard of the malice of our adversaries, and the defects and
discouragement of our own forces. Other collections have been either for
private persons or strangers, or places remote, or matters concerning some
particular occasions. This concerns a general good, and touches every man
both in conscience and honor. Heretofore we have endeavored to maintain
Religion, and favor others abroad, let us not therefore neglect our selves,
and our own honor, profit, and necessary service at home. Neither let any man
think it strange, that a work of such greatness should be advanced by this
weak means, or that a project so necessary should proceed so slowly. Almighty
God, albeit all-sufficient, yet would have his own Tabernable built by the
voluntary offerings of his people. Speak, says God to Moses, Exodus 25. to
the children of Israel, that they receive an offering for me of every man whose
heart gives it freely. And Exodus 36. it follows, and they brought still unto
Moses free gifts every morning, and they ceased not until they were stayed
from offering. King Solomon likewise was greatly helped in the building of the
Temple by the contribution of his Subjects, as appears by the words of
Scriptures, 1 King. 9. 19. further, by voluntary offerings and contributions,
the Temple was repaired by Ioash, 2 King. 12. and by Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. and
this has been the use and practice of ancient times in building, and endowing
most famous Churches, Colleges, Schools, and other Monuments of Religion and
Learning, both in our own and other Countries. Our Adversaries by this course
have had means to build many Monasteries and Colleges, and Schools for
Jesuits and Friars, as it were propugnacles of Superstition, Heresy,
Idolatry, and Antichrists tyranny, to uphold and make good their own
corruptions in Religion, and usurpations upon the Magistrates government, and
every Christian man's liberty. And this have they done not only in Europe, but
also in the Indies, and not one in every Kingdom, but in the same State
diverse, and almost in every great City one. And shall not this flourishing
Kingdom build and endow one College for the maintenance of Gods true service,
and the honor of the whole State? It were a dishonor to our Nation, and the
whole Church and State to think contrary.

The work we confess has hitherto proceeded slowly: And no marvel, seeing
great works are not easily achieved. Noah's Ark, Gods Tabernacle and Temple,
and famous Schools and Colleges, albeit founded by Kings and great men, were
long in building, and do we wonder that this College is not yet finished?
further it pleased God to deprive us of Prince Henry our principal hope, and
the chief Author of this design. Lastly, who knows whether God has
appointed these weak means to set forward a great work, that his power in
our weakness might have the whole glory?

Let us therefore, good Countrymen and Christians, hearken willingly to his
Majesty's motion, and readily follow his example. Let it appear by our bounty
how zealous we are to maintain his everlasting Truth, and root out error and
idolatry. Let us by effects declare how studious we are to do good works, and
to advance our Countries honor. They that have much may give of their
abundance: the rest according to the measure of their means. God as well
accepts the Widows mite, and poor man's good will, as the rich man's treasure.

If we honor God with our substance, he will honor us and increase our
substance. If we build a house for the maintenance of his truth, that it may
continue to our posterity, God will uphold our houses, restore to us, and
double it to our posterity. Abraham by offering his (...), was made a father of
many sons, yea of Nations. And Solomon that showed his Royal magnificence in
building God a Temple, in honor and riches passed all other Kings. How then
can we excuse our selves, if we deny God a small offering, that daily offers
to us many graces, and gives us all the good things we possess. Our souls
and bodies are a sacrifice due to him: and therefore no Christian may deny to
him an offering out of his wordly goods, if Gods service require it.

As for those that draw back in this service, and refuse to concur in
promoting Gods honor, let them mark the words of our Savior, Matthew. 12. He
that is not with me is against me. And the curse of the Angel upon the people
of Meros, Judge. 5. Curse ye Meros, says the Angel, for they came not up to
help the Lord.

But we hope we shall not need many words to move them, that already are so
well persuaded, nor to persuade men, that in Religion and devotion are so
forward. It is the duty of good Christians to advance Gods honor, and repress
Superstition, Heresy, Idolatry, Blasphemy. It is the office of good subjects
to defend the honor of the State, against the sycophancies of English
Fugitives, and the secret practices of fortaine enemies their adherents. The
adversaries using all their skill, and joining their forces against Religion
and the State, it behooves us likewise to unite our forces, and to join in
consultation how to resist them. This common business requires common help,
the practices of the Adversaries provoke us to use speed, the quality of the
work being for defense of Religion and the State, will move any whose heart is
not hardened, cheerfully to give. Whosoever shall willingly give, shall
receive of God a full reward in this life, and when they dye, their works
shall follow them, and then whatsoever they have given to God on earth, they
shall assuredly find in Heaven.

Wherefore recommending the College of Chelsey to every religious Christians
devout thoughts, we cease further to press them. Only for satisfaction of
those that desire to know why this College is erected at Chelsey, and not in
one of the Universities, this we thought fit to add, that this place was
thought most fit to receive directions from our Superious, to consult with men
of best experience, to obtain intelligence from foreign parts, to print
Books, and to disperse them; And lastly, to obtain the favor of the State
and City. Further hereby, as all emulation may be avoided, so the help of
both Universities may as well be had by intercourse of our Agents, as if the
College stood in either of the Universities. Thus all things now stand. God
bless the proceeding of this work, and give honor to his own name, and a
happy issue to this holy design. Amen.

GOVERNORS OF THE CITY OF LONDON. And first of Ecclesiastical Bishops; and
other Ministers there.
HAving thus run through the description of these Cities of London and
West-minster, as well in their original foundations, as in their increases of
buildings and ornaments, together with such incidents of sundry sorts, as are
before, both generally and particularly discoursed. It remains that somewhat
be noted by me, touching the Policy and Government, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, of London, VV. Malmesberie.
as I have already done for West-minster, the order whereof is appointed by the
late Statute, even as that of London is maintained by the Customs thereof,
most laudably used before all the time of memory.

And first to begin with the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Antiquities of
Glaste.
I read, that the Christian Faith was first preached in this Island (then called
Britain) by Joseph of Arimathea, and his brethren, Disciples of Christ, in the
time of Arviragus, then Governor here, Lib. confii.
under the Roman Emperor. Eleutherius died in the year 186. when he had
sitten Bishop 15. years.
After which time, Lucius, King of the Britains, sent his Ambassadors, Elvanus
and Meduvanus, two men learned in the Scriptures, with Letters to Eleutherius,
Bishop of Rome, desiring him to send some devout and Learned men, by whose
instruction, he and his people might he taught the Faith and Religion of
Christ. Eleutherius baptized those Messengers, making Elvanus a Bishop, and
Meduvanus a Teacher, and sent over with them into Britain, two other famous
Clerks, Faganus and Deruvianus, by whose diligence, Lucius and his people of
Britain, were instructed in the Faith of Christ, and baptized, the Temples of
Idols were converted into Cathedral Churches, and Bishops were placed, where
Flamines before had bin: at London, York and Carleon upon Vske, were placed
Archbishops, says some. The said Epistle (to us sent by Eleutherius) to King
Lucius, Liber Custom.
for the establishing of the faith, ye may read in my Annals, Summaries and
Chronicles, truly translated and set down, as mine Author has i^, for some
have curtalled and corrupted it, and then fathered it, upon Reverend Bid, Bid.
who never wrote word thereof, or otherwise to that effect, more than this as
follows:

In the year 156. Marcus Aurelius Verus, the 14. Emperor after Augustus,
governed the Empire, with his brother Aurelius Co^modus. In whose time,
Eleutherius, a Holy man, being Pope of the Church of Rome, Lucius King of
Britains wrote unto him, desiring that by his commandment, he might be made
a Christian: which his request was granted him; whereby the Britains receiving
then the Faith, kept it sound and undefiled in rest and peace, until
Dioclesian the Emperors time.

Thus far Bid, which may suffice to prove the Christian Faith then to be
received here. And now of the London Bishops, according as I find them
registered.

There remains in the Parish Church of Saint Peter upon Cornehill in London,
This is before set down in Cornehil Ward.
a table wherein is written that Lucius founded the same Church to be an
Archbishops See, and Metropolitan and chief Church of his Kingdom, and that
it so endured the space of four hundred years, until the coming of
Augustine the Monk, and others from Rome, in the reign of the Saxons.

The Archbishops names I find only to be set down by Ioceline of Furnes,
Ioceline of Furnes.
in his book of British Bishops, and not else where. Theanus (says he) was
the first Archbishop of London in the time of Lucius, who builded the said
Church of Saint Peter, in a place called Cornehill in London, by the aid of
Ciran, chief Butler to King Lucius.

2 Elvanus was the second, and he builded a Library to the same Church
adjoining, and converted many of the Druides (learned men in the Pagan law) to
the Christian Faith.

3 Cadar was the third: then followed,

4 Obinus.

5 Conan.

6 Paludius.

7 Stephen.

8 Iltute.

9 Dedwin, or Theodwin.

10 Theodred.

11 Hillary.

12 Restitutus.

13 Guidelium, or Guiteline.

14 Fastidius.

15 Vodimus, slain by the Saxons.

16 Theonw, the sixteenth, fled with the Britains into Wales, 1. Tome. com.
about the year of Christ, 587. Thus much out of Ioceline of the Archbishops:
the credit whereof I leave to the judgment of the learned. For, I read of a
Bishop of London (here also named) in the year of Christ 326. to be present
at the second Council, holden at Arles, in the time of Constantine the great,
who subscribed thereunto in these words:

Ex Provincia Britanniae Civitate Londinensi Restitutus Episcopus, as plainly
appears in the first Tome of the Councels. He writes not himself
Archbishop, and therefore makes the matter of Archbishops doubtful, or rather
overthrows that opinion.

The Saxons being Pagans, having chased the Britains with the Christian
Preachers into the Mountains of Wales and Cornwall, and having divided this
Kingdom of the Britains amongst themselves; at the length, to wit, in the
year 596. Pope Gregory, moved of a godly instinction (says Bid) in the 147.
year, after the Angles or Saxons in Britain, sent Augustine, Melitus, Iustus
and John, with other Monks, to preach the Gospel to the said Nation of the
Angles.

These landed in the I Will of Thanet, and were first received by Ethelbert, King
of Kent, whom they converted to the faith of Christ, with diverse other of his
people, in the 34. year of his reign, which Ethelbert gave unto Augustine the
City of Canturbury.

The Metropolitan See being established at Canturbury, these that follow, were
successively Bishops of London, to this present time.

This Augustine in the year of Christ 604. consecrated Melitus and Iustus
Bishops, appointing Melitus to preach unto the East Saxons, whose chief City
was London: and their King Sebert, Nephew to Ethelbert, by preaching of
Melitus, received the Word of Life.

And then Ethelbert, King of Kent, builded in the City of London Saint Paul's
Church, S. Paul's Church in London first founded.
wherein Melitus began to be Bishop, in the year 619. and sat five years.
Ethelbert by his Charter gave Lands to this Church of Saint Paul: 1. Melitus
first Bishop of London, 619.
so did other Kings after him.

King Sebert, through the good life, and like preaching of Melitus, having
received Baptism, to show himself a Christian, builded a Church to the honor
of God and S. Peter, on the West side of London, which Church is called
Westminster: but the successors of Sebert, being Pagans, expelled Melitus out
of their Kingdoms.

Iustus the second, 2. Iustus, 624.
Bishop for a time, and then Melitus again: after whose decease, the seat was
void for a time. At length Sigebert, Son to Sigebert, brother to Sebert,
ruled in Essex: he became a Christian, and took to him a holy man, named
C^dda, or Chadda, who wan many by preaching and good life, to the Christian
Religion.

Ceadda, 3. Cedda, B. of London, 658.
or Chadda, was (by Finan) consecrated Bishop of the East Saxons, and he ordered
Priests and Deacons in all the parts of Essex, Ithancaster, and Tilberie.
but especially at Ithancaster, Ralph Cogshall.
and Tilberie.

This City of Ithancaster (says Ralph Cogshall) stood on the bank of the
River Pante, that runs by Maldun in the hundred of Danesey; but now is
drowned in Pante, so that nothing remains, but the ruin of the City in the
River. Tilberie (both the West and East) stands on the Thames side, nigh over
against Gravesend.

Wina, 4 Wina, 666.
expelled from the Church of Winchester by Cenewalche the King, was adopted to
be the fourth Bishop of London, in the reign of Wolferus, King of Mercia, and
sat nine years.

Erkenwald, 5. Erkenwald, 680.
borne in the Castle or Town of Stallingborough in Lindsey, first Abbot of
Crotesey, Crotese, or Charlesey.
was by Theodore, Archbishop of Canturbury, appointed to be Bishop of the East
Saxons, in the City of London. This Erkenwald in the year of Christ, 677.
before he was made Bishop, had builded two Monasteries, one for himself, being
a Monk in the Isle of Crote in Surrey, by the River of Thames and another for
his Sister Edilburga, being a Nun, in a certain place called Berching in
Essex: he deceased at Berching, in the year, 697. and was then buried in Paul's
Church, and translated into the new Church of S. Paul, in the year, one
thousand, one hundred forty eight.

Waldhere, 6 Waldhere, 697.
or Walthere, was Bishop of London: King Sebba became a Monk in Paul's Church.
Sebba, King of the east Saxons, at his hands received the habit of Monk: for
at that time there were Monks in Paul's Church, as writes Radulphus Dedicato,
and others. To this Bishop he brought a great sum of money, to be bestowed
and given to the poor, reserving nothing to himself; but rather desired to
remain poor in goods, as in Spirit, for the Kingdom of Heaven. When he had
reigned thirty years, he deceased at Paul's, and was there buried, and lies
now in a Coffin of Stone, on the North side of the Isle next the Quire.

Ingwaldus, 7. Ingwaldus, 716.
Bishop of London, was at the consecration of Tatwine, Archbishop of
Canturbury; he confirmed the foundation of Crowland, in the year, seven
hundred and sixteen, (says Ingulfus) and deceased in the year 744. as says
Hoveden.

746 Engulfe, called also Egwolfe, or Egnaldus, Bishop of London.

754 Wighead, or Wigherus, Bishop of London.

761 Eadbrightus, or Edbrithe, Bishop of London.

768 Eadgar, or Eadgarus, Bishop of London.

773 Kenewalth, Bishop of London.

784 Eadbaldus, Bishop of London.

795 Hedbert, or Hethobert, Bishop of London, deceased 802. says Hoveden.

813 Osmund, or Oswin, Bishop of London, he was witness to a Charter made to
Crowland, in the year 833. says Engulfus.

835 Ethelmothe, Bishop of London.

838 Ceolbert, or Celbertus, B. of London.

841 Renulfe, or Ceorulfe, Bishop of London.

850 Swithulfus, Bishop of London, he likewise was witness to a Charter of
Crowland, 851.

860 Edstanus, Bishop of London, witness to a Charter of Crowland, 860.

870 Wulfius, or Wolfius, Bishop of London.

878 Ethelwardus, Bishop of London.

886 Elstanus, Bishop of London, died in the year 900. says Asser, and all
these, says the Author of Flores Historiarum, were buried in the old Church of
S. Paul, but there remains now no memory of them.

900 Theodricus, Bishop of London: this man confirmed King Edreds Charter, made
to Winchester, in the year, 947. whereby it seems, that he was Bishop of
London of a later time than he is here placed.

922 Wulstanus, Bishop of London.

941 Brithelme, Bishop of London.

958 Dunstanus, Abbot of Glastenburie: then Bishop of Worchester, and in time
Bishop of London, he was afterward translated to Canturbury, 960.

960 Ealfstanus, Bishop of London: the 28. in number.

981 Edgare, Bishop of London, he confirmed the grants made to Winchester, and
to Crowland, 966. and again to Crowland, 970. the Charter of Etheldred,
concerning Vlfrunhampton, 996.

1004 Elphinus, Bishop of London.

1010 Alwinus, Bishop of London.

1012 Alfhune, Bishop of London: he was sent into Normandy in the year 1013.
says Asser.

1044. Robert, a Monk of Gemerisius in Normandy, Bishop of London. 7. years.
afterward translated from London to Canturbury.

1050 Spe^gasius elected, but rejected by the King.

1051 William, a Norman, Chaplain to Edward the Confessor, was made Bishop of
London, 1051. fare 17. years, and deceased 1070. He obtained of William the
Conqueror, the Charter of Liberties for the City of London, as I have set down
in my Summary, and appears by his Epitaph in Paul's Church.

1070 Hugh de Orwell, or Orivall, Bishop of London: he died of a Leprosy, when
he had sitten fifteen years.

1085 Mauricius, Bishop of London, in whose time, to wit, in the year 1089.
the Church of S. Paul was burnt, with the most part of this City, and
therefore he laid the foundation of a new large Church, and having sitten 22.
years, he deceased, 1107. says Matthew Paris.

1108 Richard Beam, or Beamor, called by some Richard Bearvis, Bishop of
London, did wonderfully increase the work of this Church begun, purchasing the
streets and lanes (adjoining) of his own money: and he founded the Monastery
of S. Osyth in Essex, he sat Bishop 19. years, and deceased 1127.

1127 Gilbertus Vniversalis, a Canon of Lions, elected by Henry the first, he
deceased 1141. when he had sitten fourteen years.

1142 Robertus de Sigillo, a Monk of Reading, whom Maud the Empress made
Bishop of London, where he sat eleven years. Geffrey de Magnavile took him
prisoner at Fulham, and he deceased 1152.

1153 Richard Beams, Archdeacon of Essex, Bishop of London ten years, who
deceased 1162.

1163 Gilbert Foliot, Bishop of Hereford, from whence translated to London,
sat three and twenty years, and deceased, 1186.

1189 Richard Fitz Neale, the Kings Treasurer, Archdeacon of Essex, elected of
London, at Pipwell, 1189. He sat nine years and deceased, 1198. This man
also took great pains about the building of Paul's Church, and raised many
other goodly buildings in his Diocese.

1199 William S. Mary Church, commonly called, William de Sancta Maria, a
Norman, Bishop of London, who was one of the three Bishops, that by the Popes
commandment executed his interdiction or curse upon the whole Realm of
England; but he was forced (with the other Bishops) to fly the Realm in
1208. and his Castle at Stratford in Essex was by commandment of K. John
overthrown, 1210. This William, in company of the Archbishop of Canturbury,
and of the Bishop of Ely, went to Rome, and there complained against the King,
1212. and returned, so as in the year 1215. King John in the Church of S.
Paul, at the hands of this William, took upon him the Cross for the Holy
Land. He resigned his Bishopric of his own voluntary, in the year 1221.
says Cogshall.

1221 Eustachius de Faulconbridge, Treasurer of the Exchequer (says Matthew
Paris) Chancellor of the Exchequer (says Textor, and Cogshall) Bishop of
London, 1223. Whilst at Chelmesford he was giving holy Orders, a great tempest
of wind and rain annoyed so many as came thither, whereof it was gathered, how
highly God was displeased with such as came to receive Orders, to the end, they
might live a more easy life, of the Stipend appointed to the Churchmen,
giving themselves to banketting, and so with unclean and filthy bodies, (but
more unclean souls) persume to minister unto God, the Author of purity and
cleanesse. Falcatius de Brent was delivered to his custody in the year, 1224.
This Eustachius deceased in the year 1228. and was buried in Paul's Church, in
the South side, without or above the Quire.

1229 Rogerus Niger, Archdeacon of Colchester, made Bishop of London. In the
year 1230. (says Matthew Paris) upon the feast day of the Conversion of S.
Paul, when he was at Mass in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, a great
multitude of people being there present suddenly the weather waxed dark, so as
one could scantly see another, and an horrible thunderclap lighted on the
church, which so shook it, that it was like to hay^fallen. And there withal
out of a (...) crowd proceeded a flash of lightning, that all the Church seemed
to be on fire; whereupon such a strench ensued, that all men though they
should have dyed: thousands of men and women ran out of the Church, and being
astonished, fell upon the ground, void of all sense and understanding.

None of all the multitude traied in the Church, save the Bishop and one
Deacon, which stood still before the high Altar, awaiting the will of God: when
the Air was cleansed, the multitude returned into the Church, and the Bishop
ended the Service. (...)-Parish.


This Reger Niger is commended to have been a man of worthy life, excellently
well learned, a notable Preacher, pleasant in talk, middle of countenance, and
liberal at his Table. He admonished the Usurers of his time, to leave such
enormities, as they rendered the salvation of their souls, and to do penance
for that they had committed: but when he saw they laughed him to scorn, and
also threatened him, the Bishop generally excommunicated and accursed all such,
and commanded strictly that such Usurers should depart further from the City
of London, which hitherto had been ignorant of such mischief and wickedness,
lest his Dioces should be infected therewithal. He fell sick, and dyed at his
Manor of Bishops Hall, in the Lordship and Parish of Stebunheth, in the year
1241. and was buried in Paul's Church, on the North side of the Presbytery, in a
fair Tomb coped, of gray Marble.

1241 Fulco Bosset, Deane of York, by the death of Gilbert Basset, possessed
his lands, and was then made B. of London, deceased on the 21. day of May, in
the year 1259. as says John Tex^or, and was buried in Paul's Church.

1259 (...) de Wingham, Chancellor of England, made Bishop of London, deceased
in the year 1262. says Textor, and was buried in Paul's Church, on the South
side without, or above the Quire, (...) Marble Monument, close at the head of
Faulconbridge.

1262 Richard Taloot, Bishop of London, straightwayes after his consecration
deceased, says Eversden.

1262 Henry Sandwich, Bishop of London, deceased in the year 1273. as the same
Author affirms.

12^3 John de Chishull, Deane of Paul's, Treasurer of the Exchequer, and Keeper
of the great Seal, was Bishop of London, and deceased in the year 1279. says
Eversden.

1280 Ful^o Loved, Archdeacon of Colchoster, elected Bishop of London, but
refused the place.

1280 Richard de Grave^send, Archdeacon of Northampton, Bishop of London. It
appears by the Charter warren granted to this Bishop, that (in his time)
there were two Woods in the Parish of Stebunheth, pertaining to the said
Bishop: I have (since I kept house for my self) known the one of them by
Bishops Hall, but now they are both made plain of wood, and not to be
discerned from other grounds. Some have fabuled, that this Richard Gravesend,
Fable of Richard Gravesend reproved.
Bishop of London, in the year 1392. the 16. of Richard the second, purchased
the Charter of liberties to this City; which thing has no possibility of
truth, as I have proved, for he deceased in the year 2303. almost ninety
years before that time.

1307 Ralph de Baldocke, Deane of Paul's, Bishop of London, consecrated at Lions
by Peter, Bishop of Alba, in the year 1307. He was a great furtherer of the
new work of Paul's, to wit, the East end, called our Lady Chapel, and other
adjoining: this Ralph deceased in the year 1313. and was buried in the said
Lady Chapel, under a flat stone.

1313 Gilbert Segrave was consecrated Bishop of London, and sat three years.

1317 Richard Newport, Bishop of London, sat two years, and was buried in
Paul's Church.

1318 Stephen Gravesend, Bishop of London, sat twenty years.

1338 Richard Bintworth, or Wentworth, Bishop of London, and Chancellor of
England, deceased the year 1339.

1339 Ralph Stratford, Bishop of London: he purchased the piece of ground
called No man's land, beside, Smithfield, and dedicated it to the use of
burial, as before has appeared: he was borne at Stratford upon Avon, and
therefore builded a Chapel to S. Thomas there: he sat 14. years, and
deceased at Stebunhith.

1354 Michael Northbroke, Bishop of London, deceased in the year 1361. says
Merimouth, sat 7. years.

1362 Simon Sudbery, Bishop of London, sat 13. years, translated to be
Archbishop of Canturbury, in the year 1375.

1375 William Conrtney, translated from Hereford to the Bishopric of London,
and after translated from thence to the Archbishopricke of Canturbury, in the
year, 1381.

1381 Robert Breybrooke, Canon of Lichfield, bishop of London, made Chancellor
in the 6. of Richard the second sat Bishop 20. years, and deceased in the
year 1404. he was buried in the said Lady Chapel at Paul's.

1405 Roger Walden, Treasurer of the Exchequer, Archbishop of Canturbury, was
deposed, and after made bishop of London: he deceased in the year 1406. and
was buried in Paul's Church, by Alhallowes Altar.

1406 Nicholas Bubwith, bishop of London, Treasurer of the Exchequer,
translated to Salisbury, and from thence to Bathe, and lies buried at Wells.

1407 Richard Clifford, removed from Worcester to London, deceased 1422. as
says Thomas Walsingham, and was buried in Paul's.

1422 John Kempe, Fellow of Martin College in Oxford, was made bishop of
Rochester, from whence removed to Chichester, and thence to London: he was
made the Kings Chancellor in the year 1425. the fourth of Henry the sixth, and
was removed from London to York, in the year ^26. He sat Archbishop there
25. years, and was translated to Canturbury; he was afterward made Cardinal
in the year 1452. In the bishop of Londons house at Fulham he received the
Cross, and the next day the Pall, at the hands of Thomas Kempe bishop of
London: he deceased in the year 1454.

1426 William Gray, Deane of York, consecrated Bishop of London, who founded a
College at Thele in Hartfordshire, for a Master and four Canons, and made it
a Cell to Elsing Spittle in London. It had of old time been a College decayed,
and therefore newly founded: he was translated to Lincoln 1431.

1432 Robery Fitzhugh, Archdeacon of Northampton, consecrated Bishop of
London, sat 5. years; he deceased in the year 1435. and was buried on the
South side of the Quire of Paul's.

1435 Robert Gilbert, Doctor of Divinity, Deane of York, consecrated Bishop of
London, sat twelve years, deceased 1448.

1449 Thomas Kempe, Archdeacon of Richmond, consecrated Bishop of London, at
York house, (now White Hall) by the hands of his Uncle, John Kempe, Archbishop
of York, the eighth of February, 1449. He founded a Chapel of the Trinity
in the body of Saint Paul's Church on the North side; he sat Bishop of London
39. years, and 48. days, and then deceasing in the year 1489. was there
buried.

1489 John Marshall Bishop of London, deceased in the year 1493.

1493 Richard Hill, Bishop of London, deceased 1495. and was buried in the body
of S. Paul's Church.

1496 Thomas Savage, first Bishop of Rochester, then Bishop of London 5.
years, was translated to York 1510. where he sat Archbishop 7. years, and
was there buried in the year, 1507.

1502 William Warkham, Bishop of London, made Keeper of the great Seal, sat
two years, was translated to Canturbury.

1504 William Barnes, Bishop of London, sat 10. Months and 11. days,
deceased in the year 1505.

2505 Richard Fitz-Iames, Fellow of Martin College in Oxford, in the reign of
Henry the 6. was made Bishop of Rochester, after Bishop of Chichester, and then
Bishop of London: he deceased 1521. and lies buried hard beneath the North
west pillar of the Steeple in Paul's, under a fair Tomb of Marble, over the
which was builded a fair Chapel of Timber, with stayres mounting thereunto:
this Chapel was burned with fire from the Steeple 1561. and the Tomb was
taken down.

1521 Cuthbert Tunstall, Doctor of Law, Master of the Rowies, Lord Privy Seal,
and Bishop of London, was thence translated to the Bishopric of Durham, in
the year 1529.

1529 John Stokesley, Bishop of London, sat 13. years, deceased in the year
1539. and was buried in the Lady Chapel in Paul's.

1539 Edmund Bonner, Doctor of the Civil Law, Archdeacon of Leicester, then
Bishop of Hereford, was elected to London, in the year 1539. whilst he was
beyond the Seas, Ambassador for King Henry the eighth.

On the first of September 1549. he preached at Paul's Cross, for the which
Sermon, he was charged before the Council of King Edward the sixth by William
Latimer, Parson of S. Lawrence Poultney, and John Hooper, sometime a white
Monk: and being convented before certain Commissioners at Lambith, was for
his disobedience to the Kings order, on the 20. day of the same Month, sent to
the Marshalsey, and deprived from his Bishopric.

1550 Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of Rochester, elected Bishop of London, was
installed in Paul's Church on the twelfth of April.

This man by his deed dated the 12. day after Christmas, in the 4. year of
Edward the sixth, gave to the King the Manors of Branketry and Southminster,
and the Patronage of the Church of Cogshall in Essex, the Manors of
Stebunheth, and Hackney, in the County of Middlesex, and the Marsh of
Stebunheth, with all the singular Messuages, Lands and Tenements to the said
Manors belonging, and also the Advowson of the Vicarage of the Parish Church
of Cogshall in Essex aforesaid: which grant was confirmed by the Deane and
Chapter of Paul's, Stebunheth and Hackney, as only pertained to them.

The said King Edward by his Letters Patents, dated the sixteenth of April, in
the said fourth year of his reign granted to Sir Tho. Wentworth, Lord
Wentworth, Lord Chamberlain of the Kings household, for and in consideration of
his good and faithful service before done, a part of the late received gift,
to wit, the Lordships of Stebunheth and Hackney, with all the members and
appurtenances thereto belonging in Stebunheth, Hackney way, Shorditch, Holiwell
street, White Chapel, Stratford at Bow, Poplar, North-street, Li^ehouse,
Ratcliffe, Cleve street, Brocke street, Mile end, Bleten Hall green, Old
Foord, Westheth, Kingsland, Shakelwel, Newington street, alias Hackney street,
Clopton, Church street, Well street, Humbarton, Grove street, Gunston street,
alias, More street, in the County of Middlesex, together with the Marsh of
Stebunheth, etc.

The Manor of Hackney was valued at 41. l. 9. s. 4. d. by year: and the
Manor of Stebunheth at 140. l. 8. s. 11. d. ob. by year, to be holden in
chief, by the service of the twentieth part of a Kinghts fee.

This Bishop, Nicholas Ridley, for preaching a Sermon at Paul's Cross, on the
16. of July in the year 1553. was committed to the Tower of London, where he
remained prisoner till the 10. of April, in the year 1554. and was thence sent
to Oxford, there to dispute with the Divines and learned men of the contrary
opinion, and on the 16. of October 1555. he was burned at Oxford, for opinion
against the Romish order of Sacraments, etc.

1553 Edmund Bonner aforesaid, being released out of the Marshalsey, was
restored to the Bishopric of London, by Queen Mary, on the fifth of August,
in the year 1553. and again deposed by Queen Elizabeth, in the Month of
July, Anno 1559. and was eftsoons, committed to the Marshalsey, where he dyed
on the 5. of Septembr 1569. and was at midnight buried amongst other prisoners
in St. Georges Churchyard.

1559 Edmund Grindull, Bishop of London, being consecrated the 21. of December
1559. was translated to York, in the year 1570. and from thence removed to
Canterbury, in the year 1575. he dyed blind 1583. on the 6. of July, and was
buried at Crodowne in Surrey.

1570 Edwine Sandys, being translated from Worcester to the Bishopric of
London, in the year, 1570. was thence translated to York, in the year 1576.
and dyed in the year 1588.

1576 John Elmere, Bishop of London, deceased in the year 1594. on the 3. of
June at Fulham, and was buried in Paul's Church, before Saint Thomas Chapel.

1594 Richard Fletcher, Bishop of Worcester, was on the 30. of December in
Paul's Church elected Bishop of London, and deceased on the 15. of June 1596. he
was buried in Paul's Church without any solemn funeral.

1597 Richard Bancroft, Doctor of Divinity, brought up first in Christ's
College, and afterward in Jesus College in Cambridge, was consecrated Bishop
of London, at Lambith, on Sunday, being the 8. day of May, 1597. and translated
to Canterbury in December 1604.

1604 Richard Vaughan, Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop first of Bangor, next of
Chester, was translated to London in January 1604. and dyed in March 1607.

1607 Thomas Ravis, Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Christ's Church in Oxford,
was first Bishop of Gloucester, and then removed to London, the 19. of May,
1607. and dyed the 14. of December 1609.

1609 George Abbot, Doctor of Divinity, having been little above one month
Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was called to London, toward the latter end
of January 1609. and removed to Canterbury in Anno 1611.

1611 John King, Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Christ's Church in Oxford,
where he was brought up, and Archdeaeon of Nottingham, was consecrated Bishop
of London, the eighth day of September, 1611. and worthily remained long in the
same dignity. His Grandfather was Brother unto Robert King, sometime Bishop of
Oxford.

George Mountain, Doctor of Divinity, Lecturer in Greshams College, afterward
Master of the Savoy, and Deane of Westminster, then Bishop of Lincoln, and
thence removed to be Lord Bishop of London, and Almoner to his Majesty, last
of all removed again, to be Lord Archbishop of York.

William Laud, Doctor in Divinity, President of St. John Baptists College in
Oxford, Deane of Gloucester, next Bishop of St. David's, next Bishop of Bath and
Wells, next Bishop of London, and Deane of his Majesty's Chapel Royal, and
now Archbishop of Canterbury, and one of his Highness most Honorable Privy
Council.

William Iuxon, Doctor in Divinity, President of St. John Baptists College in
Oxford, Deane of Worcester, next Clarke of the Closset to his Majesty, next
Bishop elect of Hereford, next Deane of his Majesty's Chapel Royal, and
Bishop of London.

Thus much for the succession of the Bishops of London, whose Dioces contains
the City of London, the whole Shires of Middlesex and Essex, and a part of
Hartfordshire.

These Bishops have for Assistants in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, a
Deane, a Chaunter, a Chancellor, a Treasurer, five Archdeacons, to wit, London,
Middlesex, Essex, Colchester, and S. Albans, and 30. Prebendaries.

There appertains also to the said Church for furniture of the Quire in
Divine Service, and administration of the Sacraments, a College of 12. Pety
Canons, six Vicars, Chorall, and Queristers, etc.

This Dioces is divided into Parishes, every Parish having his Parson, or Vicar
at the least, learned men for the most part, and sufficient Preachers to
instruct the people.

There were in this City, and within the Suburbs thereof in the reign of Henry
the second (as writes Fitz-Stephens) thirteen great Conventuall Churches,
besides the lesser sort, called Parish Churches, to the number of 126. all
which Conventuall Churches, and some others since that time founded, are now
suppressed and gone, except the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul in London, and
the College of Saint Peter at Westminster.

THE TEMPORAL GOVERNMENT OF THIS CITY, SOMEWHAT Discoursed in brief manner.
THIS City of London being under the government of the Britains, P^^ent.
Aserius Menevem.
Romans, and Saxons, the most ancient and famous City of the whole Realm,
Florencius Wigor. Marianus Scot^^^.
was at length destroyed by the Danes, and left desolate, as may appear by our
Histories. But Aelfred King of the West Saxons, having brought this whole
Realm (from many parts) into one Monarchy, honorably repaired this City, and
made it again habitable, and then committed the custody thereof to his Son
in law Adhered, Earl of Mercia. After whose decease, the City, with all other
possessions pertaining to the said Earl, returned to King Edward, surnamed the
Elder, etc. And so remained in the Kings hands, being governed under him by
Portgraves (or Portreves) which name is compounded of the two Saxon words,
Portgraves.
Port and Gerefe or Reve-Porte betokens a Town, and Gerefe signifies a
Guardian, Ruler or Keeper of the Town.

These Governors of old time (says Robert Fabian) with the laws and customs
then used within this City, Lib. (...). Alb^ni.
were registered in a Book, called the Doomes-day Book, written in the Saxon
Tongue: but of later days, when the laws and customs were changed, and for
that also the said Book was of a small hand, sore defaced, and hard to be read
or understood; it was less set by, so that it was imbezeled and lost. Rob.
Fabian.
Thus far Fabian.

Notwithstanding, I have found by search of diverse old Registers and other
Records abroad; namely, in a Book sometime appertaining to the Monastery of
Saint Albans, of the Portgraves, and other Governors of this City, as
follows.

First, that in the reign of King Edward the last, Citizens of London called
Burgesses.
before the conquest, Wolfegare was Portgrave, as may appear by the Charter of
the same King, in these words:

Edward, King, greeteth Alfward Bishop, and Wolfgar my Portgrave, and all the
Burgesses of London. And afterward, that in another Charter, King Edward
greeteth William, Bishop, and Swetman my Portgrave. And after that, in another
Charter to the Abbey of Chertsey: To William, Bishop, and Leofstane and Alffy
Portgraves.

In the reign of William Conqueror, William, Bishop of London, procured of the
said Conqueror his Charter of Liberties, to the same William, Bishop, and
Godfrey, Portgrave, in the Saxon tongue, and turned into English, thus:

William, Charter of William Conqueror.
King, greeteth William, Bishop, and Godfrey, Portgrave, and all the Burgesses
within London, French, and English: And I grant that they be all their law
worth, that they were in Edward days the King. And I will that each child be
his Fathers heir. And I will not suffer that any man do you wrong: and God
you keep.

And then in the reign of the said Conqueror, and of William Rufus, Godfrey
de Magnavile was Portgrave, (or Sheriff) as may appear by their Charters,
Provost.
and Richard de Par was Provost.

In the reign of King Henry the first, Hugh Buche was Portgrave, and
Leofstanus, Goldsmith, Provost, buried at Bermondsey.

After them, Aubery de Vere was Portgrave and Robert Bar Querel, Provost. This
Aubery de Vere was slain in the reign of King Stephen. I. Leyland.
It is to be noted also, that King Henry the first granted to the Citizens of
London, the Shirifwicke thereof, and of Middlesex, as in another place is
showed.

In the reign of King Stephen, Sheriffs.
Gilbert Becket was Portgrave, and Andrew Buchevet, Provost.

After him, Godfrey Magnavile, the Son of William, the Son of Godfrey
Magnavile, by the gift of Maud the Empress, was Portgrave or Sheriff of
London and Middlesex, for the yearly farm of three hundred pound, as
appears by the Charter.

In the time of King Henry the second, Peter Fitz Walter was Portgrave; after
him John Fitz Nigel was Portgrave, after him, Ernulfus Buchel became Portgrave;
and after him William Fitz Isable.

These Portgraves are also in diverse Records called, Portgraves, since called
Sheriffs, and Judges of the Kings Court, and have therefore Vnder-Sheriffes,
men learned in the law, to sit in their Courts. Doomesmen, or Judges of the
Kings Court.
Vicecomites, Vicounties, or Sheriffs, as being under an Earl; for that they
then, as since, used that office as the Sheriffs of London do till this day.
Some Authors do call them Doomes-men, Eldermen, or Judges of the Kings Court.

William Fitz Stephen, noting the estate of this City, and Government thereof
in his time, under the reign of King Stephen, and of Henry the second, has
these words:

This City (faith he) even as Rome, is divided into Wards, it has yearly
Sheriffs in stead of Consuls, it has the dignity of Senators and Aldermen, it
has Under-officers, and according to the quality of Laws, it has several
Courts, and general Assemblies upon appointed days.

Thus much for the antiquity of Sheriffs, and also of Aldermen in several
Wards of this City may suffice: and now for the name of Bayliffes, and after
that, of Majors as follows.

In the first year of King Richard the first, Bailiffes of London.
the Citizens of London obtained to be governed by two Bailiffes, which
Bailiffes are in diverse ancient dceds called Sheriffs, according to the speech
of the Law, which called the Shire Balliva, for that they (like as the
Portgraves) used the same office of Shrivewicke, for the which the City paid to
fee-farme, 300. l. yearly as before, since the reign of Henry the first,
which also is yet paid by the City into the Exchequer until this day.

They also obtained to have a Mayor, to be their principal Governor and
Lieutenant of the City, as of the Kings Chamber.

1189 The names of the first Bailiffes or Officers, entering into their office
at the Feast of S. Michael the Archangell, in the year of Christ 1189. were
named Henry Cornehill, and Richard Reynere, Bailiffes or Sheriffs. Their first
Mayor was Henry Fitz-Alwin, Draper, appointed by the said King, and continued
Mayor from the first of Richard the first, until the 15. of King John, which
was 24. years and somewhat more.

1190 The second of Richard the first, Sheriffs John Herlion, Roger Duke:
Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. First Mayor of London.
1191 The third Sheriffs, William Haverell, John Buckmote: Mayor, Henry
Fitz-Alwin. 1192 The fourth, Nicholas Duke, Peter Newelye: Mayor, Henry
Fitz-Alwin. 1193 The fifth, Roger Duke, Richard Fitz-Alwin. Mayor, Henry
Fitz-Alwin. 1194 The sixth, William Fitz-Isabel, -- William Fitz-Arnold: --
Sheiffes.

Mayor, Henry Fitz Alwin. An. Dom. 1195 The seventh
Robert Besaunt, -- Ioke de Iosue: -- Sheriffs.
Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1196 The eighth

Gerard de Antiloche, -- Robert Durant: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1197 The ninth
Roger Blunt, -- Nicholas Ducket: -- Sheriffs.
Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1198 The tenth
Constantine Fitz-Arnold, -- Robert le Beau: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. King John began his reign the sixth of April 1199.
An. Dom. 1199 The first of King John,
Arnold Fitz-Arnold, -- Richard Fitz Bartholomew: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. King John granted the Sheriffewicke of London, and
Middlesex, to the Citizens thereof, as King Henry the first before had done,
for the sum of 300. l. yearly. Also he gave them authority to choose and
deprive their Sheriffs at their pleasure. An. Dom. 1200 The second
Roger Dorset, -- James Bartholemew: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1201 The third
Walter Fitz-Alice, -- Simon de Aldermanbury: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Alwin. An. Dom. 1202 The fourth
Norman Blondel, -- John de Ely: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1203 The fifth
Walter Brown, -- VV. Chamberlain: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. Walter Brune, and Rosia his wife, founded the
Hospital of Saint Mary without Bishopsgate, commonly called, Saint Mary
Spittle. An. Dom. 1204 The sixth
Thomas Haverel, -- Hamond Brond: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1205 The seventh
John VValgrave, -- Richard de Winchester: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1206 The eighth
John Holyland, -- Edmund Fitz-Gerard: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1207 The ninth
Roger Winchester, -- Edmund Hard Le: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Firz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1208 The tenth
Peter Duke, -- Thomas Neale: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. The King by his Letters Patents granted to the
Citizens of London liberty and authority, yearly to choose themselves a Mayor.
An. Dom. 1209 The eleventh
Peter le Iosue, -- William Blound: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1210 The twelfth
Adam VVhitley, -- Stephen le Grass: -- Sheriffs,

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1211. The thirteenth
John Fitz-Peter, -- John Garland: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. An. Dom. 1212 The foureteenth
Randolph Eyland, -- Constantine Iosue: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwin. This Henry Fitz-Alwin deceased, and was buried in the
Parish Church of S. Mary Bothaw, near to London Stone, where he dwelt. An.
Dom. 1213. the fifteenth
Martin Fitz-Alice, -- Peter Bate: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Roger Fitz-Alwin. This year the Ditch about London was begun to be
made, of 204. foot broad, by the Londoners. 1214 The sixteenth
Solomon Basing, -- Hugh Basing: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Serle, Mercer. Roger Fitz-Alwin, says Grafton. 1215 The seventeenth
John Travers, -- Andrew Newland: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Hardel. King Henry the third began his reign the 19. of
October, 1216. 1216 The first
Benet Seinturer, -- William Bluntivers: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, James Alderman for part, and Solomon Basing for part. 1217 The second
Thomas Boker^, -- Ralph Holyland: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Serle, Mercer, Robert Serle, says Grafton. 1218 The third
John Wayle, or Veil, -- John le Spicer: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Robert Serle, Mercer. The Forest of Middlesex, and the Warren of
Stanes, were this year disaforested. 1219 The fourth
Richard Wimbledon, -- John Wayle, or Veil: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Robert Serle, Mercer. 1220 The fifth
Richard Renger, -- John Veil: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Robert Serle, Mercer. 1221 The sixth
Richard Renger, -- Thomas Lambart: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Robert Serle, Mercer. 1222 The seventh
Richard Renger, -- Thomas Lambart: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Robert Serle, Mercer. Constantine Fitz-Arnulph raised great troubles in
this City, and was hanged with his Nephew and other. 1223 The eighth
John Travars, -- Andrew Bokerel: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Renger. 1224 The ninth
John Travars, -- Andrew Bokerel: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Renger. The King granted to the Comminaltie of London, to have
a common Scale. 1225 The tenth
Roger Duke, -- Martin Fitz-William: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Renger. 1226 The eleventh
Roger Duke, -- Martin Fitz William: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Renger. This year the King confirmed to the Citizens of London
free Warren, or liberty to hunt a certain circuit about the City, in the
Warren of Stanes, etc. And also, that the Citizens of London should pass
tol-free throughout all England, and that the Keddles, or Weres in the River of
Thames, and Midway, should be plucked up and destroyed for ever, etc. Patent
11. Henry 3. 1227 The twelfth
Stephen Bokerel, -- Henry Cecham: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Roger Duke. The liberties and Franchises of London were ratified, and
the King granted, that either Sheriff should have two Clerks, and two
Sergeants: also, that the Citizens should have a common Seal. 1228 The
thirteenth
Stephen Bokerel, -- Henry Cocham: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Roger Duke. 1229 The foureteenth
William Winchester, -- Robert Fitz John: -- Sheriffs

Mayor, Roger Duke. 1230 The fifteenth
Richard Walter, -- John de VVoborne: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Roger Duke. 1231 The sixteenth
Michael of S. Helen, -- Walter de Enfield: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1232 The seventeenth
Henry de Edmonton, -- Gerard Bat: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1233 The eighteenth
Simon Fitz Mary, -- Roger Blunt: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1234 The nineteenth
Ralph Ashwy, -- John Norman: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1235 The twentieth
Gerard Bat, -- Richard or Robert Hardle: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1236 The one and twentieth
Henry Cobham, -- Jordan of Coventry: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1237 The two and twentieth
John Toloson, -- Gervais the Cordwainer: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer. 1238 The three and twentieth John Codra^, --
John VVilhall: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Renger. 1239 The four and twentieth
Reymond Bongy, -- Ralph Ashwy: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Ioyner. This William Ioyner, builded the Quire of the Gray
Friars Church in London, and became a Lay brother of that house. 1240 The five
and twentieth
John Gisors, -- Michael Tony: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Gerard Bat. This year Aldermen of London were chosen, and changed
yearly, but that order lasted not long. Gerard Bat was again elected Mayor
for that year to come, but the King would not admit him, being charged with
taking money of the Victuallers in the precedent year. 1241 The six and
twentieth
Thomas Duresme, -- John Voyle: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Reymond Bongey. 1242 The seven and twentieth
John Fitz-Iohn, -- Ralph Ashwy: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Reymond Bongey. 1243 The eight and twentieth
Hugh Blunt, -- Adam Basing: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Ralph Ashwy. 1244 The nine and twentieth
Ralph Foster, -- Nicholas Bat: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Michael Tony. 1245 The thirtieth
Robert of Cornehil, -- Adam of Bewley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Gisors Pepperer. 1246 The one and thirtieth
Simon Fitz-Mary, -- Lawrence Frowicke: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Gisors. Simon Fitz-Mary, founded the Hospital of Mary, called
Bethelem without Bishopsgate. Queen Hith was now let to farm to the Citizens
of London. 1247 The two and thirtieth
John Voyle, -- Nicholas Bat: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Peter Fitz-Alwin. 1248 The three and thirtieth
Nicholas Fitz Iosue, -- Geffrey Winchester: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Michael Tony. 1249 The four and thirty
Richard Hardell, -- John Tolason: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Roger Fitz-Roger. 1250 The five and thirtieth
Humfrey Bat, -- William Fitz-Richard: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Gisors, Pepperer. The King now granted, that the Mayor should be
presented to the Barons of the Exchequer, and they should admit him. 1251 The
six and thirtieth
Lawrence Frowicke, -- Nicholas Bat: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Adam Basing. 1252 The seven and thirtieth
William Durham, -- Thomas VVimborne: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Tolason, Draper. The Liberties of this City were seized, and the
Mayor charged, that he looked not to the Assise of bread. 1253 The eighth and
thirtieth
John Northampton, -- Richard Picard: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Hardell, Draper. 1254 The nine and thirtieth
Ralph Ashwy, -- Robert of Limon: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Hardell, Draper. 1255 The fortieth
Stephen Do, -- Henry Walmond: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Hardell, Draper. The Mayor, diverse Aldermen, and the Sheriffs
of London were deprived, and other placed in their rooms. 1256 The one and
fortieth
Michael Bockerell, -- John the Minor: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Hardell, Draper. 1257 The two and fortieth
Richard Otwel, -- William Ashwy: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Hardell; Draper. The King caused the walls of this City to
be repaired, and made with Bulwarks. 1258 The three and fortieth
Robert Cornhill, -- John Adrian: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Hardell, Draper. 1259 The four and fortieth
John Adrian, -- Robert Cornhill: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Gisors, Pepperer. 1260 The five and fortieth
Adam Browning, -- Henry Coventrie: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Fitz-Richard. 1261 The six and fortieth
John Northhampton, -- Richard Picard: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Fitz-Richard. 1262 The seven and fortieth
John Tailor -- Richard Walbrooke: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Thomas Fitz-Richard. 1263 The eight and fortieth
Robert de Mountpiter, -- Osbert de Suffolk: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Thomas Fitz-Richard. The Citizens of London fortified the City with
iron Chains, drawn rhwart over their streets. 1264 The nine and fortieth
Gregory Rockesley, -- Thomas de De^ford: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Thomas Fitz-Thomas Fitz-Richard. 1265 The fiftieth
Edward Blund, -- Peter Anger: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Thomas Fitz-Thomas Fitz-Richard. The Chains and Posts in London were
plucked up, the Mayor and principal Citizens committed to Ward, and Otho
Constable of the Tower, was made Custos of the City, etc. 1266 The one and
fiftieth
John Hind, -- John Walraven: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Richards. The Earl of Gloucester entered the City with an
Army, and therein builded Bulwarks, cast Trenches, etc. 1267 The two and
fiftieth
John Adrian, -- Lucas de Batencourt: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Alen de la Souch. This Alen de la Souch, being a Baron of this Realm,
and also chief Justice, was in the year 1270. slain in Westminster Hall, by
John warren Earl of Surrey. Thomas Fitz-Th^obald, and Agnes his wife, this
year founded the Hospital of Saint Thomas of Acon in Westcheape. 1268 The
three and fiftieth*
Walter Harvy, -- William Dur^sme: -- Sheriffs.

T. Wimborn; Custos, Sir Stephen Edward. A variance fell in London between the
Goldsmiths and the Tailors, wherthrough many men were slain. 1269 The four
and fiftieth
Thomas Basing, -- Robert Cornehill: -- Sheriffs.

Hugh Fitz-Ottonis, Custos of London, and Constable of the Tower. 1270 The five
and fiftieth
Walter Potter, -- Philip Tailor: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Adrian Vintner. 1271 The six and fiftieth
Gregory Rokesly, -- Henry Walleys: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Adrian Vintner. The steeple of Bow Church in Cheap fell down,
and slew many people. 1272 The seven and fiftieth
Richard Paris, -- John de Wodeley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Walter Harvy, Custos, H. Frowike, Pepperer, for part that year.
King Edward the first began his reign the sixteenth of November, 1272. 1273
The first
John Horn, -- Walter Potter: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Walter Harvy, Knight. 1274 The second
Nicholas Winchester, -- Henry Coventry: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Walleis. 1275 The third
Lucas Ba^encourte, -- Henry Frowicke: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Gregory Rokesley; chief Saymaster of all the Kings Mints throughout
all England, and keeper of the Kings Exchange at London. 1276 The fourth
John Horn, -- Ralph Blunt: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Gregory Rokesley. 1277 The fifth
Robert de Arar, -- Ralph L. Fewre: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Gregory Rokesley. 1278 The sixth
John Adrian, -- Walter Langley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Gregory Rokesley. 1279 The seventh
Robert Basing, -- William le Meyre: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Gregory Rokesley. 1280 The eighth
Thomas Fox, or Box, -- Ralph Delamere, or Moore: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Gregory Rokesley. 1281 The ninth
William Farendon, -- Nicholas Winchester: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Gregory Rakesley. This William Farendon, Goldsmith, one of the
Sheriffs was Father to Nicholas Farendon: Of these two Faringden Ward took
that name. 1282 The tenth
W. le Meyre, -- Richard Chigwel: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Walleis. This Henry Walleis builded the Tun upon Cornehill, to
be a Prison, and the Stocks to be a Market-house. 1283 The eleventh
Ralph Blunt, -- Ankerin de Betavil, or Hawkin Betuell: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Walleis. 1284. The twelfth
Jordan Goodcheape, -- Martin Box: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Walleis. Lawrence Ducket, Goldsmith, murdered in Bow-Church, and
the murderers hanged. 1285 The thirteenth
Stephen Cornehill, -- Roberts Rokesley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Gregory Rokesley; Custos, Ralph Sandwitch, and John Briton. It was
ordained, that Millers should have but one halfe-penny for a quarter of Wheat
grinding: and the great water Conduit in Cheap was now begun to be made. 1286
The foureteenth
Walter Blunt, -- John Wade: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. Wheat was now sold at London for sixteen pence, and
for twelve pence the quarter. 1287 The fifteenth
Thomas Cross, -- Walter Hawteyne: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. 1288 The sixteenth
W. Hereford, -- Thomas Stanes: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. 1289 The seventeenth
W. Betaine, -- John of Canturbury: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Ralph Sandwitch, Ralph Barnavars, and Sir John Briton. This year a
Subsidy was granted, for the reparations of London Bridge. 1290 The eighteenth
Fulke of S. Edmond, -- Solomon Langford, or Le Setel: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir John Briton, Knight. 1291 The nineteenth
Thomas Romain, -- W. de Leyre: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir John Briton, Knight, Ralph Sandwitch. 1292 The twentieth
Ralph blunt, -- Hamond Box: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. 1293 The one and twentieth
Henry Bell, or Bole, -- Elias Russell: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. Three men had their right hands cut off at the
Standard in Cheap, for re^cuing of a prisoner, arrested by a Sergeant of
London. 1294 The two and twentieth
Robert Rokesley the younger, Martin Aubery, or Amersbery: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Ralph Sandwitch. 1295 The three and twentieth
Henry Box, -- Richard Gloucester: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir Ralph Sandwitch. 1296 The four and twentieth
John (...), -- (...): -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir John Briton. This year all the Liberties of the City were
restored, the Mairalty excepted. 1297 The five and twentieth
Thomas of Suffolk, -- ^^dam of Falham: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir John Briton. 1298 The six and twentieth
Richard Re^^a^^, -- Thomas ^ely: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Walleis. Certain Citizens of London brake up the Tun upon
Cornehill, and took out prisoners, for the which they were grievously
punished. 1299 The seven and twentieth
John Armenter, -- Henry ^ingene, or Fingrith: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Elias Russell. 1300 The eighth and twentieth
Lucas de Havering, -- Richard Champnes: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Elias Russell. 1301 The nine and twentieth
Robert Callor, or Callet, -- Peter de Besenho: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir John Blunt, Knight. 1302 The thirtieth
Hugh Pourte, -- Simon Paris: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir John Blunt. 1303 The one and thirtieth
W. Combmartin, -- John de Burford: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir John Blunt. 1304 The two and thirtieth
Roger Paris, -- John de Lincoln: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir John Blunt. Geffrey Hertel^pole, Alderman, was elected to be
Recorder of London, and took his oath, and was appointed to wear his apparel
as an Alderman. 1305 The three and thirtieth
William Cawson, -- Reginald Thunderley: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir John Blunt. 1306 The four and thirtieth
Geffrey at the Conduit, -- Simon Billet: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir John Blunt. Seacoale was forbidden to be burned in London,
Southwarke, etc. Edward the second began his reign the seventh of July, the
year of Christ, Anno, 1307. 1307 The first
Nicholas Pigot, -- Nigellus Drury: -- Sheriffs.

Custos, Sir John Blunt. 1308 The second*
W. Basing, -- James Butt^ler: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Nicholas Faringdon, Goldsmith. 1309 The third
Roger le Palmer, -- James of S. Edmond: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Thomas Roman. 1310 The fourth
Simon Cooper, -- Peter Blackney: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Reffam, Mercer. The King commanded the Mayor and communaltie to
make the Wall of London, from Ludgate to Fleetbridge, and from thence to the
Thames. 1311 The fifth
Simon Metwod, -- Richard Wilford: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Gisors, Pepperer. Order was taken that Merchant-strangers
should sell their wares within forty days after their arrival, or else the
same to be forfeited. 1312 The sixth
John Lambin, -- Adam Lutkin: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Gisors, Pepperer. 1313 The seventh
Robert Gurden, or Burdeint, Hugh Garton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Nicholas Faringdon, Goldsmith. Prices set on victuals: a fat stalled
Ox, 24. shillings, a fat Mutton, 20. pence, a fat Goose, two pence half
penny, a fat Capon, two pence; a fat Hen, one penny; two Chickens, one penny;
three Pigeons, one penny; 24. eggs one penny, etc. 1314 The eighth
Stephen Abingdon, -- Hamond Chickwell, or Chigwell: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Gisors, Pepperer. Famine and mortality of people, so that the
quick might unneath bury the dead, horse flesh, and dogs flesh was good meat.
1315 The ninth
Hamond Goodchape, -- William Bodeleigh: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Stephen de Abingdon. 1316 The tenth
William Caston, -- Ralph Balancer: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Wingrave. An early Harvest: a Bushel of Wheat that had been
sold for ten shillings, was now sold for ten pence, etc. 1317 The eleventh
John Prior, -- W. Furneux, or Furneis: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Wingrave. Such a murren of Kin^, that Dogs and Ravens that sed on
them were poisoned. 1318 The twelfth
John Pointell, -- John Dalling: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Wingrave. 1319 The thirteenth
Simon de Abingdon, -- I. Preston: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer. John Gisors, late Mayor of London, and many
other Citizens fled the City, for things laid to their charge. 1320 The
foureteenth
Renauld at the Conduit, -- W. Prodham, or Produn: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Nicholas Farengdon, Goldsmith. 1321 The fifteenth
Richard Constantine, -- Richard de Hackney: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer. 1222 The sixteenth
John Grantham, -- Richard de Ely: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer. Fish and Flesh market established at the
Stocks, in the midst of the City. 1323 The seventeenth
Adam of Salisbury, -- John of Oxford: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Nicholas Farengdon, Goldsmith. Of this Nicholas Farengdon, and of
William Farengdon his father, read more in Farengdon Ward. 1324 The eighteenth
Benet of Fulham, -- John Cawson: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer. 1325 The nineteenth
Gilbert Mordon, -- John Causton, or Cotton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer. The Citizens of London took the Bishop of
Excester, and cut off his head at the Standard in Cheap. 1326 The twentieth
Richard Rothing, -- Roger Chaunteclere: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Britain, Goldsmith. This Richard Rothing is said to new build
the Parish Church of S. James at Garlicke-Hith. Edward the third began his
reign the 25. of January, the year of Christ, Anno, 1326. This King Edward
granted, that the Mayor should be Justice for the Jail delivery at Newgate,
that the Citizens of London should not be constrained to go out of the City of
London to any War. More he granted, that the Liberties and Franchises of the
City should not, after this time (for any cause) be taken into the Kings
hands, etc. More he granted by his Letters Patents, dated the sixth of March,
that no Escheter should be in the City, but the Mayor for his time only. 1327
The first
Henry Darcy, -- John Hawton, or Haughton: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer.
This year the Walls of London were ^^payred. 1328 The second
Simon Frances, -- Henry Combmartin: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Grantham, Grocer. 1329 The third
Richard Lazar, William Gisors: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Swandland. This year the King kept a great Iousting in Cheap,
betwixt Sopars-lane and the great Cross. 1330 The fourth
Robert of Elie, -- Thomas Whorwode: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Pountney, or Pultney, Draper. 1331 The fifth
John Mocking, -- Andrew Aubery: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Pultney, Draper. 1332 The sixth Nicholas Pike, -- John Husband: --
Sheriffs.

John Preston, Draper, This year was founded Elsing Spittle, by W. Elsing,
Mercer, that became first Prior of that Hospital. 1333 The seventh
John Hamond, -- William Hansard: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Puleney, Drapes. 1334 The eighth John Kingstone, or Kington,
Walter Turk: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Reginald at the Conduit, Vintner. 1335 The ninth
Walter Mordon, -- Richard Vpton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Nicholas Wotton, Reignold at the Conduit, says Grafton. 1330 The tenth
John Clarke, -- W. Curtes: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Pultney, Draper. This Sir John Pultney founded a College in
the Parish Church of S. Lawrence Pountney, by Candlewicke street. 1337 The
eleventh
Walter Neale, -- Nicholas Crane: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Darcy. Walter Neale, Bladesmith, gave lands to the repairing of
the highways about London. 1338 The twelfth
William de Pomfret, -- Hugh Marbeler, or Marberoll: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Darcy. The King granted, that the Sergeants of the Mayor and
Sheriffs of London, should bear Maces of Silver and gilt, with the Kings
Arms engraven on them. 1339 The thirteenth
William Thorney, -- Roger Frosham: -- Sheriffs.

Andrew Aubery, Grocer, 1340 The foureteenth
Adam Lucas, -- Bartlemew Moris: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Andrew Aubery, Grocer. 1341 The fifteenth
Richard de Barking, -- John de Rokesley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John of Oxenford, Vintner. 1342 The sixteenth
John Loufkin, -- Richard Killingbery: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Simon Francis, Mercer. The price of Gascoyn Wines at London,
fourepence, and Renish Wine six pence the Galon. 1343 The seventeenth
John Steward, -- John Aylesham: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John H^mond. 1344 The eighteenth
Geffrey Witchingham, -- Thomas Leg: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Hamond. 1345 The ninteenth
Edmund Hemenhall, -- John of Gloucester: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Leget, Richard Lazar faith Grofton. 1346 The twentieth
John Croyden, -- William Clopton: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Geffrey Witchingham. 1347 The one and twentieth
Adam Brapson, -- Richard Fas, or Bas: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Thomas Leggy, Skinner. King Edward now won Callis from the French. 1348
The two and twentieth
Henry Picard, -- Simon Dolseby: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Loufkin Fishmonger. A great Pest. Sir Walter Manny, knight, now
founded the Charter House by Smithfield, to be a burial for the dead. 1349
The three and twentieth
Adam of Bury, -- Ralph of Lynne: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Walter Turk, Fishmonger. 1350 The four and twentieth
John Notte, -- William of Worcester: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Killingbury. 1351 The five and twentieth
John Wroth, -- Gilbert of Stenineshorp: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Andrew Aubery. 1352 The six and twentieth
John Peache, -- John Stotley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Adam Francis, Mercer. This Mayor procured an Act of Parliament, that no
known whore should wear any hood, or attire on her head, except reyed, or
striped cloth of diverse colors, etc. 1353 The seven and twentieth
William Would, or Wild, -- John Little: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Adam Francis, Mercer. This Adam Francis was one of the Founders of the
College in Guild-Hal Chapel, etc. H. Prowicke was the other. 1354 The eight
and twentieth
William Notingham, -- Richard Smelt: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Thomas Leggy, or Legget Skinner. Aldermen of London were used to be
changed yearly, but now it was ordained, that they should not be removed,
without some special cause. 1355 The nine and twentieth
Walter, or Thomas (...), Thomas Brandon: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Simon Francis, Mercer. 1356 The thirtieth
Richard Notingham, -- Thomas Dolssel: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Henry Picard, Vintner. This Henry Picard feasted the Kings of England,
of France, Cypres, and Scots, with other great Estates, all in one day. 1357
The one and thirtieth
Stephen Candish, -- Bartholmew Prostling: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Stody, Vintner. This John Stody gave tenements to the Vintners
in London, for relief of the poor of that Company. 1358 The two and thirtieth
John Barnes, -- John B^^is: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Loufkin, Stockfishmonger. 1359 The three and thirtieth Simon of
Benington, -- John of Chichester: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Simou Dolseby, Grocer. 1360 The four and thirtieth
John Dennis, -- Walter Berny: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Wroth, Fishmonger. 1361 The five and thirtieth
William Holbech, -- James Tame: Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Peche, Fishmonger. 1362 The six and thirtieth
John of S. Albones, -- James Andrew: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Stephen Candish, Draper. 1363 The seven and thirtieth
Richard of Croyen, -- John Hiltoft: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Not, Grocer. 1364 The three and fortieth
John de Metford, -- Simon de Mordon: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Adam of Bury, Skinner. 1365 The nine and thirtieth
John Bukylsworth, -- John or Thomas Ireland: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Loufkin, Fishmonger, and Adam of Bury, Skinner. 1366 The fortieth
John Ward, -- Thomas of Lee, or at the Lee. -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Loufkin, Fishmonger. This John Loufkin builded the Parish Church
of S. Michael in Crooked-lane. 1367 The one and fortieth
John Turngold, or Torgold, -- William Dickeman: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, James Andrew, Draper. 1368 The two and fortieth
Robert Girdeler, -- Adam Wimondham: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor Simon Mordon, Stockfishmonger. This year Wheat was sold for two
shillings six pence the bushel. 1369 The three and fortieth
John Piel, -- Hugh Holdich: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Chichester, Goldsmith. 1370 The four and fortieth
William Walworth, -- Robert Gayton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Barnes, Mercer. 1371 The five and fortieth
Adam Staple, -- Robert Hatfield: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Barnes, Mercer. This John Barnes gave a chest with three locks,
and one thousand Marks, to be lent to poor men. 1372 The six and fortieth
John Philpot, -- Nicholas Brembar: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Piel, Mercer. 1373 The seven and fortieth
John Aubery, -- John Fished: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Adam of Bury, Skinner. 1374 The eight and fortieth
Richard Lions, -- William Woodhouse: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Walworth, Fishmonger. 1375 The nine and fortieth
John Hadley, -- William Newport: Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Ward, Grocer. 1376 The fiftieth
John Northampton, -- Robert Laund: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Adam Staple, Mercer. The Londoners meant to have slain John, Duke of
Lancaster: Adam Staple, Mayor, put down, and Nicholas Brembar elected. Also
the Aldermen were deposed and other set in their places. Richard the second
began his reign the one and twentieth of June, in the year 1377. 1377 The
first
Nicholas Twiford, -- Andrew Pikeman: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Nicholas Brembar, Grocer. John Philpot, a Citizen of London, sent
Ships to the Sea and scoured it of Pirates, taking many of them prisoners. 1378
The second
John Boseham, -- Thomas Cornwalis: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Philpot, Grocer. This John Philpot gave to the City lands, for the
finding of thirteen poor people for ever. 1379 The third
John Helisdon, -- William Barrat: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Hadley, Grocer. 1380 The fourth
Walter Doget, or Docket, -- William Knighthode: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Walworth, Fishmonger. This William walworth arrested Wat Tiler,
the Rebel, and this year was Knighted. He increased the Parish Church of
Saint Michael in Crooked-lane, and founded there a College. Other Aldermen
were also then Knighted with him, for their service in the field. 1381 The
fifth
John Rota, -- John Hynde: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Northampton, Draper. 1382 The sixth
Adam Bamme, -- John Sely: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Northampton, Draper, or rather Skinner, as I find in some Record.
1383 The seventh
Simon Winchcombe, -- John More: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Nicholas Brembar, Grocer. John Northampton, late Mayor of London,
was committed to perpetual prison and his goods confiscated. 1384 The eighth
Nicholas Exton, -- John French: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Nicholas Brembar, Grocer, Knighted with William Walworth. 1385 The
ninth
John Organ, -- John Churchman: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Nicholas Brembar, Grocer. The foresaid John Churchman now builded
the Custom House, near to the Tower of London, and did many other works for
the commodity of this City. 1386 The tenth
W. Stondon, -- W. More: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Nicholas Exton, Fishmonger. This year the Citizens of London, fearing
the French, pulled down houses near about their City, repaired their Walls,
and cleansed their ditches, etc. 1387 The eleventh
William Venor, or Vinor, -- Hugh Falstalfe: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Nicholas Exton, Fishmonger. Sir Nicholas Brembar, late Mayor of London
was this year beheaded. 1388 The twelfth
Thomas Austen, -- Adam Carlehul: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Nicholas Twiford, Goldsmith, Knighted with William Walworth. 1389 The
thirteenth
John Walcot, -- John Love: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Vinor, or Venour, Grocer. 1390 The fourteenth
John Francis, -- Thomas Vivent: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Adam Bamme, Goldsmith. This Adam Bamme provided from beyond the Seas,
Corn in great abundance, so that the City was well able to serve the Country.
1391 The fifteenth
John Shadworth, or Chadworth, -- Henry Vamere: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Hind, Draper. This Mayor was, for displeasure taken, sent to
Windsor Castle, and the King made a Custos or Warden of the City. 1392 The
sixteenth
Gilbert Mafield, -- Thomas Newington: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Stondon, Grocer. 1393 The seventeenth
Drew Barentin, -- Richard Whitington: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Hardley, Grocer. Faringdon Ward was now by Parliament
appointed to be divided into two Wards, to wit, infra, and extra. 1394 The
eighteenth
William Bramston, -- Thomas Knoles: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Froyshe, Mercer. 1395 The nineteenth
Roger Ellis, -- William Sevenoke: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William More, Vintner. 1396 The twentieth
Thomas Wilford, -- William Parker: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Adam Brown, Goldsmith. 1397 The one and twentieth
John Woodcocke, -- William Ascham: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Richard Whitington, Mercer. 1398 The two and twentieth
John Wade, -- John Warnar: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Drew Barentin, Goldsmith. King Henry the fourth began his reign
the twenty ninth of September, in the year, 1399. 1399 The first
William Waldern, -- William Hende or Hide: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Knoles, Grocer. 1400 The second
John Wakel, -- William Ebot: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Francis, Goldsmith. 1401 The third
William Venor, -- John Fremingham: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Shadworth, or Chadworth, Mercer. The Conduit upon Cornehill
was this year made, being before an old prison house, called the Tun. 1403
The fourth
Richard Marlow, -- Robert Chicheley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Walcote, Draper. 1403 The fifth
Thomas Falconer, -- Thomas Poole: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Ascham, Fish-monger, 1404 The sixth
William Louth, -- Stephen Spilman: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Hind, Draper. This John Hynd was a new builder of the Parish of
Saint Swithen, by London-Stone.
1405 The seventh
Henry Barton, -- William Cromer: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Woodcocke, Mercer. This Mayor caused all the Weres in the
River of Thames, from Stanes to the River of Medwey, to be destroyed, and the
Trinkes to be burned, etc. 1406 The eighth
Nicholas Wotton, -- Geffrey Brook: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Richard Whitington, Mercer. This year a great Pestilence in London
took away more than 30000. people. 1407 The ninth Henry Pontfract, -- Henry
Halton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Stondon, Grocer. 1408 The tenth
Thomas Ducke, -- William Norton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Drew Barentine, Goldsmith. This Drew Barentine builded a part of
Goldsmiths Hall, and gave them lands. 1409 The eleveth
John Law, -- William Chichley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Marlow, Ironmonger. A great play at Skinners well, which lasted
eight days, and was of matter from the creation of the World: the most part of
all the great Estates of England were there to behold it. 1410 The twelfth
John Pen, -- Thomas Pike: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Knowles, Grocer. This Thomas Knowles began a new to build
the Guild Hall in London, etc. 1411 The thirteeth
John Rainwell, -- William Cotton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Robert Chichley, Grocer. 1412 The foureteenth
Ralph Lovenham, -- William Sevenoke: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Waldren, Mercer. Henry the fifth began his reign the
twentieth of March, the year 1412. 1413 The first
John Sutton, -- John Michaell: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Cromar, Draper. Sir John Oldcastle assembled a great power
in Fickets field in London, which power was overcome and taken by the King and
his power. 1414 The second
John Michaell, -- Thomas Alen: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Falconer, Mercer. This Mayor caused the Posterne called
Moregate to be builded, and he lent to the King 10000. marks upon Jewels, etc.
1415 The third
William Cambridge, -- Allen Everard, -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Nicholas Wotton, Draper. 1416 The fourth
Robert Whitigton, or Widington, -- John Coventrie: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Henry Barton, Skinner. This Henry Barton ordained Lanthornes with
Lights, to be hanged out on the Winter evenings, betwixt Hallontide and
Candlemasse. 1417 The fifth
Henry Read, -- John Gedney: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Richard Marlow, Ironmonger. 1418 The sixth
John Brian, -- Ralph Barton, -- John Paruesse: Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Sevenoke. This Willam Sevenoke, son to William Rumsched of
Sevenoke in Kent, was by his Father bound an apprentice with Hugh de Bois a
Citizen and Ferrer of London, for a term of years, which being expired in
the year 1394. the eighteenth of Richard the second, John Hadley being Mayor
of London, and Stephen Spilman, Chamberlain of the Guild Hall: he alleged,
that his master had used the trade or mystery of a Grocer, and not of a Ferrer,
and therefore required to be made free of the Grocers Company, which was
granted. This William Sevenoke, founded in the town of Sevenoke in Kent, a
free. School, and Almes-houses for the poor. 1419 The seventh
Robert Whitington, -- John Butler: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Richard Whitington, Mercer. This Mayor founded Whitington College.
1420 The eighth
John Butler, -- John Wells: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Cambridge, Grocer. 1421 The ninth
Richard Gosseline, -- William Weston: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Robert Chichley, Grocer. This Mayor gave one plot of ground
thereunto, to build the Parish Church of Saint Stephen upon Walbrooke. Henry
the sixth began his reign the one and thirtieth day of August, in the year,
1422. 1422 The first
William Eastfield, Newgate this year builded by the Executours of Richard
Whitington.
-- Robert Tatarsal: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Walderne, Mercer, son of Geffrey Walderne, of the Parish
of Walderne in Sussex. 1423 The second Nicholas James, -- Thomas Watford, or
Wind-ford: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Cromar, Draper, son of John Cromar of Aldernham in
Hertford-shire. 1424 The third
Simon Seman, -- John Bywater: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Michell, Stockfishmon^^^^ne of John Michell of Ekelingham in
Suffolk. 1425 The fourth
William Milred, or Milreth, John Brokle: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Coventrie, Mercer; son of William Coventrie, of the City of
Coventrie in Warwickshire. 1426 The fifth
John Arnold, -- John Higham: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Three Wards in London discharged from Fifteenes by this Mayor.
Sir John Rainewell, Fishmonger, son of Robert Rainewell, Citizen, and
Haberdasher of London. 1427 The sixth
Henry Frowick, -- Robert Otely. -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Gedney, Draper, son of William Gedney, of Saint Edes, in
Cambridge-shire. 1428 The seventh
Thomas Duffhouse, or Defe-house, -- John Abbot: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Henry Barton, Skinner, son of Henry Barton, of Myldenhall in
Suffolk. 1429 The eighth
William Russe, -- Ralph Holland: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William East-field, Mercer, son of William East field, of Tickel
in Yorkshire. Ralph Holland the Sheriff gave to impotent poor on hundred and
twenty pounds, to prisoners fourscore pounds, to hospitals forty pounds, etc.
1430 The ninth
Walter Chertsey, A Charitable Sheriff.
-- Robert Large: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Nicholas Wotton, Draper, son of Thomas Wotton of London, Gentleman.
Walter Chertsey, Draper, gave to the poor, one hundred pounds, beside twenty
pounds, to the Hospitals, etc. 1431 The tenth
John Aderley, -- Stephen Brown: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, He builded the Standard in Cheape^^^^.
Sir John de Wells, Grocer, son of John de Wells, of the City of Norwich.
This John de Wells was a great benefactor toward the new building of the
Chapel (...) the Guild Hall: besides he builded the South I Will of the Quire at
Saint Antlins Church, as by his picture, (strangely there found) his Motto and
Arms does yet plainly appear. 1432 The eleventh
John Olney, -- John Paddesley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Parveis, Fishmonger, son to John Parveis of Ersgeston in
Barkesh^^e. 1433 The twelfth
Thomas Chalton, -- John King: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Brokle, Draper. son to William Brokle, of Newport Panel in
Buckinghamshire. 1434 The thirteenth
Thomas Barnewell, -- Simon Air: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, A great Frost of 14. weeks long.
Sir Roger Oteley, Grocer, son to William Oteley of Vfford in Suffolk. 1435
The fourteenth
Thomas Catworth, -- Robert Clopton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Henry Frowicke, Mercer, son to Henry Frowicke of Middlesex. 1436
The fifteenth
Thomas Morsted, -- William Gregory: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor again, Sir John Michell, Stockfishmonger. 1437 The sixteenth
William Hales, -- William Chapman: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor again, This Mayor a great (...) to the (...) Conduits.
Sir William Easfield, and then made a Knight of the Ba^h. 1438 The seventeenth
Hugh Dyker, -- Nicholas ^owe: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, A great dearth Bread made of Fitches, Pease, Beans, and Fear^e (...).
Sir Stephen Brown, Grocer, son to John Brown of Newcastle upon Time. Wheat
was then sold for three shillings the Bushel; but this Mayor sent into Prusia,
and caused to be brought from thence, certain Ships laden with Rye, which
caused great relief in so extreme a necessity. 1439 The eighteenth
Philip Malpas, -- Robert Marshall: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Robert Large, Mercer, son of Thomas Large, Borne in London. Philip
Malpas, at his decease, gave one hundred and twenty pounds to poor Prisoners:
and every year, for five year, four hundred and three shirts and smockes,
Bountiful Charity.
forty pair of sheets, and one hundred and fifty gowns of good frize, to
poor people. To poor maids marriages, one hundred marks. To repairing high
ways, one hundred marks: And to five hundred poor people in London, every
one six shillings eight pence, etc. 1440 The nineteenth
John Sutton, -- William Welinhale: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, He was master of the money in the Tower of London.
Sir John Paddesley, Goldsmith, son to Simon Paddesley, of Bury Saint Edmond
in Suffolk. 1441 The twentieth
William Combis, or Combs, Richard Rich: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Robert Clopton, Draper, son of Thomas Clopton, of Clopton in
Cambridge shire. 1442 The one and twentieth
Thomas Beaumont, -- Richard Nordon: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Alderley, Ironmonger, son of John Aderley or Hatherley, of the
City of Bristoll. 1443 The two and twentieth
Nicholas Wyfold, -- John Norman: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Thomas Catworth, Grocer, son of John Catworth of Rushton in
Northumberland. 1444 The three and twentieth
Stephen Foster, -- Hugh Witch: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Paul's Steeple was fired with lightening and hardly quenched.
again Sir Henry Frowicke, son to Henry Frowicke of Totenham in Middlesex
Gounty. 1445 The four and twentieth
John Darby, -- Godfrey Fielding: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Simon Air, Draper, son to John Air, of Brandon in Suffol^e.
This Simon Air builded (...) Hall in London, to be a Common Carner for the
City. 1446 The five and twentieth
Robert Horn, -- Godfrey Bullen: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Olney, Mercer, son of of John Olney of the City of Coventrie.
1447 The six and twentieth
William Abraham, -- Thomas Scot: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor again, Sir John Gedney, Draper. 1448 The seven and twentieth
William Cotlow, or Catlow, -- William Marrow: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor again, Sir Stephen Brown, Grocer. 1449 The eight and twentieth
William Hulin, -- Thomas Canning: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, (...).
Sir (...) son to Thomas (...) in Redfordshire. 1450 The nine and twentieth.
John (...) -- William Dear: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Nicholas Wilford, but more truly Wyfold, Grocer, son to Thomas
Wyfold of Hertley in Barkeshire. 1451 The thirtieth
Matthew Philip, -- Christopher Wharton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Gregory, Skinner, son of Roger Gregory of Milden-hall in
Suffolk. 1452 The one and thirtieth
Richard Zee, -- Richard Alley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, A great Fray was this year at the westling.
Sir Geffrey Fielding, Mercer, son to William Fielding of Litterworth in
Leicestershire. This Lord Mayor was made of the Council to King Henry the
sixth and King Edward the fourth. 1453 The two and thirtieth
John Walden, or Waldron, -- Thomas Cook: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The Aldermen (before) rode by land on hourseback to West (...).
Sir John Norman, Draper, son to Io. Norman of Banbury in Oxfordshire. This I.
Norman was the first Mayor that was rowed by water to Westminster, to take his
Oath: he caused a Barge to be made at his own charge, and every Company had
several Barges, well decked and trimmed, to pass along with him. For joy
whereof, the Watermen made a Song in his praise beginning. Row thy Boat,
Norman, etc. 1454 The three and thirtieth
John Field, -- William Tailor: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Stephen Foster, Fishmonger, son of Robert Foster of London,
Stock-fishmonger. This man enlarged Ludgate, for ease of the prisoners there.
1455 The four and thirtieth
John Young, -- Thomas Oldgrave: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Marrow, Mercer, son to Stephen Marrow, of Stebunheath, in
Middlesex. 1456 The five and thirtieth
John Styward. -- Ralph Verney: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Canning, Grocer, son to John Canning, of the City of
Bristoll. 1457 The six and thirtieth
William Edwards, -- Thomas Reyner: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This Mayor gave 1000 (...) poor householders in London.
Sir, Godfrey Bullen, son to Geffrey Bullen of Salle in Norfolk. 1458 The
seven and thirtieth
Ralph Ioceline, -- Richard Medham: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Scot, Draper, son to Robert Scot of Dorney in
Buckinghamshire. 1459 The eight and thirtieth
John Plummer, -- John Stocker: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Now were the woeful battles of Blorebeath, Northhampton, Wakefield,
Saint Albanes, and Mortiners Cross each ofter other.
Sir William Hulin, Fishmonger, son to Nicholas Hulin of Fulham in Middlesex.
1460 The nine and thirtieth
Richard Fleming, -- John Lambert: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Richard Leo, Grocer, son to Simon Lee, of the City of Worcester.
King Edward the fourth began his reign the fourth of March, in the year 1460.
after the account of the Church of England. 1461 The first
George Ireland, -- John Lock: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Hugh Witch, Mercer, son of Richard Witch, of Wice Malbano in
Cheshire. 1462 The second
William Hampton, -- Bartholomew James: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Cook, Draper, son of Robert Cook of Lavenham in Suffolk.
This Mayor was made Knight of the Bath, This Mayor was knight of the Bath and
after Knighted in the field by the King.
and had great troubles after. 1463 The third
Robert Basset, -- Thomas Muschamp: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Matthew Philip, Goldsmith, son to Arnold Philip of the City of
Norwich. 1464 The fourth
John Tate, -- John Stone: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Ralph Ioceline, Knight of the Bath in the field.
Sir Ralph Ioceline, Draper, son to Geffrey Ioceline, of Sabridgeworth in
Hertfordshire. 1465 The fifth
Henry Weaver, Henry Weaver, knight of the Bath being Sheriff, Surmistedly
charged with Treason.
-- William Constantine: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Ralph Varney, Mercer, son to Ralph Varney, borne in the City of
London. 1466 The sixth
John Brown, -- Henry Brice, -- John Darby: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Young, Grocer, son of Thomas Young of the City of Bristoll.
This Mayor was made Knight in the field: and this year began the troubles of
Sir Thomas Cook, and of other Aldermen, as you may read more at large in my
Summarie. 1467 The seventh
Thomas Stalbrooke, -- Humfrey Hoyford: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Oldgrave, Skinner; son of William Oldgrave, of Knottysford
in Cheshire. 1468 The eighth
Simon Smith, -- William Harriot: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Tailor, Grocer, son to John Tailor of Ecclestone in
Staffordshire. 1469 The nint
Richard Gardner, -- Robert Drope: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, King Henry the sixth delivered out of the Tower.
Sir Richard a Lee, son to John a Lee, of the City of Worcester. This year,
the Tower of London being delivered the Lord Mayor, and his brethren the
Aldermen, they deliverd, King Henry the sixth, who was kept there Prisoner. 1470
The tenth
John Crosby, -- John Ward: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Stockton, Mercer, son to Richard Stockton, of Bratoft in
Lincolneshire. Thomas Nevil, the Bastard Falconbridge, with a riotous company,
The insurrection of the Bastard Faulconbridge and his accomplices.
did this year set upon this City, at Aldgate, Bishops-gate, the Bridge, etc.
And twelve Aldermen, with the Recorder were Knighted in the field, by Edw. the
fourth, to wit, John Stockton, Mayor; Ralph Veruey, late Mayor; John Young, late
Mayor; William Tailor, late Mayor; Richard a Lee, late Mayor; Matthew Philips,
The most of these Knights were afterward made Majors.
late Mayor, George Ireland; William Stocker; William Hampton; Thomas
Stalbrooke; John Crosby; Bartholomew James; and Thomas Vrswike, Recorder.
1471 The eleventh
John Alen, -- John Shelley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Edwards, Grocer, son to William Edwards of the Parish of
Hoton in Essex. The water-Conduit in Aldermanbury, and the Standard in
Fleetstreete were this year finished. 1472 The twelfth
John Brown, -- Thomas Bledlow: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Mychenhampton.
Sir William Hampton, Fishmonger, son to John Hampton of Minchen-hampton in
Glocestershire. Punishment inflicted on strumpets and Vagabonds.
This Mayor punished Strumpets, and caused stocks to be set up in every Ward,
to punish Vagabonds. 1473 The thirteenth
Sir William Stocker, -- Robert Belisdon: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Tate, Mercer, son of John Tate, Sergeants and their yeomen
appointed to the Sheriffs.
borne in the City of London. This year the Sheriffs of London were
appointed (each of them) to have sixteen Sergeants, and every Sergeant to have
his Yeoman. Also six Clerks, a Secondary, a Clerk of the Papers, and four
other Clerks, besides the Vndersheriffes Clerks. 1474 The fourteenth
Edmond Shaa, or Shawe, -- Thomas Hill: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Robert Drope, Draper, son to John Drope of Saint Edes in
Huntingdonshire. This Mayor increased the Water-Conduit in Corne-hill.
1475 The fifteenth
Hugh Brice, -- Robert Colwich: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Robert Basset, Salter, son to Robert Basset of Billerykey in Essex.
1476 The sixteenth
Richard Rawson, -- William Horn: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor again, He corrected the Bakers and Victualers of this City.
Sir Ralph Ioceline, Draper, Knight of the Bath, by whose diligence the walls of
the City were repaired. 1477 The seventeenth
Henry Collet, -- John Stocker: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Humfrey Heyford, Goldsmith, son to Roger Heyford of Stratford
Bow near London. 1478 The eighteenth
Robert Harding, Robert Bifield gave 50. li. toward the water Co^duits.
-- Robert Bifield: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Richard Gardener, Mercer, son of John Gardener of Exning in Suffolk.
1479 The nineteenth
Thomas Ilam, Tomas Ilam newely builded the great Conduit in Cheap side.
-- John Ward: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Bartholomew James, Draper, son to Edward James of London,
Vpholder. 1480 The twentieth
Thomas, or William Daniel, William Bacon: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Brown, otherwise called John de Werks, Mercer, son of John
Brown of Okeham in Rutland-shire. 1481 The one and twentieth
Robert Ta^e, -- Richard Chawrey, -- William Wiking: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, New building of Creplegate.
Sir William Heriot, or Harriot, Draper, son to John Heriot late of Segrave
in the County of Leicester. 1482 The two and twentieth
William White, -- John Matthew: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Edmond Shaa, or Shaw, Goldsmith, son to John Shaa, late of
Donkenfield, in the County of Chester. This Sir Edmond Shaa, caused the
Posterne called Creplegate to be newly builded. King Edward the fifth began his
reign the ninth of April, in the year 1483. Richard the third began his
reign the two and twentieth of June in the year 1483. 1483 The first
Thomas Newland, -- William Martia: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Robert Billesdon, Haberdasher, son to Alexander Billesdon, of
Queeningborough in the County of Leicester. 1484 The second
Richard Chester, -- Thomas Britain, -- Ralph Astrie: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, 3 Lord Majors, and three Sheriffs in one year, by reason of a
sweating sickness.
Sir Thomas Hill, Grocer: Sir William Stocker, Draper, and John Ward, Grocer.
Thomas Hill was son to William Hill of Hilston in the County of Kent. William
Stoker was son to Thomas Stocker of Eaton in the County of Bedford: and John
Ward was son to Richard Ward of Howdon in the County of York. Thomas Hill
appointed by his Testament, the water Conduit in Grasse-street to be builded
this year. Henry the seventh began his reign the two and twentieth of August
in the year 1485. 1485 The first
John Tate, -- John Swan, or Swans: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Hugh Brice, Goldsmith, son to Richard Brice of Dublin in Ireland.
This Hugh Brice was keeper of the Kings Mints at London. 1486 The second
John Percivol, -- Hugh Clopton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This was father to him that builded Paul's School.
Sir Henry Collet, Mercer, son to Robert Collet of Wendover in the County of
Buckingham. This year the Cross in West Cheap was new builded in beautiful
manner. 1487 The third
John Fenkel, -- William Remington: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Florne, Saiter, son to Thomas Horn of Snaysewell in the
County of Cambridge. This William was made Knight, in the field, by King Henry
the seventh, and gave to the repairing of high ways betwixt London and
Cambridge, five hundred Marks, and bountifully to the Preachers at Paul's
Cross. 1488 The fourth
William Isaac, -- Ralph Tinley or Tilney: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Robert Tate, Mercer, son to Thomas Tate of the City of
Coventr^y. 1489 The fifth
William Capell, -- John Brook: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William White, Draper, son to Williamwhite of Tickhill in the
County of York. 1490 The sixth
Henry Cote, or Coote, -- Robert Revell, -- Hugh Pemberton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This man lived and dyed a Bachelor and never was Batchelour Mayor
before.
John Matthew, Mercer, being first a Linen Draper, and translated to the
Mercers. He was son to Thomas Matthew of Sherington in the County of
Buckingham, 1491 The seventh
Thomas Wood, -- William Brown: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Hugh Clopton, Mercer, son to John Clopton of Stratford upon Avon
in the County of Warwick, where the said Hugh builded the goodly stone Bridge.
1492 The eighth
William Purchase, -- William Welbeck: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Martin, Skinner, son to Walter Martin of the County of
Hertford. This year there was a riot made upon the Easterlings, by the Mercers
servants and others. d others. 1493 The ninth
Robert Fabian, -- John Winger: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This Mayor was made Knight by King Henry the seventh.
Sir Ralph Ostrich, or Astrie, Fishmonger, son to Geffrey Ostrich, or Astrie,
of Hitchin in the County of Hertford. Robert Fabian, Alderman, made Fabians
Chronicle, a very painful labor, to the great honor of the City, and the
whole Realm. 1494 The tenth
Nicholas Alwin, -- John Warner: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Richard Chawrie, Salter, son to William Chawrie, of Westram in
Kent. 1495 The eleventh
Thomas Kneesworth, -- Henry Summer: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor again, One man twice Lord Mayor.
Sir Henry Collet Mercer. This year was much trouble, about the intercourse
between England and Flanders. 1496 The twelfth
John Shaa, -- Richard Haddon: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Tate the younger, son to Thomas Tate of Coventrie, and brother to
Robert Tate, Mayor before named. The King made this Mayor, Robert Shifield,
Recorder, and both the Sheriffs Knights, for their service against the Rebels
at Blacke-Heath Field. 1497 The thirteenth
Barthelomew Read, -- Thomas Windew or Windout: Sheriffs.

Mayor, The levelling of More-fields.
William Purchase, Mercer, son to John Purchase of Gamelinghey in the County of
Cambridge. This year all the Gardens in More-fields were destroyed, and made
plain ground. 1498 The fourteenth
Thomas Bradbury, -- Stephen (...) -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Made Knight in the field by the King.
Sir John Percivall, Merchant-Taylor, son to Roger Percivall of London. 1499
The fifteenth
James Wilford, -- Thomas, or Richard Brond: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, A good Mayor for the poor^.
Sir Nicholas Aldwine, Mercer, son to Richard Aldwine of Spalding in
Lincolneshire. He gave twelve pence a piece to three thousand poor people in
London, and the like to as many more in and about Spalding. 1500 The sixteenth
John Hawes, -- William Steed: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Rennington, Fishmonger, son to Robert Rennington of Bostone
in Lincolneshire. 1501 The seventeenth
Lawrence Aylmer, -- Henry Head: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The Lord Majors first riding from the Guild hell to take Barge for
Westminster.
Sir John Shaa, Goldsmith, son to I. Shaa of Rochford in Essex. This Mayor was
made Knight in the field by the King, and he caused his Brethren the Aldermen
to ride from the Guild Hall to the waters side, when he took Barge to
Westminster, where he was sworn by the Kings Council. He first kept Court in
his own house, and called and redressed all matters coming before him. 1502
The eighteenth
Henry Kebble, -- Nicholas Nives: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Bartholomew Read, Goldsmith, son to Robert Read of Crowmer in
Norfolk. Thomas Granger. 1503 The nineteenth
Christopher Hawes, -- Robert Wats: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Capell, Draper, son of John Capell of Stoke-Neyland, He
was Knighted by Henry the seventh.
in the County of Suffolk. This Mayor first caused Cages to be set up in every
Ward, for the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds. 1504 The twentieth
Roger Acheley, -- William Brown: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Winger, Grocer, son to William Winger of Leicester. 1505 The
one and twentieth
Richard Shore, -- Roger Grove: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Kneisworth, Fishmonger, son to John Kneisworth, of
Kneisworth in Cambridgeshire. This Thomas Kneisworth appointed the
water-Conduit at Bishops-gate to be builded. 1506 The two and twentieth
William Copinger, This Fitz-William, Merchant-Taylor, was after of council to
King Henry the eighth, He builded also the greater part of the Parish Church of
Saint Andrew Vnder^^aft In London.
-- Thomas Johnson, -- William Fitz-Williams: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Richard Haddon, Mercer, son of William Haddon, Citizen and Mercer
of London. 1507 The three and twentieth
William Butler, -- John Kerkby: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, William Brown, Mercer, son of John Brown, Citizen and Mercer of
London, for part of the year; and Lawrence Aylmer, Draper son of Thomas
Aylmer, of Ellesnam in Essex for the other part. 1508 The four and twentieth
Thomas Exmewe, -- Richard Smith: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Stephen Iennings, Merchant-Taylor, son to William Iennings of
Woolnerhampton, in Staffordshire, where he builded a Free School, which is
still worthily maintained by the Company of Merchant-Taylors of London. King
Henry the eighth began his reign the two and twentieth of April, in the year
1509. 1509 The first
George Monox, -- John Doget: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Thomas Bradbury, Mercer, son to William Bradbury of Branghin in
Hertfordshire, for part of the year, and Sir William Capell for the rest. 1510
The second
John Milborne, -- John Rest: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, He gave also 1000. li. to finish up his Parish church of Aldermary,
with a steeple, not yet performed*
Sir Henry Kebble, Grocer, son to George Kebble, Citizen and Grocer of
London. He new builded the Parish Church of Aldermary by Watling-streete. 1511
The third
Nicholas Shelton, -- Thomas Mirsine: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Roger Acheley, Draper, son to Thomas Acheley, of Stanwardine in
Shropshire. A careful Magistrate for Corn.
This Roger Acheley provided Corn for service of this City in great plenty,
and caused the same to be stowed up in Leaden Hall, being called the Common
Garner. 1512 The fourth
Robert Holdernes, or Aldernes; -- Robert Fenrother: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This Copinger gave half of his goods to his wife and the other hal^ to
the poor that had most need*
Sir William Copinger, Fishmonger, son to Walter Copinger, of Buckfeill in
Suffolk for part of the year, and Sir Richard Haddon for the rest. 1513 The
fifth
John Dawes, -- John Bruges, -- Roger Basford: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Brown, Mercer, son to John Brown, Citizen and Mercer of
London. John Tate Mercer, this year builded the Church of Saint Anthonies
Hospital in London. 1514 The sixth
James Yarford, -- John Mundy: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir George Monox, Draper, borne in London, but his fathers name not
remembered. 1515 The seventh
Henry Warley, -- Richard Gray, -- William Baily: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Butler, Grocer, son to Richard Butler, of Bindenham in
Bedfordshire. 1516 The eighth
Thomas Seymer, -- John, or Richard Thurstone: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Rest, Grocer, son to William Rest of Peterborough in
Northhamptonshire. 1517 The ninth
Thomas Baldrie, -- Ralph, or Richard Simons: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, He made the water Conduit at London wall by Moregate.
Sir Thomas Exmewe, Goldsmith, son to Richard Exmewe, of Ruthin in
Flintshire. 1518 The tenth
John Allen, -- James Spencer: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Mirfine, Skinner, son to George Mirfine of Ely in
Cambridgeshire. 1519 The eleventh
John Wilkinson, -- Nicholas Partrich: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Majors Knighted by courtefie of the Kings.
Sir James Yardford, Mercer, son to William Yardford of Kidwelley in Wales.
From this time onward, the Majors of London (for the most part) were Knighted
by courtesy of the Kings, and not otherwise. 1520 The twelfth
John Skevington, -- John Kyme, alias Keble: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Brug, or Bruges, Draper, son to Thomas Brug, or Bruges, of
Dymmocke in Glocestershire. 1521 The thirteenth
John Breton, or Britain, -- Thomas Pargitor: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, He builded the Almeshouses by Tower hill*
Sir John Milborne, Draper, son to John Milborne of Long Melford in Suffolk.
1522 The fourteenth
John Rudstone, -- John Champneis: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Not thirteen thousand Parishes in England. then approved.
Sir John Mundy, Goldsmith, son to William Mundy of Wycombe in
Buckinghamshire. 1523 The fifteenth
Michaell English, -- Nicholas Iennings: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Baldrie, Mercer, son to Richard Baldrie of S^ow market in
Suffol^^. 1524 The sixteenth
Ralph Dodmere, -- William Roche: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Ba^ly, Draper, son to John Baily of Thacksted in Essex.
1525 The seventeenth
John Caunton, or Calton, -- Christopher Askew: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Allen, Mercer, son to Richard Allen of Thacksted in Essex.
1526 The eighteenth
Stephen Peacocke, -- Nicholas Lambert: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Seymer, Mercer, son to John Seymer of London, Fishmonger,
who was son to Robert Seymer of Walden in Essex. 1527 The nineteenth
John Hardy, -- William Holleis: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This year was the great sweating sickness.
Sir James Spencer, Vintner, son to Robert Spencer of Congleton in Cheshire.
1528 The twentieth
Ralph Warren, -- John Long: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Testament in English translated by (...).
Sir John Rudstone, Draper, son to Robert Rudstone of (...) Yorkshire. 1529
The one and twentieth
Michaell Dermer -- Walter Champion: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This Mayor was translated from the Brewers to the Mercers.
Sir Ralph Dodmer, Mercer, son to Henry Dodmer, of Pickering-Leigh in
Yorkshire. This year it was decreed that no man should be Mayor of London
more than one year. 1530 The two and twentieth
William Dauntesey, or Dancy, -- Richard Champion: Sheriffs.

Mayor, The King first called Supreme head.
Sir Thomas Pargitor, Salter, son to John Pargitor, of Chippingnorton in
Oxfordshire. 1531 The three and twentieth
Richard Gresham, -- Edward Altham: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Nicholas Lambert, Grocer, son to Edward Lambert of Wilton in
Wiltshire. 1532 The four and twentieth
Richard Reynolds, -- John Martin, -- Nicholas Pinchon, -- John Priest: --
Sheriffs.

Mayor, This year was queen Elizabet's borne at Greenwich.
Sir Stephen Peacock, Haberdasher, son to Stephen Peacock of the City of
Dublin in Ireland. 1533 The five and twentieth
William Forman, -- Thomas Kitson: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Oath taken to the succession.
Sir Christopher Askew, Draper, son to John Askew of Edmonton in Middlesex.
1534 The six and twentieth
Nicholas Leveson, -- William Denham: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The Popes power expelled out of England.
Sir John Champneis, Skinner, son to Robert Champneis, of Chew in
Sommersetshire. 1535 The seven and twentieth Humfrey Monmouth, -- John Cotes:
-- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Serieants and their Yeomen put away by the Sheriffs.
Sir John Allen, Mercer, and made a Privy Counselor to the King, for his
great wisdom. The forenamed Sheriffs, Monmouth and Cotes, did put away
twelve Sergeants and twelve Yeomen; but by a Court of Common Council, they
were enforced to take them again. 1536 The eight and twentieth
Robert, or Richard Paget, -- William Bowyer: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The River of Thames over-frozen.
Sir Ralph Warren, Mercer, son to Thomas Warren Fuller, who was son to
William Warren, of Fering in Essex. 1537 The nine and twentieth
John Gresham, -- Thomas Lewin: Sheriffs.

Mayor, The great Bible printed in English printed.
Sir Richard Gresham, Mercer, son to John Gresham of Holt, in Norfolk. 1538
The thirtieth
William Wilkinson, -- Nicholas Gibson: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Suppression of Abbeys and religious houses.
Sir William Forman, Haberdasher, son to William Forman, of Gainsborough in
Lincolneshire. 1539 The one and thirtieth Thomas Ferrer, -- Thomas Huntlow: --
Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Holleis, son to William Holleis, Citizen and Baker of
London. 1540 The two and thirtieth William Laxstone, -- Martin Bows: --
Sheriffs.

Mayor, (...) in every (...) Church.
Sir William R^che, Draper, son to John Roche of Wixley in Yorkshire. 1541
The three and thirtieth
Rowland Hill, -- Henry Suckley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Michael Dormer, Mercer, son to Geffrey Dormer of Tame in
Oxfordshire. 1542 The four and thirtieth
Henry Hobberthorne, -- Henry Amcoates: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The great Plague at London.
John Cotes, Salter, son to Thomas Cotes of Bearton in Buckinghamshire. 1543
The five and thirtieth
John Toulouse, -- Richard Dobbes: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Bu^^en besieged and yielded.
Sir William Bowyer, son to William Bowyer of Harston in Cambridgeshire for
one part, and Sir Ralph Warren Mercer, for the rest. 1544 The six and thirtieth
John Wilford, -- Andrew Iud: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Laxton, Grocer, son to John Laxton of Yongdell in
Northamptonshire. 1545 The seven and thirtieth
George Barn, -- Ralph Allen, or Alley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Martin Bows, Goldsmith, son to Thomas Bows, an Inhabitant of
the City of York for many years. 1546 The eight and thirtieth
Richard Iarveis, -- Thomas Curteis: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The death of King Henry the Eight.
Sir Henry Hobberthorne, Merchant-Taylor, son to Christopher Hobberthorne of
Waddingworth in Lincolneshire. King EDWARD the sixth began his reign the
eight and twentieth day of January, in the year, 1546. 1547 The first
Thomas White, -- Robert Chertsey: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, 2 Sons of one man Majors of London each after other.
Sir John Gresham, Mercer, son to John Gresham of Holt in Norfolk, and
Brother to Sir Richard Gresham, formerly Lord Mayor. 1548 The second
William Lock, -- Sir John Ayleph: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, A great death in London.
Henry Amcoates, Fishmonger, son to William Amcoats, of Astrap in
Lincolnshire. 1549 The third
John York, -- Richard Turk: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Book of Common Prayer in English.
Sir Rowland Hill, Mercer, son to Thomas Hill of Hodnet in Shropshire. 1550
The fourth
Augustine Hind, -- John Lion: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The second great Sweating Sickness.
Sir andrew Iud, Skinner, son to John Iud of Tonebridge in Kent. 1551 The
fifth
John Lambert, -- John Cowper: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Richard Dobbes, Skinner, son to Robert Dobbes of Baitby in
Yorkshire. 1552 The sixth
William Garret, or Gerrard, John Mainard: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The death of King Edward the sixth.
Sir George Barn, Haberdasher, son to George Barn, Citizen and Haberdasher
of London. Queen Marie began her reign the sixth day of July in the year
1553. 1553 The first
Thomas Offley, -- William Hewet: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The bounty of Sir Thomas White.
Sir Thomas White, Merchant-Taylor, son to Thomas White of Rickmansworth in
Hertfordshire. (...), his rising and suppressing.
This Sir Thomas White founded Saint John Baptists College in Oxford, and gave
two thousand pound to the City of Bristol to purchase one hundred and twenty
pound land yearly. 1554 The second
David Woodroffe, -- William Chester: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Lady Jane beheaded*
Sir John Lion, Grocer, son to Thomas Lion of Peryfare in Middlesex. 1555 The
third
Thomas Lee, or Leigh, -- John Machel: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Seven Aldermen in London dyed in less than 10 Months*
Sir William Garret or Garrard, Haberdasher, son to John Garret, Citizen and
Grocer of London, who was son to William Garret of Seddingbourne in Kent.
1556 The fourth
William Harper, -- John White: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, First ordaining of the night Belman.
Sir Thomas Offley, Merchant-Taylor, son to William Offley of the City of
Chester. 1557 The fifth
Richard Mallory, -- James Altham: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Callis lost to the French.
Sir Thomas Curteis, Fishmonger, son to John Curteis of Enfield in Middlese^.
He was free of the Pewterers, and translated to the Fishmongers. 1558 The
sixth
John Halsey, -- Richard Champion: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Death of Queen Mary.
Sir Thomas Lee, or Leigh, Mercer, son to Roger Lee of Willington in
Shropshire. Queen ELIZABETH began her reign, the seventeenth of November, in
the year, 1558. 1559 The first
Thomas Lodge, -- Roger Martin: Sheriffs.

Mayor, Common Prayer in English, and Images pulled down.
Sir William H^wet, Cloth-worker, worker, son to Edmund Hewet of Wales in
Yorkshire. 1560 The second
Christopher Draper, -- Thomas Row: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Chester, Draper, son to John Chester, Citizen and Draper
of London. This year the Merchant-Taylors founded their notable Free-Schoole
for poor men's children, etc. 1561 The third
Alexander Avenon, -- Humfrey Baskervile: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Paul's steeple burned June 4. 1561.
Sir William Harper, Merchant-Taylor, son to William Harper of the Town of
Bedford. 1562 The fourth
William Allen, -- Richard Chamberlain, -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, New Haven yielded to the French.
Sir Thomas Lodge, Grocer, son to William Lodge of Cresset in Shropshire.
1563 The fifth
Edward Banks, -- Rowland Heyward: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The great Plague: No Majors Feast by reason of the Plague The great
frost and Thames over-frozen*
Sir John White, Grocer, son to Robert White of Farneham in Surrey. 1564 The
sixth
Edward Iackman, -- Lionel Ducket: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The Bursse builded by Sir Thomas (...)
Sir Richard Mallory, Mercer, son to Anthony Mallory of Papworthamus in
Cambridgeshire. 1565 The seventh
John Rivers, -- James Hawes: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The birth of our Royal Sovereign King (...) June 9. 1566.
Sir Richard Champion, Draper, son to Richard Champion of Godilming in
Surrey.
1566 The eighth
Richard Lambert, -- Ambrose Nicholas, -- John Langley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Christopher Draper, Ironmonger, son to John Draper of Melton
Mowbray in Leicestershire. 1567 The ninth
Thomas Ramsey, -- John Bond: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Downegate Conduit builded.
Sir Roger Martin, Mercer, son to Lawrence Martin of Melford in Suffolk. 1568
The tenth
John Oleph, -- Robert Harding, -- James Bacon: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The great Lottery at Paul's and the New Churchyard builded near
Bethlehem.
Sir Thomas Row, Merchant-Taylor, son to Robert Row Citizen and
Merchant-Taylor of London, who was son to Reynald Row of Lee in Kent. This
year Sir Thomas Row enclosed a piece of ground by Moore-fields, with a Brick
wall, to be a place for burial of the dead, to such Parishes in London as
wanted Churchyards. 1569 The eleventh
Henry Beecher, -- William Dane: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Rebellion of the Earls in the North.
Sir Alexander Avenon, Ironmonger, son to Robert Avenon, or Avenand of
Kings-Norton in Worcestershire. 1570 The twelfth
Francis Barneham, -- William Box: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Queen Elizabeth her coming to the Royal Exchange.
Sir Rowland Heyward Clothworker, son to George Heyward of Bridge north in
Shropshire. 1571 The thirteenth
Henry Milles, -- John Branche: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Allen, Mercer, son to William Allen, Citizen and
Pasteller of London, who was son to Richard Allen of Stondon in
Hertfordshire. 1572 The fourteenth
Richard Pipe, -- Nicholas Woodroffe: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Duke of Norfolk beheaded, June 2. 1572.
Sir Lionell Ducket, Mercer. 1573 The fifteenth
James Harvey, -- Tho. Pulloccell or Pullison: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, M. Saunders murdered: his wife, Brown, Mistress Drewry, and trusty
Roger executed.
Sir John Rivers, Grocer, son to Richard Rivers of pensehurst in Kent. 1574
The sixteenth
Thomas Blancke, -- Anthony Gamage: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir James Hawes, Clothworker, son to Thomas Hawes, Citizen and
Merchant of London, who was son to John Hawes of Stoke-Newington in Middlesex.
1575 The seventeenth
Edward Osborne, -- Wolstane Dixie: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Ambrose Nicholas, Salter, son to John Nicholas of Nedingworth in
Huntingdonshire. 1576 The eighteenth
William Kempton, -- George Barn: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Oldbourne. Conduit builded by by Master Lamb.
Sir John Langley, Goldsmith, son to Robert Langley of Althrope in
Lincolneshire. 1577 The nineteenth
Nicholas Backhouse, -- Francis Bowyer: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Strange sickness at Oxenford death of the Judges.
Sir Thomas Ramsey, Grocer, son to John Ramsey of Flenbridge in Kent.
1578 The fourteenth
George Bond, -- Thomas Star^le: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The blazing Star. The great deep Snow.
Sir Richard Pipe, Draper, son to Richard Pipe of Woolverhampton, in
Staffordshire. He was free of the Leathersellers, and from them translated to
the Drapers. 1579 The one and twentieth
Martin Calthrope, -- John Heart: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The great and general Earthquake, on Wednsday in Easter week the fir^
of April, 1580.
Sir Nicholas Woodroffe, Haberdasher, son to David Woodroffe, Citizen and
Haberdasher of London, who was son to John Woodroffe, or Woodrove, of the
Parish of Vscombe, in Devonshire. 1580 The two twentieth
Ralph Woodcocke, -- John Allot: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The bla^ing star (...) two ^one the ^ightly.
Sir John Branche, Draper, son to John Branche, Citizen and Draper of London,
who was son to John Branche of Laynham in Suffolk. 1581 The three and
twentieth
Richard Martin, -- William Web: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Mouesiers coming into England, and his return.
Sir James Harvey, Irohmonger, son to William Harvey, of Cotwalton in
Staffordshire. 1582 The four and twentieth
William Row, -- John Haydon, deceased, -- Cuthbert Buckle succeeded: --
Sheriffs.

Mayor, Standard at Leaden Hall for Thames-water.
Sir Thomas Blanke, Haberdasher, son to Thomas Blanke, Citizen and
Haberdasher of London, who was son to Thomas Blanke of Gilford in Surrey.
1583 The five and twentieth
William Masham, -- Desmonds head set on London Bridge.
John Spencer: -- Sheriffs. Arden and Somerviles Treason.


Mayor, Sir Edward Osborne, Clothworker
worker, son to Richard Osborne, of Ashford in Kent. 1584 The six and twentieth
Stephen Slany, -- Henry Billingsley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, W. Parries treason. E. of Northumberl. murdered himself in the Tower.
Sir Thomas Pulloccill, or Pullyson, Draper, son to William Pulloccill, of
Footescray in Kent. 1585 The seven and twentieth
Anthony Ratcliffe, -- Henry Pranell: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Wolstane Dixie, Skinner, son to Thomas Dixie, of Catworth in
Huntingdonshire. 1586 The eight and twentieth
Robert House, Sir Philip Sidney his honorable Funeral, Febr. 16. 1586.
-- William Elkin: Ludgate new builded by the Cities charge.
-- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir George Barn, Haberdasher, son to Sir George Barn, Knight,
Citizen, Haberdasher, and Lord Mayor of London; who was son also to George
Barn, Citizen and Haberdasher of London. 1587 The nine and twentieth
Thomas Skinner, -- John Catcher: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir George Bond, Haberdasher, son to Robert Bond, of Trull in
Sommersetshire. 1588 The thirtieth
Hugh Offley, The (...).
-- Richard Saltonstall: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Queen Elizabeth her coming to Paul's Sermon.
Sir Martin Calthrop, Draper, son to Martin Calthrop, Citizen and Draper of
London: He served one part of the year, and Sir Richard Martin, Goldsmith, the
other. 1589 The one and thirtieth
Richard Gurney, -- Stephen Some: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Death of (...).
Sir John Heart, Grocer, son to Ralph Heart, of Sproston-Court in Yorkshire.
1590 The two and thirtieth
Nicholas Mosley, -- Robert Brook: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Allot, Fishmonger, son to Richard Allot of Limbergh in
Lincolnshire: He served one part of the year, and Sir Rowland Heyward the
other. 1591 The three and thirtieth
William Rider, -- Benet, or Benedict Barnham -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The Thomas almost empty of water for two days space.
Sir William Web, Salter, son to John Web, of Reading in Barkshire. 1592
The four and thirtieth -- Robert Tailor: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, No Bartholomew Fair at London.
Sir William Row, Ironmonger, son to Thomas Row of Penschurst in Kent. 1593
The five and thirtieth
Paul Banning, -- Peter Haughton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Doctor Lopez executed at Teyborne.
Sir Cuthbert Buckle, Vintner, son to Christopher Buckle, of Bourgh, in
Westmerland: He served one part of the year, and Sir Richard Martin,
Goldsmith, the other; which Sir Richard Martin was son to Thomas Martin, of
Saffron Walden in Essex. 1594 The six and thirtieth
Robert Lee, -- Thomas Bennet: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Vnrely youth executed on Tower Hill.
Sir John Spencer, Clothworker, son to Richard Spencer of Waldingfield in
Suffolk. 1595 The seven and thirtieth
Thomas Low, A Provost Marshall for London.
-- Leonard Hallyday: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Stephen Slany, Skinner, son to John Slany, of Mitton, in
Staffordshire. 1596 The eight and thirtieth
John Wats, -- Richard Godard: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir, Thomas Skinner, Clothworker, son to John Skinner, of Walden in
Essex. He served the one part of the year, and Sir Henry Billingsley,
Haberdasher the other. This Sir Henry Billingsley was son to Roger
Billingsley, of the City of Canterbury, in Kent. 1597 The nine and thirtieth
Henry Row, -- John More: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Lectures reading in Greshams College.
Sir Richard Saltonstall, Skinner, son to Gilbert Saltonstall, of Hallyfax in
Yorkshire. 1598 The fortieth
Edward Holmedon, -- Robert Hampson: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Earl of Essex his going toward Ireland.
Sir Stephen Some, Grocer, son to Thomas Some, of Bradley in Suffolk. He
was free of the Girdlers, and from them translated to the Grocers. 1599 The one
and fortieth
Humphrey Welde, -- Roger Clerk: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Earl of Essex returned, and L. (...) sent into Ireland.
Sir Nicholas Mosley, Earl of Essex his rising, troubles, and death.
Clothworker, son to Edward Mosley, of Hough in Lancashire. 1600 The two and
fortieth
Thomas Smith, -- Thomas Cambell, -- William Craven: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Rider, Haberdasher, son to Thomas Rider of Mucklestone in
Staffordshire. 1601 The three and fortieth
Henry Anderson, -- William Glover: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Spaniards and Irish overcome in Ireland.
Sir John Garret, or Garrard, Haberdasher, son to Sir, William Garret, or
Garrard, Knight, Lord Mayor and Haberdasher of London, son to John Garret or
Garrard, Citizen and Grocer of London, who was son to William Garret, or
Garrard, of Seddingborne, in Kent. 1602 The four and fortieth
James Pemberton, -- John Swinnerton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Robert Lee, Merchant-Ta^ler, son to Humphrey Lee of Bridge-North
in Shropshire. King JAMES began his reign the four and twentieth of March in
the year, 1602. 1603 The first
Sir William Rumney, -- Sir Thomas Middleton: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This year died good Queen Elizabeth.
Sir Thomas Bennet, Mercer, son to Thomas Bennet, of Willingford in
Barkeshire. 1604 The second
Sir Thomas Hayes, Knight, Sir Roger Jones Knight: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Term (...), and (...) plague at London.
Sir Thomas Low, Haberdasher, son to Simon Low, Citizen and Merchant-Tayler
of London, who was son to Ralph Low, of London. 1605 The third
Clement Scudamor, Knight, Sir John Folles, Knight: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The most happy discovery and prevention of the Gunpowder Treasons.
Sir Leonard Hollyday, Marchant-Tayler, son to William Hollyday of Redborough
in Glocestershire. 1606 The fourth
William Walthall, -- John Lemon: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir John Wats, Clothworker, son to Thomas Wats of Buntingford in
Hertfordshire. 1607 The fifth
Geffrey Elwes, -- Nicholas Style: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Henry Row, Mercer, son to Sir Thomas Row, Knight, Lord Mayor,
Citizen and Merchant-Tayler of London. 1608 The sixth
George Bolles, -- Richard Farrington: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This year Aldgate was fully finished.
Sir Humfrey Weld, Grocer, son to John Weld of Eaton in Cheshire. 1609 The
seventh
Sebastian Harvey, -- William Cockaine: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The Lord Majors ^hews long left off, were now revived again by order
from the King.
Sir Thomas Cambell, Jronmonger, son to Robert Cambell, of Fulsam in
Norfolk. 1610 The eighth
Richard Pyat, -- Francis Jones: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir William Cravon, Merchant-Tayler, son to William Craven of
Appletreewick in Yorkshire. 1611 The ninth
Edward Barkham, -- George Smithes: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This year died the Royal Prince Henry.
Sir James Pemberton, Goldsmith, son to James Premberton, of Ecclestone in
Lancashire. 1612 The tenth
Edward Rotherham, -- Alexander Prescot: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Marriage of the (...) to the Lady Elizabeth.
Sir John Swinnerton, Merchant-Tayler, son to Thomas Swinnerton, Citizen and
Merchant-Tayler of London, who was son to Richard Swinnerton, of Oswestrey in
Shropshire. 1613 The eleventh
Thomas Bennet, -- Henry Iaye: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The new River brought to London from Amwell.
Sir Thomas Middleton, Grocer, son to Richard Middleton, of Denbigh, in the
County of Denbigh. 1614 The twelfth
Peter Proby, -- Martin Lumley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Thomas Hayes, Draper, son to Thomas Hayes of the City of
Westminster. 1615 The thirteenth
William Goare, -- John Goare: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This year two brethen Sheriffs and the younger first chosen.
Sir John Iolles Draper, son to Thomas Ielles of Stratford-Bow in Middlesex.
The Kings great journey to Scotland, and happy return.
1616 The fourteenth
Allen Cotton, -- Cuthbert Hacket: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, This Mayor was the second Bachelor.
Sir John Leman, Fishmonger, son to John Leman of Gillingham in Norfolk.
1617 The fifteenth
William Hollyday, -- Robert Johnson: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, the right Honorable, George Bolles, Grocer, son of Thomas Bolles, of
Newbold in the County of Leicester. 1618 The sixteenth
Richard Hearne, -- Hugh Hamersley: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Sebastian Harvey, Iro^ monger, he was son to Sir James H^^vey,
Knight, Lord Mayor of London, which was son to William Harvey, of Cot^ton in
Staffordshire. 1619 The seventeenth
Richard Deane, -- James Cambell: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Doctor Abbot Lord Bishop of London, translated and enstalled Archbishop
of Canterbury April 9.
Sir William Cockaine, Skinner, he was son to William Cockaine, son of
Roger Cockaine of Baddesley in Warwickeshire. 1620 The eighteenth
Edward Allen, -- Robert Ducie: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The new River brought from Amwell, was finished the twentininth of
September.
Sir Francis Jones, Haberdasher, he was the son of John Jones of Claverley in
the County of Saloppe. 1621 The ninteenth
George Whitmore, -- Nicholas Rainton: -- Sheriffs.

Sir Edward Barkham, Draper, (...) son of Edward Barkham, (...) in the County
of (...) 1622 The twentieth
John Hodges, -- Humfrey Hanford Knight: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Prince Charles having been in Spain arrived in England the sixth of
October.
Sir Peter Proby, Grocer, commonly in the Country called Peter ap-Robin, his
fathers name is not recorded, but is said to be borne near Whitchurch in
Shropshire. 1623 The one and twentieth
Ralph Freeman, -- Thomas Moulson: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Our gracious queen Mary landed at Dover the 12. of June.
Sir Martin Lumley, Draper, he was the son of James Lumley, of London. 1624
The two and twentieth
Rowland Heilin, -- Robert Parkhurst: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, King James died at Theobalds the 27. day of March.
Sir John Goare, Merchant-Taylor, he was the son of Gerrard Goare, who was
the son of John Goare of London. King Charles began his reign the seven and
twentieth of March, in the year, 1625. 1625 The first
Thomas Westwray, -- Ellis Crispe, -- John Poole, -- Christopher Cletherowe: --
Sheriffs.

Mayor, Sir Allen Cotton, Draper, he was son to Ralph Cotton, of Whitchurch
in the County of Salop. 1626 The second
Edward Bromfield, -- Richard Fenne: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The Duke of Buckingham made his voyage to the Isle of Ree near R^^hell.
Sir Cuthbert Aket, alias Hacket, Draper, he was son of Thomas Aket, or
Hacket, who was the son of Thomas Aket, or Hacket, of Dertford in Kent. 1627
The third
Maurice Abbot, -- Henry Garway: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The death of Lamb called by diverse Doctor Lamb.
Sir Hugh Hammersley, Haberdasher, The drawbridge also newly repaired.
he was the son of Hugh Hammersley, who was the son of Richard Hammersley,
of the Town and County of Stafford. 1628 The fourth
Rowland Backhouse, -- William Acton, Knight and Baronet: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, John Felton for killing the Duke of Buckingham, executed and hanged in
chains.
Sir Richard Deane, Skinner, he was son of George Deane, of Muchdunmowe in
Essex. 1629 The fifth
Humfrey Smith, -- Edmund Wright: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The birth of Royal Prince Charles, May the 29 at S. James's near
Charing Cross.
Sir James Cambell, Ironmonger, he was the son of Thomas Cambell, who was
son of Robert Cambel, of Fulsam in the County of Norfolk. 1630 The sixth
Arthur Abdy, -- Robert Cambell: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, Mervin Lord Audley, and ^arle of ^^^^^haven beheaded on Towerhill, May
14.
Sir Robert Ducy, Merchant-Taylor, he was the son of Henry Ducy of London.
1631 The seventh
Samuel Cranmer, -- Henry Prat: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The houses joining to the Cathedral Church of St. Paul began to be
pulled down.
Sir George Whitmore, Haberdasher, he was the son of William Whitmore, who
was son to Richard Whitmore, of the Parish of Charely in the County of Salop.
1632 The eighth
Hugh Perry, -- Henry Andrews: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, The third part of London Bridge burned.
Sir Nicholas Raynton, Haberdasher, he was the son of Robert Raynton of
Highinton in the County of Lincoln. 1633 The ninth
Gilbert Harrison, -- Richard Gurney: -- Sheriffs.

Mayor, the right Honorable, Ralph Freeman, Clothworker, son of William
Freeman of the Town and County of Northampton.
Thus much for the chief and principal Governors of this famous City; of
whose public Government, with the assistance of other inferior Officers,
their charges for preserving the Peace, service of the Prince, and Honor of
this City, much might have been said, and shall be hereafter discoursed more
at large, when I have more spacious ground to walk in, and other helps
(thereto belonging) can more conveniently be had.

OF THE TWELVE HONORABLE COMPANIES OF THIS ANCIENT AND Famous City; out of
which the Lord Mayor is to be chosen yearly, because those of inferior
rank, are not capable of such dignity. MERCERS.
THe Mercers were enabled to be a Company, and to purchase Lands, to the value
of twenty pounds by the year, the seventeenth year of King Richard the
second, Anno Dom. 1393.

GROCERS.
GOD GRANT GRACE



The Company of Grocers, in elder times called Pepperers: were first
incorporated by the name of Grocers, in the twentieth year of King Edward the
third, Anno Dom. 1345. The Arms ancient, and supporters granted by Thomas
Benote, Clarencieux, in the time of King Henry the eight, Helm and Crest, by
William Harvey, Clarencieux, Anno Dom. 1562.

DRAPERS.
UNTO GOD ONLY BE HONER and GLORY.



THe Company of Drapers were incorporated in the seventeenth year of King
Henry the sixth, Anno Dom. 1430. The Arms first granted by Garter King of
Arms: Crest and Supporters by William Harvy, Clarencieux, Anno Dom. 1561.

FISHMONGERS
AL WORSHIP BE TO GOD ONLY



THe Fishmongers were (at the first) two Companies, namely, Stockfishmongers,
and Saltfishmongers; which Saltfishmongers, in the beginning of the Reign of
King Henry the eighth, Anno Dom. 1509. did bear their Arms as here is set
down. But lastly, in the 28. year of the same King, Anno Dom. 1536. the said
Companies were united in one, and then their Arms more fully granted.

GOLDSMITHS.
TO GOD ONLY. BE ALL GLORY



THe Goldsmiths, were incorporated and confirmed in the sixteenth year of King
Richard the second, the Crest and Supporters were granted by Robert Cook,
Clarencieux, Anno Dom. 1571.

SKINNERS.
TO GOD ONLY. BE ALL GLORY.



THe Company of Skinners were incorporated in the first year of King Edward
the third, Anno Dom. 1327. And made a Brotherhood in the eighteenth year of
King Richard the second. The Crest and Supporters were granted by William
Haruy, who was free of the same Company, Anno Dom. 1561.

MERCHANT-TAILORS.
CONCORDIA PARVA RES CRESCVNT.



THe first Patent of these Arms, were granted by Sir Thomas Holne Knight,
Clarencieux, King of Arms to the Company of Tailors and Linen Armourers, in
the one and twentieth year of King Edward the fourth, Anno Dom. 1480. And
since then incorporated by King Henry the seventh, by the name of
Merchant-Tailors, in the seventeenth year of his reign, Anno Dom. 1501. The
Crest and Supporters being granted by Robert Cook, Clarencieux, Anno Dom. 1585.

HABERDASHERS.
SERVE AND OBEY



The Haberdashers, or Hurrers, (of old time so called) were incorporated a
Brotherhood of Saint Katharine, in the six and twentieth year of King Henry
the sixth Anno Dom* 1447. And they were confirmed in the seventeenth year of
King Henry the seventh, and named Merchant-Haberdashers. The Crest and
Supportters were granted by Robert Cook, Clarencioux, King of Arms. Anno Dom.
1571.

SALTERS.
SAL SAPIT OMNIA



THe Company of the Salters had their Arms first granted to them in the two
and twentieth year of King Henry the eight, Anno Dom. 1530. by Thomas Benolt,
Clarencieux. The Crest and Supporters by Robert Cook, Clarencieux In the nine
and twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth, Anno Dom. 1587.

IRONMONGERS.


THe Ironmongers were incorporated, in the third year of King Edward the
fourth, Anno Dom. 1462. And their Arms first granted by Lancaster, King of
Arms, Marshall to Clarencieux, King of Arms, Anno Dom. 1455. And the four
and thirtieth year of the reign of King Henry the sixth.

VINTONNERS.


THe Vintonners were incorporated in the Reign of King Edward the third, by
the name of Wine-Tonners, and confirmed in the fifteenth year of King Henry
the sixth, Anno Dom. 1436. The Arms first granted by Clarencieux, in the sixth
year of King Henry the sixth, Anno Dom. 1427.

CLOTHWORKERS
MY TRUST IS IN GOD ALONE



THe Clothworkers had their Arms first granted by Thomas Benolt, Clarencieux,
in the two and twentieth year of King Henry the eighth, Anno Dom. 1530. The
Crest and Supporters granted by Robert Cook, Clarencieux, King of Arms, Anno
Dom. 1587.

NOW FOLLOW THE COMPANIES OF Merchants, and their several Arms, so many as I
could attain unto.
MERCHANTS Of the Staple.
GOD BE OUR FRIEND



THe Company of Merchants, called of the Staple, incorporated by King Edward
the third: in whose time they had their Staple of Wools at Callis.

Merchants Adventures.
GOD BE OUR FRIEND



THe Company of Merchants, called Merchants Adventures, were incorporated by
King Edward the fourth: And had their Privileges confirmed and enlarged by
Queen Elizabeth.

Merchants of Russia.
GOD BE OUR GOOD GVIDE



THe Company of Merchants of Russia, who were incorporated by King Edward the
sixth: and again confirmed and augmented by Queen Elizabeth.

Merchants of Elbing.


THe Company of Merchants of Elbing, they became incorporated by Queen
Elizabeth.

Merchants of Levant, or Turkey Merchants.


THe Company of Merchants of Levant, or (more commonly) termed Turkey
Merchants, being first incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, were afterward
confirmed and enlarged by our Sovereign Lord King James.

Merchants of Spain.


THe Company of Merchants of Spain, or more usually called Spanish Merchants,
were incorporated by Queen Elizabeth.

Merchants of East India.
DEVS-INDICAT

DEO DVCENTE, NIL NOCET.



THe Company of Merchants, called Merchants of East India, were incorporated by
Queen Elizabeth, Anno Dom. 1600.

New French Merchants Adventurers.
REDDITE CVIQVE SVVM.



A New Company of Merchant Adventures, but of their incorporating I am able to
say nothing: but the Coat and Crest of their Arms were given and granted by
Sir William Seger, Garter, and Master William Camden, Clarencieux, Kings of
Arms, the thirteenth day of November, in the 14. year of King James, 1616.

The Company of French Merchants.


THe Company now called of French Merchants: of their creating, incorporating,
and Patents granting, no intelligence has been given me, and therefore I am
the less able to speak of them: only I hear them to be a Company of worthy
Gentlemen; and let that honest title at this time suffice them.

Merchants of Virginia.
EN DAY VIRGINIA QVINTAM.



THe Company of Merchants, called Merchants of Virginia, Bermudas, or
Summer-I^ands, for (as I hear) all these additions are given them. I know not
the time of their incorporating, neither by whom their Arms, Supporters, and
Crest were granted, and therefore am compelled to leave them abruptly.

THE OTHER COMPANIES following the Twelve.
DYERS.


KIng Henry the sixth, late King of England, of famous memory, by his Highness
Letters Patent, or Charter of Incorporation, bearing date the sixteenth day of
February, in the nine and fortieth year from the beginning of his Reign; and
in the first year of the redemption of his Royal power, did incorporate the
Company of the Dyers in London, and so they have ever since continued.

BREWERS.


THe Charter of the Brewers was granted by King Henry the sixth, and his
Letters Patent dated at Windsor, the two and twentieth of February, in the
sixth year of his Reign. Moreover, it was reconfirmed at Greenewich, July the
13. and second year of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory.

LETHER SELLERS.


THe Lethersellers being formerly a Society, or Brotherhood of long time,
became incorporated in the sixth year of King Richard the second, and when
Whittington was Lord Mayor of London.

PEWTERERS.


THe Pewterers were a Company, or Meeting of friendly and neighbourly men, in
the time of King Edward the fourth; and in the thirteenth year of this King
became incorporated, January the 20. And from this King they have been still
confirmed by all Princes since: lastly, by King James.

Barbers-Chirurgions.


THe Barbers-Chirurgions, being a Company of no mean credit and estate, became
a Brotherhood and Fellowship, incorporated by the Charter of King Edward the
fourth; afterward by the Henry's, the seventh and eighth, Philip and Mary, and
Queen Elizabeth: last of all they were again confirmed by King James, with
other additions also: and all those former Charters have bin reconfirmed (with
larger additions) by our most gracious King Charles.

ARMOVRERS


THe Society or Company of the Armourers, have been a Brotherhood of ancient
continuance, and became incorporated in the beginning of the reign of King
Henry the sixth: the King being pleased to style himself a Brother of their
Society.

WHITE-BAKERS.


THe Company of White-Bakers are of great Antiquity, as appears by their
Records, and diverse other things of Antiquity, extant in their common Hall.
They were a Company of this City in the first year of Edward the second, and
had a new Charter granted unto them in the first year of Henry the seventh;
the which Charter was confirmed unto them by Henry the eighth, Edward the
sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and King James.

VVax-Chandlers.


THe Company of Wax-Chandlers, having been a Brotherhood of very ancient
standing, and much used in the times of superstition, became yet to be
incorporated in Anno, 1484. it being the second year of King Richard the third.

Tallovv-Chandlers.


THe company of the Tallow-Chandlers, were a Society of great antiquity, living
in good formality among men, and loving agreement with themselves: they became
to be incorporated in the second year of King Edward the fourth, and from him
successively to King James.

CVTLERS.


COncerning this Company of Cutlers, I find them to be of great antiquity, and
that they were incorporated in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the
fifth, and afterward confirmed by King Henry the sixth, King Henry the eighth,
King Philip and Queen Mary, famous Queen Elizabeth; and King James in his
fifth year, the eighth day of February, fully confirmed all.

GIRDLERS.


I Find the Company of the Girdlers not to be much behind-hand (with others)
for eminency and antiquity, because they have held good correspondency with the
world and with themselves: they became to be incorporated the sixth day of
August, in the seven and twentieth year of the Reign of King Henry the sixth.

BVTCHERS.


THe Butchers were incorporated by King James, under his Letters Patent,
bearing date the sixteenth day of September, in the third year of his Reign
of England, and of Scotland the nine and twentieth: they were incorporated by
the name of Master, Wardens, and Comminalty of the Art or mystery of Butchers
of the City of London, the Fraternity being very ancient.

SADLERS.


THe Company of Sadlers questionless declare themselves to be of great
antiquity, as showing their beginning in the times of these Kings following:
Edward the first, Rich. the second, Henry the fourth, Edw. the second, Edw. the
third, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth, Edw. the fourth, rich. the third,
Henry the seventh, Henry the eighth, Edw. the sixth, and since the first King
above named, the Craft of the Sadlers has given Livery, and so have continued
in their Livery by the space of 300 years and more. What all the precedent
Princes gave and granted, King James confirmed.

CARPENTERS.


THe Company of the Carpenters, being a Society of ancient standing, were
incorporated by Letters Patent, bearing date the seventh day of July, in the
seventeenth year of the Reign of King Edward the fourth; by the name of
Master, Wardens, and Comminalty of the mystery of Freemen of the Carpentry of
the City of London.

CORDWAINERS.


THe Company of Shoomakers or Cordwainers, as they style themselves, have been
of long continuance, and were first incorporated in the seventeenth year of
King Henry the sixth; being afterward confirmed by Philip and Queen Mary, in
the fourth and fifth years of their Reign: then again re-confirmed by Queen
Elizabeth, in the fourth year of her Reign: and lastly, by King James.

PAINTERS.


THe Company of the Painters, having the addition of Painters-Stainers, for
their skill and cunning in diverse mysterious works, have been a Society of
great antiquity from time to time, and were incorporated in Anno Dom. 1580. it
being the three and twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth, etc.

CVRRIERS.


THe Company of Curryers, a Company of long continuance, and of good community
amongst themselves, became incorporated in the third year of King James, the
twelfth day of June.

MASONS.


THe Company of Masons, being otherwise termed Free-Masons, of ancient standing
and good reckoning, by means of affable and kind meetings diverse times, and
as a loving Brotherhood should use to do, did frequent this mutual assembly
in the time of King Henry the fourth, in the twelfth year of his most gracious
Reign.

PLVMBERS.


THe Company of Plumbers, of large and very memorable antiquity, remaining a
Fellowship or Brotherhood by the name of Plumbers. At length they attained to
be incorporated by Letters Patent, the eleventh or twelfth day of April, in
the ninth year of King JAMES of England, and of Scotland the four and
fortieth, etc.

INHOLDERS.


THe Company of the Inholders, having been a Community or Society of honest
friendly men, by their often meeting and conversing together, as in those days
it was a matter much observed: became to be incorporated in the sixth year of
King Henry the eighth, and so renewed from time to time.

FOVNDERS.


THe Company of Founders, no doubt of antiquity and long continuance in
Brotherhood and Fellowship together, were incorporated the eighteenth day of
September, in the twelfth year of the Reign of King JAMES.

EMBROIDERERS.


THe Company of the Embroiderers can make appear by their worthy and famous
pieces of Art, that they have been of ancient use and eminence, as is to be
seen in diverse places at this day: but for the matter of their incorporating,
it has relation to the fourth year of Queen Elizabeth, etc.

POVLTERS.


THe Company of the Poulters were incorporated in the nineteenth year of King
Henry the seventh, the three and twentieth day of January, and renewed again in
the thirtieth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, February the two and
twentieth.

COOKS.


THe Company of the Cooks, having been a Fellowship or Brotherhood of
antiquity, became to be incorporated in the twelfth year of the Reign of King
Edward the fourth, the eleventh day of July: re-confirmed again by Queen
Elizabeth: and afterward by King James, in the thirteenth year of his Reign,
May the nineteenth day.

COOPERS.


THe Company of the Coopers, became to be incorporated in the sixteenth year
of the Reign of King Henry the seventh, by the name of Master, Wardens, or
Keepers of the Comminalty of the Freemen of the mystery of Coopers in London,
and the Suburbs of the same City.

Brick-layers and Tylers.


THe Company of Tylers and Brick-layers, or Brick-layers and Tylers,
notwithstanding their antiquity, were first incorporated in the tenth year of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and confirmed again in the second year of the
Reign of King James.

BOWYERS.


THe Company of Bowyers, in regard that the use of the long Bow has added no
mean honor to this Realm of England, making it famous in far remote
nations: they may well stand on a great privilege of antiquity, yet their
incorporating speaks but of the one and twentieth year of the Reign of King
James.

FLETCHERS.


ALthough there is small reason of sundering Bows from Arrows, or Arrows
from Bows, yet because they have divided themselves into two several
Companies, let the fault be on their own heads: for as I find them, so I
leave them.

BLACK-SMITHES.


THe Company of Smithes, or Black-Smithes, by which title you please to term
them, being a very ancient Brotherhood or Fraternity of the City of London,
were first incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, in the twentieth year of her
Reign, their Charter bearing ^ate the fifteenth of April, etc. Afterward it
was reconfirmed by King James, in the second year of his Reign, the one and
twentieth day of March.

IOYNERS.


THe Company of the Ioyners, called also Ioyners and Seelers, of ancient
standing, and reputed to be a loving Society, were incorporated by Queen
Elizabeth, in the thirteenth year of her Reign.

PLAISTERERS.


THe Company of the Plaisterers, of larger antiquity then leisure will admit to
be delivered, of good and mutual agreement among themselves, like affable and
loving Brethren, were incorporated in the time of King Henry the sevent, etc.

WEAVERS.


THe Company of Weavers (not meaning them which are now called Silke-Weavers)
were of very ancient note indeed; as having three several Societies of
themselves, the Woollen-Cloth-Weavers, the Arras-Weavers, and the
Linnen-Weavers: all which I refer to a further relation.

FRVITERERS.


THe Company of the Fruiterers, being a very ancient Brotherhood, and of long
continuance, became to be first incorporated in the third year of the Reign
of King James, etc.

SCRIVENERS.


THe Company of the Scriveners, an ancient and long continued Society, were
incorporated the eight and twentieth day of January, in the fourteenth year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, King James.

Bottle-makers and Horners.


AS for Bottle-makers and Horne-makers, the precedent times have remembered them
to be of Antiquity, and two distinct Companies combined in one: But I find no
Record that they were at any time incorporated.

STATIONERS.


THe Company of the Stationers, of great antiquity, before the famous Art of
Printing was invented or brought hither, as (for the most part) their then
dwelling in Paternoster Row, and the adjoining parts can testify. Their
Charter of incorporation was granted the fourth day of May, in the third and
fourth years of King Philip and Queen Mary.

MARBLERS.


THe Company called by the name of Marblers, for their excellent knowledge and
skill in the Art of Insulpting personages for Tombs, Grave-stones, and
Monuments in Churches, and elsewhere in Religious places: their antiquity and
what respect they have carried, is unknown to me; nor can I find them to be
incorporated, but hold some friendship with the Masons, and are thought to be
esteemed among them in Fellowship.

WOOLL-PACKERS.


THe Company of Wooll-packers I know not what to say of them, because it seems
that there were such men in the Haunse days, when the Wooll-Staple flourished,
and that our Wooll-Merchants had their eminency. Further, I cannot speak of
them, but leave them and their Arms to your consideration.

FARRIERS.


THe Company of the Farriers. My relation concerning them, must needs be
answerable to their own allegation. Henry de Ferraris, or Ferrers, a Norman
borne, came over with William the Conqueror, who gave unto the said Henry de
Ferraris (as being his Farrier, or Master of his horse) the Honor of Tutbury,
in the County of Stafford, which was the first Honor given to the Ferrars in
England.

PAVIOVRS.


THe Company of the Paviours, no doubt have been a Company of antiquity, and
maintained a Community or Brotherhood among themselves; but for incorporation,
no Record does testify it to me, and therefore I have the less to say of them.

LORINORS.


THe Company of the Lorinors, or Lorimers, which they please to accept, I have
received a note from themselves, that the second day of October, and fourth
year of King Henry the seventh, the Wardens of the Art of Lorimers came into
the Court of our Lord the King, in the Chamber of Guild Hall, in the City of
London, before Sir William Horn Knight, then Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of the
said City, preferring then and there a Bill or Supplication to the Mayor and
Aldermen. And this is all that I can find remembered of them.

BROWN-BAKERS.


THe Company of the Brown-Bakers, a Society of long standing and continuance,
prevailed to have their incorporating granted the ninth day of June, in the
nineteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King James.

WOOD-MONGERS.


THe Company of the Wood-mongers, being a very ancient Fellowship, and of good
and amiable agreement together for long time, became to be incorporated the
nine and twentieth day of August, in the third year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord King James.

VPHOLSTERS.


THe Company of the Vpholsters, or Vpholders, were in elder times of good
reckoning and esteem, and had a Brotherhood or Fellowship among themselves,
but concerning their incorporating I find it not recorded.

TVRNERS.


THe Company of the Turners had long continued a loving Fellowship or
Brotherhood among themselves, to the good president and example of others: they
became incorporated in the second year of King James.

GLASIERS.


THe Company called of the Glasiers, have been a Society of ancient memory,
and maintained a league of Brotherly affection together; but because I am able
to say nothing of their incorporating, I am the more willing to pass them over.

CLEARKES.


THe Company of the Clearkes, commonly termed Parish-Clearkes, I find to be
very ancient in continuance, and stand registered in the Books of Guild Hall;
they became first to be incorporated in the seventeenth year of King Henry
the third, and followed on still in all the Princes Reigns, to the ninth year
of our Sovereign Lord King James.

WATERMEN.


THe Company of the Watermen, that have their maintenance by rowing in Boats on
the River of Thames, being a Brotherhood under the power and command of the
Lord Mayor of London, I leave them for this time.

APOTHECARIES.


THe Company of the Apothecaries, that have divided themselves from the Ancient
Society of Grocers, grew so highly favored by our Sovereign Lord, King James,
that (as I have heard) he called them his Company; and granted them order for
incorporation the sixth day of December, in the fifteenth year of his
Highness Reign.

SILKE-THROVVERS.


THis Company of Silke-throwers, having gained their Trade of Silke-throwing
from the Strangers, since Anno quinto of Queen Elizabeth, and being for the
most part Free men of this City, were made a Fellowship of this City 4. die
Iunii, Anno 19. of King James, Sir Francis Jones, Knight, being then Lord
Mayor. And 23. die Aprilis Anne quinte Caroli Regis, they were incorporated by
the name of the Master, Wardens, Assistants and Commonalty of the Trade, Art,
or Mystery of Silke-throwers of the City of London.

LONDON.
DOMINE DIRIGE NOS



THus our most Noble, Ancient, and famous Mother, LONDON, (the Queen or
Empress of all Cities in this West part of the World) having, like an
Amazonian Virago, led forth her warlike City-Sonnes into their Fields of
Honor, without her Walls, to take an ample view of her Arms, Furniture, and
other warlike Embellishments, such as beseemed their worth, and her dignity;
like a valiant Captain, that takes it to be his honor, of abiding last in the
field, and marshalling them home before her into her walled City, follows
after them her self, in her own Arms and brave Accoutrements.

The names of the Wards, and their Aldermen, as they now are.
THere are in this City (according to the number of the Wards) six and twenty
Aldermen: whereof, yearly on the Feast of Saint Michael the Arch-angell, one of
those Aldermen is elected to be Mayor for the year following: He is to begin
and take place on the eight and twentieth day of October then next following.
The other Aldermen his Brethren are to him Assistants in Councels and Courts,
etc.

As the Wards are formerly set down, according to the order of their beginning
Eastward: so I thought it fet to set down those Aldermens names that have the
instant government and direction of them: wherein let no exception be taken,
although Aldermen (not knighted) are named as their Wards successively follow,
because this observation is done but only for orders sake.

Wards on the East side of VValbrooke.
WARDS. ALDERMEN. 1 Portsoken. Alderman Parkhurst. 2 Aldgate. Alderman Rainton.
3 Tower-streete. Sir Hugh Hammersley. 4 Limestreet. Sir James Cambell. 5
Bishopsgate. Alderman Bacchus. 6 Broadstreet. Alderman Moulson. 7 Cornehill.
Alderman Freeman. 8 Langborne. Sir George Whitmore. 9 Billingsgate. Alderman
Cletherow. 10 Bridge within. Alderman Poole. 11 Candlewickstreet. Sir Richard
Deane. 12 Walbrooke. Sir John Goare. 13 Downegate. Alderman Bromfield. 14
Vintry. Alderman Garaway. 15 Cordwainerstreet. Alderman Wright. 16 Cheap. Sir
Edward Barkham. 17 Colemanstreet. Sir Maurice Abbot. 18 Basing-Hall. Sir Robert
Ducie. 19 Creplegate. Alderman Cranmer. 20 Aldersgate. Sir William Acton. 21
Faringdon within. Alderman Smith. 22 Breadstreet. Sir Martin Lumley. 23 Queen
Hithe. Alderman Perry. 24 Castle Baynard. Alderman Venne, 25 Faringdon without.
Alderman Cambell. 26 Bridge without. Alderman Abdy.

Thus these Wards have (from time to time) held, and still do their several
Aldermen, till either death, or occasion of remove, do make an alteration of
them in their Aldermen. As for an example, since the last Impression of this
Book, which is within the compass of fifteen years, of all the Aldermen
that then were living, there remain no more then three at this instant.

MOre, there is a Recorder of London, a grave and learned Lawyer, skillful in
the Customs of this City, also assistant to the Lord Mayor: he takes place
in Councels and in Courts before any man that has not been Mayor, and
learnedly delivers the Sentence of the whole Court.

THe Sheriffs of London (of old time) chosen out of the Comminalty, Commoners,
and oftentimes never came to be Aldermen; as many Aldermen were never
Sheriffs, and yet advanced to be Majors. But of later time, (by occasion) the
Sheriffs have been made Aldermen, before, or presently after their Election.

Nicholas Faringdon was never Sheriff, yet four times Mayor of this City, and
so of other; which reprooveth a byword, Such a one will be Mayor, before he be
Sheriff, etc.

These Gentlemen bear Offices of especial respect in the City.
MAster Chamberlain of London,

Master Common Sergeant.

Master Town-Clarke, or Common Clarke.

The Coroner of London.

Officers belonging to the Lord Majors house, according as they were first
published by Master STOWE.
Sword Bearer. Common Hunt. Common Crier. Water-Bayliffe. Esquires 4.
Coroner of London. Sergeant Carvers. 3. Sergeants of the Chamber. 3. Sergeant
of the Channel. Yeoman of the Channel. Yeomen of the water side. 4.
Vnder-Water-Bayliffe. Yeomen of the Chamber. 2. Meale-weighers. 3. Yeomen of
the Wood-wharfes. 2. The Sword-bearers man. Common Hunts men. 2. Common Criers
man. Water-Bayliffes men. 2. The Carvers man. Gentlemen's men, seven.

Whereof nine of these have Liveries of the L. Mayor, viz. The Sword Bearer and
his man, the three Carvers, and the four Yeomen of the Waterside. All the
rest have their Liveries from the Chamber of London.

Thus far after my notes delivered by an Officer of the Lord Majors house,
but unperfect: for I remember a Crowner, an Vnder-Chamberlaine, and four
Clerks of the Majors Court, and others.

According to a TABLE hanging in the ancient Council Chamber, and their days
of waiting.
MAster Sword Bearer, to wait daily.

Master Common Hunt, to wait Mundaies, Wednesdays, Frydayes and Saturdayes.

Master Common Crier, to wait Tuesdayes, Thursdayes, Frydayes, and Saturdayes.

Master Water-Bayliffe, to wait Mundayes, Tuesdayes, Wednesdayes and Thursdayes.

The three Sergeant Carvers, to wait weekly, all excuses set apart.

The three Sergeants of the Chamber likewise, to wait weekly, without any
excuse.

The Sergeant of the Channel, to wait daily.

The two Yeomen of the Chamber, one of them to wait daily at dinner, to Usher
the Hall.

The four Yeomen of the Waters side, two of them to wait weekly, and not to
be absent.

The Yeomen of the Channel, to wait daily.

The Vnder-Water-Bayliffe, to wait on Holidays and Court days, if he go not
up the River.

The six young men, to wait daily.

The three Meale-Weighers, to wait on Holidays, and Court days.

The two Yeomen of the Wood-Wharfe, to wait on general days.

The Forraigne-Taker, to wait likewise on general days.

The Sheriffs of London, their Officers.
THe Sheriffs of London, in the year 1471. were appointed each of them to
have sixteen Sergeants, every Sergeant to have his Yeoman. And six Clerks, to
wit, a Secondary, a Clarke of the Papers, and four other Clerks, besides the
Vnder-Sheriffes Clerks, their Stewards, Butlers, Porters, and other in
household many.

Of the Majors and Sheriffs Liveries somewhat.
TO follow president of former time, the Clarks of Companies were to enquire
for them of their Companies, that would have the Majors Livery, their money (as
a benevolence given) which must be twenty shillings at the least put in a
purse, with their names that gave it, and the Wardens to deliver it to the
Mayor by the first of December. For the which, every man had then sent him
four yards of broad Cloth, rowed or striped thwart with a different color, to
make him a Gown, and these were called Rey Gowns, which was then the Livery
of the Mayor, and also of the Sheriffs; but each differing from others in the
colors.

Of older times I read, that the Officers of this City ware Gowns of party
colors, as the right side of one color, and the left side of another: as for
example; I read in Books of accounts in the Guild Hall, that in the
nineteenth year of Henry the sixth, there was bought for an Officers Gown two
yards of Cloth, colored Mustard-villars (a color now out of use) and two
yards of Cloth colored blue, price two shillings the yard, in all eight
shillings. More, paid to John Pope, Draper, for two Gown clothes, eight yards
of two colors eux ambo deux de Rouge (or red) Medley Brune and Porre (or
Purple) color, price, the yard two shillings. These Gowns were for Piers
Rider, and John Buckles, Clerks of the Chamber.

More, I read, that in the year 1516. in the 7. of Henry the 8. it was agreed
by a Common Council in the Guild Hall, that the Sheriffs of London should (as
they had been accustomed) give yearly Reyed Gowns to the Recorder,
Chamberlain, Common Sergeant, and Common Clarke, the Sword Bearer, Common
Hunt, Water-Bayly, Common Crier, like as to their own Officers, etc.

1525. More, in the sixteenth of Henry the eighth, Sir William Bailey then being
Mayor, made a request, for that clothes of Ray (as he alleged) were evil
wrought, his Officers might be permitted (contrary to custom) for that year
to wear Gowns of one color, to the which (in a common Council) one answered
and said, Yea, it might be permitted: and no man said nay, and so it passed.
Thus much for party-colored, and Ray Gowns have I read. But for benevolence
to the Mayor, I find that of later time, each man giving forty shillings
toward his charges, received four yards of broad Cloth to make him a Gown:
for Sir Thomas White performed it in the first year of Queen Mary, but Sir
Thomas Lodge gave (in stead of four yards of broad Cloth) three yards of
Satin to make them Dubblets, and since that, the three yards of Satin is now
turned into a silver Spoone, and so it has held.

The order observed by the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, and Sheriffs for their
meetings, and wearing of their Apparel throughout the whole year.
Upon Midsummer day, for the election of the Sheriffs of LONDON, etc.
THe Lord Mayor and the Aldermen (with the Sheriffs) meet at the Guild Hall,
Their morning meeting at the Guild Hall.
at eight of the clock in the morning, apparelled in their violet colored
Gowns lined, and their Cloakes of Scarlet lined, but without their horses.

And when they have been together in the Council Chamber a certain time,
concerning the nomination of certain persons to be elected: the Lord Mayor
and the Aldermen come forth, and put on their Cloakes in the Orphans Court,
and then go down in order to the Hustings Court, What is done in the Hustings
Court after the Speech of Master Recorder.
where being set, Master Recorder arises, and standing forth before the Bench
and Companies, for the same cause there assembled; having done his obeisance
first to the Court, and then to them all: he declares unto them, the reason
why they are thus there assembled together: Showing unto them, that it is for
the election of one of the Sheriffs of London, and the Sheriff of Middlesex
for the year next ensuing: As also the confirmation of the other Sheriff,
nominated by the Lord Mayor according to his prerogative. Then afterward, is
the choice and election of Master Chamberlain of London, and of other Officers.

But first, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen go up into the Lord Majors Court, The
naming and choosing of the Sheriff by voice and hands.
and there remain, until the Sheriff be named and chosen, the door being
fast shut to them all the while.

Then the Sheriffs, Master Chamberlain, Master Common Sergeant, Master
Towne-Clarke, and the Counselors of the City, and other Officers, continue
still in the Hustings Court, to take and receive the name of him, that shall
seem (by their judgments) freely, and without consent to be nominated and
elected, and justly tried out, not only by voice, but also by hands, to be
Sheriff for the year following.

Then the Commons go to the election of Master Chamberlain; The election of
Master Chamberlain. and other Officers.
the two Bridge-Masters; the Auditors of the City and Bridge-house accounts;
and the Surveyors for Beer and Ale, according to the accustomed manner.

That done, the Sheriffs, Master Chamberlain, Master Common Sergeant, Master
Towne-Clarke, the Counselors of the City, The certifying of the Sheriffs
choice.
the two Secondaries of the Compters, and the Wardens of the head or chief
Companies (Master Common Crier going before them, bearing his Mace) thus they
carry up the report to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, concerning what they have
done in their election.

Which report being received, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen came down again to
the Hustings Court. Their coming down again to confirm the Election.
And there being in order set and placed, Master Recorder stands up again,
as he did before, and makes rehearsal of the names of those persons, whom
they have nominated and chosen. Then he demands of them, whether it be
their free election, yea or no? Which they confirming to be their free choice,
Master Recorder gives them thanks: And so they arise, and all depart thence
home.

On BARTHOLOMEW Eve, for the Fair in Smithfield.
THE Aldermen meet the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs at the Guild Hall
Chapel, Meeting at the Guild Hall Chapel.
at two of the clock after dinner, having on their violet Gowns lined, and
their horses, but without their cloakes, and there they hear Evening Prayer.
Which being done, they mount on their horses, and riding to Newgate, pass
forth of the Gate. A Proclamation in the Cloth-Fayre.
Then entering into the Cloth-Fayre, there they make a Proclamation, which
Proclamation being ended, they ride through the Cloth-Fayre, and so return
back again through the Churchyard of great Saint Bartholomewes to Aldersgate:
And then ride home again to the Lord Majors House.

On BARTHOLOMEW day, for the Wrestling.
SO many Aldermen as do dine with the Lord Mayor, The meeting at the Lord
Majors house on Bartholomew day.
and the Sheriffs, are apparelled in their Scarlet Gowns lined; and after
dinner, their horses are brought to them where they dined. And those Aldermen
which dine with the Sheriffs, ride with them to the Lord Majors house for
accompanying him to the Wrestling. When as the Wrestling is done, they mount
their horses, and ride back again through the Fair, and so in at Aldersgate,
and then home again to the Lord Majors house.

The next day (if it be not Sunday) is appointed for the Shooting, The Shooting
day.
and the service performed as upon Bartholomew day: but if it be Sunday, the
Sabbath day, it is referred to the Monday then following.

For the day of our LADY Fair in Southwarke.
THE Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs ride to S. Magnus Church in their Scarlet
Gowns lined, The Lord Mayor wears his Collar of Esses, without Hood, and the
Sword beater wears the embroiderd Cap, and carries the Pearl Sword.
without their cloaks, after dinner at two of the clock; and there the
Aldermen meet the L. Mayor: when evening Prayer is ended, they ride through the
Fair, till they come unto St. Grorges Church, and then ride further to
Newington Bridge, or to St. Thomas of Waterings to the Stones that point out
the Liberties of the City (if it be so their pleasures) and they then return
back again unto the Bridge-house, where they refresh themselves with a
Banquet. Then returning over the Bridge, the Aldermen take their leave of the
Lord Mayor, and depart the next way every one unto his own house. After all
this is done, and the Lord Mayor brought home: his Officers have a supper
provided for them by the Bridge-Masters.

For swearing the Sheriffs upon Michaelmas Eve.
WHat day soever it falls on, Their meting at the Sheriffs houses.
so many of the Aldermen as are bidden to dinner at either of the Sheriffs
houses, come thither first to breakefast, or else to drink, at eight of the
clock in the morning, in their violet colored Gowns furred, and their violet
cloaks, which are brought with them, without their horses. But if the Sheriff
be an Alderman; then they must put on their Cloakes, and the Sheriff likewise
his Cloak: If the Sheriff be an Alderman, or not.
and so he goes on to the Guild Hall, between two Aldermen wearing their gray
Cloakes. But if the Sheriff be no Alderman: then he is to come thither
between two of the Aldermen without Cloakes, and the Sheriff wearing his
Livery Gown and Hood. After he is sworn, then he is to put on his violet Gown
and Cloak and his Chain thereon. All which being done, the Aldermen are to
bring him home to his dwelling place to dinner, wearing their cloakes: and
after dinner, they may take their pleasure.

Upon Michaelmas day, for the election of the Lord Mayor.
ALL the Aldermen meet the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs, Their meeting at
Guild Hall in the morning by eight of the clock.
at eight of the clock in the morning at the Guild Hall, wearing their Scarlet
Gowns and Cloakes furred, riding on their horses. And after they have been a
certain time together in the Council Chamber; they come forth into the
Orphans Court, where putting on their Cloakes, they go in order to the
Chapel, there to hear Service and a Sermon: where also the Lord Mayor (with
certain Aldermen) receive the Communion.

After that the Communion is ended, and they have delivered their Offerings, The
manner of proceeding to the election of the L. Mayor.
they return back into the Council Chamber, and pausing there a while, they
come to the place where the court of Hustings is kept. Being there set in (...)
Recorder arises up, and making his obeisance first to the Lord (...) after to
the Commons, he (...) unto them, that the manner (...) custom is well known
(...) as also the reason of their (...) and thus meeting together of (...)
Companies in London, which is, for the election of the Lord Mayor for the year
ensuing: From the time of King Richard the first, to this instant year.
declaring unto them diverse grants from the Kings ^rogenitors, for this their
election from time to time. That done, the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen go up
again into the Lord Majors Court: and there remain (the doors fast shut unto
them) until the election shall be brought unto them.

Then stands up Master Common Sergeant, having the Sheriffs standing on
either side of him; and by the Sheriffs, Master Chamberlain, Master
Towne-Clarke, the two Secondaries of the Compters, and the Counselors of the
City, in the said Hustings Court before the Commons. At that time, the said
Common Sergeant makes a brief rehearsal of those former presidents which
Master Recorder had before delivered to them, saying; There remained no more
now for him to say, but only to put them in remembrance in what order and sort
they should carry themselves in their election. Advice given them what they are
to do in their election.
As namely, how they are to nominate and choose two: of the which two, the Lord
Mayor and the Aldermen must confirm one. Those two being nominated, elected and
chosen; Master Common Sergeant, the Sheriffs (with the rest before-named) and
certain of the prime Wardens of the chief Companies, go up to the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen, and there present the names of those two men, which the Commons
have nominated in their election.

Then the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen proceed by Scrutiny, One of the two
nominated persons is elected by Scrutiny.
to elect one of those two persons, which the said Commons had before
nominated. Then comes down the Lord Mayor again to the Hustings Court, and
he (whom they have chosen) goes on his left hand; and so the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen sit down again in order. But he who is chosen, sits next unto
the Lord Mayor on his left hand. Then stands up Master Recorder, and reads
unto them the names of such persons whom they have nominated and chosen. Of
which, the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen have admitted one, whose name is N.
demanding of them, whether it be their free election, The freedom of the
parties election.
or no. Then the Commons affirming it to be their free choice: the
Sword Bearer steppeth to him, and takes off his Tippet, which he has for his
labor, and puts on his Chain. And the Mayor so lately elected, standing
upon the Hustings Court, The breaking up of the Court.
given them thanks, etc. which being done, the old Mayor does likewise give
them thanks, etc. Then they arise up, putting off their cloakes, and the Lord
Mayor has the Lord Elect riding with him, to the eldest Sheriffs to dinner.

For presenting the Lord Mayor Elect to the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper.
THen after dinner, How the Lord Elect goes attended to his presenting.
the Lord Elect goes to the Lord Chancellor, if he be at home at his place or
near unto it, attended with five or six of the Aldermen, and Master Recorder
also with him, they wearing their violet Gowns, passing either by land or by
water, according as fitteth with conueniencie of the Lord Chancellors dwelling
place. The Common Hunt, with the extraordinary Officers, and those that be at
liberty, do also attend on him.

The morrow after Michaelmas day, for the new Sheriffs going to Westminster to
be sworn there.
ALL the Aldermen are to meet at the two new Sheriffs houses in the morning at
eight of the clock, Meeting at the two new Sheriffs houses in the morning.
wearing their violet Gowns furred, without their cloakes, yet having their
horses there ready. But the Lord Mayor, Master Recorder, and the two Sheriffs,
must wear their Scarlet Gowns furred, and their cloakes carried with them to
Westminster. First, they ride to them Guild Hall, and from thence to the
Vinetree, and there taking Barge, land at Westminster-Bridge, and in the Hall
they put on their cloakes; The swearing of the new Sheriffs, and the old ones
delivering their account.
then go they up into the Exchequer, where the two new Sheriffs be presented,
and the old sworn to their account.

Then they put off their cloakes, and take Barge, landing again at the
Vinetree, where they mount their horses. And the Lord Mayor rides to the
eldest Sheriffs to dinner; Master Recorder and the Sheriffs riding next to
the Lord Mayor. The two Sheriffs carrying two white rods in their hands, and
their Hench-men going after them.

The ancient Order for the day of Simon and Jude.
THe old Lord Mayor is to have so many of the Aldermen, The fetching of the old
Lord Mayor from his own house.
as are appointed to dine with him that day, come to his house by eight of the
clock in the morning, wearing their violet Gowns furred, with their violet
cloakes furred, and their horses attending. Then the Sheriffs come to fetch
him and them to the Guild Hall, and there abide in the Council Chamber, until
the coming of the new Lord Mayor, and the rest of the Aldermen, with the
Companies of either the Lords old and new going before them. After they have
continued in the Council Chamber a certain space of time, they come forth
into the Orphans Court, where they put on their furred cloakes, and then go
down to the Hustings Court, where being set in order, the common Crier makes
Proclamation, commanding every man to keep silence.

Then Master Towne-Clarke gives the new elected Lord his Oath, The new Lord
Mayor takes his Oath in the Hustings Court, and the ceremonies there done.
which when he has taken, the old Lord Mayor arises, and gives the new Lord
his place, the old Lord sitting down where the new Lord was placed. Then
Master Chamberlain first delivers to him the Scepter, next the Keys of the
common Seal; and lastly, the Seal of the office of the Maioralty. Afterward,
Master Sword Bearer gives him the Sword. And then they arise, put off their
Cloakes, and the old Lord rides home with the new Lord to his place, and there
leaves him, and so many of the Aldermen as dine with him. The old Lord (with
the rest of the Aldermen) ride home to his house, the Sword being carried
before him. And so after dinner, the Aldermen depart home at their pleasure.

On the morrow after the day of Simon and Jude, for the new Lord Mayor his
going to take his Oath at Westminster.
ALL the Aldermen and the Sheriffs meet at the new Lords house, Meeting at the
new Lord Majors house.
by eight a clock in the morning, The new Lord wears a velvet Hood and the
rich Collar: the Sword bearer the Cap of Maintenance.
wearing their Scarlet Gowns furred, and their Cloakes, and their Horses there
attending on them; from thence they ride to the Guild Hall, with the Batchelers
and Livery, as also the Gentlemen Vshers of the new Lords Company, going in
decent order before him.

But before this, The old Lord rides alone to the Guild Hall, but wears his
velvet Hood.
the old Lord rides alone from his own place to the Guild Hall, having no
Officers to wait upon him, except the Common Hunt, as a Gentleman Usher going
before him, and those Officers that are at liberty, as also the Common Hunts
man (with his own men following him) and so he tarrieth at the Hall.

And after they be all come together, they mount on their horses, riding on to
the Vine-tree, where they take Barge to Westminster Bridge, where when they are
landed, The orders and ceremonies performed at Westminster.
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen put on their Cloakes within the Palace, and then
go round about the Hall, where they perform many courtefies, going up
afterward into the the Exchequer Chamber to be sworn. When the Oath is taken
in the Exchequer, they return down again, and go first to the Kings Bench,
then to the Common Pleas, and so putting off their Cloakes, walk about the
Kings Tombs in Westminster Abbey, and then return to take Barge again.

Being landed at London, The service done to him at London, after his landing.
all the several Companies of the City, who had honored him in their Barges
to Westminster and back again, do likewise perform their attending service,
as he (with the Aldermen) ride on to the Guild Hall to dinner. Full well may
this be called a Feast, and ranked next in Honor to Saint Georges Feast: For
the Honorable Lords of his Highness Privy Council, other Lords, Barons,
Judges, Ladies, Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, with foreign Ambassadors and
Strangers, dine there as invited Guests. And therefore it is desertfully
termed, The Lord Majors Feast.
The Lord Majors Feast.

At their coming into the Hall, the new Lord Mayor, with two of the ancientest
Aldermen, What order is observed at the Guild Hall in welcomming the Guests.
Master Recorder, and the Sheriffs, go up to the Lords Table to bid them
welcome, as they do the like to all the other guests, Lords, Ladies, and
other. From thence they go to the Lady Maioresse her Table, the Gentlewomens,
and the Judges; and then the said new Lord Mayor (and they with him) go into
the Chamberlaines Office, where he dineth. Concerning the old Lord Mayor, so
soon as they come into the Hall, he goes up to the high Table in the
Hustings, and there keeps the State for that Feast. When the Hall is served
with the seconds, then the new Lord Mayor goes with Master Recorder, and those
Aldermen that dined with him, to bid the old Lord, and all the Companies or
Guests in the Hall welcome.

Then after dinner he rides with the Aldermen to Paul's, Order observed after
dinner, and for going to Paul's.
the Companies waiting, and standing in their due places for his coming.

For going to PAVLS on All Saints day, Christmas day, Twelfe day, and Candlemas
day.
ALL the Aldermen and the Sheriffs come to the Lord Majors house, The new and
old Lords wear both of them their black velvet Hoods, and the Swordbearer the
Hat of Maintenance.
in their Scarlet Gowns furred, and their Cloakes, as also their Horses
brought thither with them. From thence they ride to the Guild Hall, the Company
belonging to the Lord Mayor, and the band of Batchelers, with their Gentlemen
Vshers walking orderly before him; and there they hear Evening Prayer. When
Prayer is ended, then they ride thence to Paul's Church, where both the new Lord
Mayor and the old put on their Cloakes, An ancient custom observed in Paul's
Church.
and go up into the Quire, where they sit to hear the Sermon. Which being
done, the^ (...) about the Church, and (...) Cloakes where they did put them
on. Then they mount on their Horses again, and the Aldermen, with the
Companies and Batchelours bring the Lord Mayor home to his house: where they
have Spice-bread and Hypocrasse, and so take leave of the Lord Mayor. Here is
further to be understood, that All Saints day is the last day of the old Lords
riding with the new in this manner.

On Saint Thomas day.
THe Lord Mayor, If it be not Sunday.
and every Alderman likewise, is to sit in the Ward belonging to him, about
such business as is then necessarily required to be done. Each of them is to
wear his Violet Gown and Cloak furred.

For the CHRISTMAS Holidays.
FOr the Christmas holidays, No Cloak to be worn with their Scarlet.
until Twelfe day, if the Lord Mayor and Aldermen go abroad to any public
meeting, they are to wear Scarlet. But on the working days, within compass
of the Twelve days, if the Lord Mayor go to the Guild Hall, Markets, or
Streets, then he and they wear black.

On INNOCENTS day.
Upon Innocents day, No State is observed.
the Aldermen dine at the Lord Majors and the Sheriffs, wearing Scarlet: but
the Ladies wear black.

For Monday after Twelfe day.
THe Lord Mayor and the Aldermen meet at the Guild Hall by eight of the clock
in the morning, Indentures of the Wardmote Enquests.
wearing their furred Scarlet Gowns, and their furred Cloakes, but using no
Horses. Then and there they receive of their several Wards, their sealed
Indentures of the Wardmote Enquests: And take the Oaths of the Constables and
Scavengers.

For GOOD-FRYDAY.
THe Lord Mayor and the Aldermen meet at Paul's Cross at one of the clock in
the afternoon, Pauls-Crosse Sermon on Good-Fryday: The Black Sword.
to hear the Sermon for that day appointed: they then wearing their Pewke
Gowns, and without their Chains and Tippets.

For Monday and Tuesday in Easter week.
ALL the Aldermen and Sheriffs come unto the Lord Majors dwelling house, A Hood
for the L. Mayor.
before eight of the clock in the morning, to breakfast, wearing their Scarlet
Gowns furred, and their cloakes, as also their horses attending. When
breakefast is ended, The Cap or Hat of Maintenance.
they mount on their horses, and ride to the Spittle, the Sword and Mace borne
before the Lord Mayor. Being come thither, there they put on their Cloakes, and
then sit down in order to hear the Sermon. Which being done, they ride thence
homeward in due order, till they come to the Pumpe within Bishopsgate; and
there, so many of the Aldermen as do dine with the Sheriffs, take their leave
of the Lord Mayor, and the rest go home with him.

For Wednesday in Easter week.
LIke as before on the other two days: The last Sermon at the Spittle*
only reserved, that the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen must then wear their
violet Gowns, and suitable Cloakes: But the Ladies (on the two former days)
wearing their Scarlet, on this day are attired in black.

For Low Sunday.
ALL the Aldermen meet the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs at Paul's School, The
Rehearsal Sermon.
wearing their Scarlet Gowns furred (yet without their Cloakes or horses) and
there stay to hear the Sermon.

For Whitsunday.
Upon Whitsunday, Sermon at the New Churchyard.
all the Aldermen use to meet the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs at the new
Churchyard by Moore-fields: wearing their Scarlet Gowns lined, without
Cloakes, to hear the Sermon there appointed for that day, which being ended,
they depart thence again.

For Monday and Tuesday in Whitsun week.
ALL the Aldermen are to meet the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs at Paul's; If his
pleasure be to go.
wearing their Scarlet Gowns, without Cloakes, to hear the Sermon at the
Cross.

For the day of the Lord Majors Knighthood.
ALL the Aldermen do meet the Lord Mayor, Preparation for either place of the
Kings then being.
either at the three Cranes (if the King then be at Westminster) or at Saint
Mary Hill (if the King be then at Greenewitch) by seven of the clock in the
morning; wearing their Scarlet Gowns; and their Cloakes carried with them.
After morning Prayer is ended, they take Barge to the King his place, and there
they give attendance, until that the Ceremony be finished: and then return
home with the Lord Mayor to dinner.

For going to Paul's the first Sunday of every Term.
ALL the Aldermen do meet the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs at Paul's, The Mayor
and Sheriffs only ride.
wearing their Scarlet Gowns, either furred or lined, according as the time of
the year requires: but without Cloakes or Horses, when the Term begins.

For Election of Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament.
ALL the Aldermen do meet the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs at Guild Hall,
Knights and Burgesses for sitting in Parliament.
by nine of the clock in the morning, wearing their Violet Gowns and their
Cloakes, either furred or lined, according as the time of the year requires
when they are to be chosen, and they sit in the Hustings Court, until the
Commons do make choice of them. The order has been observed, that they choose
Master Recorder for one of their Knights, and one Gray Cloak for the other,
and two Commoners for the Burgesses: which being done, they depart thence.

For the LORDS of the Council, when they come about the Subsidies.
WHen the Lords and Commissioners come down for assesment of the Subsidies,
Commissioners for assessing the Subsidies.
the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen do wear their black Gowns, as they use at
other times. And the Commissioners are to be warned by the Officers, which do
belong to both the Sheriffs.

For Election of Master Chamberlain, and the Bridge-Masters, if any of them
depart within the year.
THe Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, Upon death, or removing.
wearing their violet Gowns without their Cloakes, being seated in the Hustings
Court, do there continue their sitting, and not remove thence, until such
time as the Election be made.

At such time as a King is to be Crowned.
ALL the Aldermen do meet the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs at the three Cranes
in the Vinetree, How the L. Mayor and Aldermen are apparelled for such a
solemnity.
according to the hour of their summons appointed. The Lord Mayor (for that
time of service and attendance) wears a Crimosin Velvet Gown, a Collar of
Esses and Scepter, but no Cloak. The Aldermen wear their Scarlet Gowns, and
their Cloaks carried with them, either furred or lined, according as the season
of the year requires. There taking Barge, they land at Westminster, and there
they give attendance in the Exchequer Chamber (being served with Cakes and
Wine) until they be called by the Heralds: and then they put on their Cloakes.

At what times the Lord Mayor wears his Cloak.
FRom Michaelmas to Whitsontide, Beginning upon Michaelmas Even.
Violet furred: and from Whitsontide to Michaelmas, Scarlet lined.

The Lord Mayor, and those Knights that have borne the office of the Maioralty,
ought to have their Cloakes furred with Gray Amiss. And those Aldermen that have
not been Majors, are to have their Cloakes furred with Calabre.

And likewise, A very necessary observation.
such as have been Majors, are to have their Cloaks lined with changeable
Taffata: and the rest are to have their Cloakes lined with green Taffata.

For the first day of every Quarter Sessions.
THe first day of every Quarter Sessions (in the forenoone only) the Lord Mayor
and the Sheriffs wear their violet Gowns and Cloakes furred. But at
Midsummer Quarter Sessions, the first day, they wear Violet Gowns and Scarlet
Cloakes: and on the other days Black.

For the burial of Aldermen.
THe Aldermen are to wear their Violet Gowns, The last love, duty, and
ceremony one to another.
except such as have (of their friends allowance) black Gowns, or mourning.
When an Alderman dies, Master Swordbearer is to have a black Gown, or three
and thirty shillings and four pence in money. And if the Alderman deceased do
give the Lord Mayor mourning, then Master Sword Bearer is to have mourning
also, or forty shillings in money, as the value thereof, and so to carry the
Sword in black before the Lord Mayor.

Master Chamberlain is not to wear his Tipper, but when the Lord Mayor or
Aldermen do wear their Scarlet or Violet.

At the Nomination of an Alderman.
FOr the Nomination of an Alderman, Nominating an Alderman*
the Lord Mayor wears his black Gown, and violet Cloak, and both the
Sheriffs their black Gowns.

For the Orphans Court.
THe Lord Mayor and the Aldermen do meet at the Guild Hall, On the day, and at
the hour appointed.
wearing their Violet Gowns without Cloakes: but the Lord Mayor ought to wear
his Cloak. The Common Crier is the Warner of this Court.

Orders taken and enacted for Orphans and their Portions. Anno 1580.
AD Commune Concilium, tentum in Guildhaldia Civitatis Londini, xiij. die
October. Anno Regni Edvardi sexti, Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
Regis, fidei defensoris, and in terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and Hibernicae
supremi capitis, quinto: coram Andrea Iudde Milite, tunc Maiore, and
Aldermannis Civitatis illius, ordinata sunt inter alia, inactitata, concessa
and stabilita, omnia and singula subsequentia.

FOr as much as the City of London is of late years sore decayed, and daily is
like to decay more and more: A great cause and occasion whereof, among other,
has been, for that freemens children (Orphans of the said City) sometimes in
the lives of their Parents, and sometimes after their deceases, being left
wealthy and rich, do bestow themselves in ungodly Marriages, for the most part
in their young age, at their own wills and pleasures, without the consent, and
against the minds of their friends, saying and affirming, that the Law and
Custom of the said City gives unto them their portions, whether they marry by
the assent of their friends or not, and so do daily cast away and undo
themselves, in trust to have their said Portions, whether their parents or
friends will or will not.

And thereby do they bestow themselves upon simple and light persons, having
neither cunning, knowledge, substance, nor good or honest conditions. By reason
whereof, such Orphans, inordinately, and insolently, do spend and consume
their patrimony and portions in short time, not only to the undoing of
themselves, and to the great ignomy and shame of their friends, but also to the
great slander of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City (who been reputed and
taken as Fathers and Protectors of the same Orphans) and to the great loss
and hindrance of the said City.

And for as much as the said Lord Mayor and Citizens, have by their laws, and
customs, power and authority to make laws and ordinances, by their Common
Council, for redress of the same:

It is therefore now (to the intent to reduce the same to a more godly, more
profitable and decent order and conformity) by the said Lord Mayor, and
Comminalty, and Citizens, in this present Common Council assembled, and by
authority of the said Common Council, enacted, ordained, authorized, and
established for a law perpetually to be observed and kept within the said
City: That if any Orphane, or child of any free man or free woman of the said
City, do offend in any the things hereafter expressed, and be thereof
lawfully convicted, before the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen or else where, that
then they and every of them, shall to all entents, purposes, constructions and
meanings, be unabled and barred to demand and claim their portion or portions,
and also shall lose and forgo and be barred for ever, of all and every his,
her or their part or parts, and portions to him or them belonging, by and after
the death of his or their said father or mother, of the goods and cattals, of
every such father and mother, by reason of any law, custom, ordinance, usage,
franches, privilege, act of Common Council, or other thing, heretofore had or
used, within the said City: The same Law, Custom, Ordinance, or other thing
whatsoever, heretofore had, made, ordained, allowed, and put in ure, to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. That is to wit: First, if any manchild,
or woman-child, shall maliciously go about or attempt to do, or cause to be
done, any bodily harm, death, or destruction to his or their Father or Mother:
Or if any man-child do hereafter marry or contract marriage in the life of his
father or mother (by whom he will claim any portion) under the age of one and
twenty years, without the consent of his said Father, or Mother, by whom he
will claim any portion: Or if any woman-child do hereafter marry or contract
marriage, in the life of her father, or other parent, by whom she shall claim
any portion, before the age of eighteen years, without the consent of her
father, or such other parent by whom she shall or may claim any portion: Or
if any man-child be a Thief, or a Fellon, or a common whore-hanter; a common
Diser, or a common player at unlawful games notoriously known: Or if any
womanchild shall hereafter commit any whoredom, or be a common Picker, that
then every of the persons so offending, shall be barred and excluded to have,
or demand any portion.

Provided always, that it shall be lawful for the father, or mother of any
such child, or children, to give and bequeath in Legacy, to such child or
children, as much as the portion of such child so offending shall amount unto,
by the custom of the said City, and then such child thereby to be enabled to
have and demand the same, as portion, this Act notwithstanding, so that the
same Legacy be contained in his or their restament in writing, and not
otherwise.

And that then, and from thenceforth his said child or children, to be admitted
and restored to claim such legacy, or legacies, in such sort, manner and
form, as if there had been never any such offense done, or committed by any
such child.

Item, it is further ordained, enacted, authorized and established, by the
authority aforesaid, that if any womanchild, being an Orphane, and under the
age of one and twenty years, at any time hereafter, after the death of her
Father, do ensure or contract her self in marriage, or else according to the
Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm, do perfitly solemnize or consummate
Marriage, with any free man of this City, the consent and agreement of the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of this said City of London for the time being, not obtained
and had, that then for every such default and offense committed or done by any
Orphane, or Orphans, of the said City, the same being confessed, or
sufficiently proved by two witnesses; or otherwise before the said Lord Mayor
and Aldermen of this said City of London, for the time being, at and in a Court
of Aldermen, she or they that so happen to behave her or themselves, as is
aforesaid, shall forfeit, forgo and lose two pence of and for every pound, so
due or to be due unto her, or them, by reason of any such Orphanage, the sum
of twelve pence of every pound, to go, or to be to the use of the Chamber of
the said City, according to the ancient custom before this time, in such case
used.

And if the said contract or marriage of the said Orphane or Orphans, be made
with any foreign, not being free of this City, at the time of any such
contract or marriage made, that then the said Orphan or Orphans, and every of
them shall forfeit and lose three shillings of every pound, or to be due unto
her or them, by virtue of any Orphanage or custom had and used within the said
City.

The one shilling of the said three shillings of every pound, to go, or to be,
to the use of the Chamber of the said City, in such manner and form as is
aforesaid.

And the other two shillings so forfeited of every pound, to go to the use of
such other Orphane, or Orphans, as then shall remain unmarried. Or else for
default of such Orphans, or Orphan, to remain to the next of the kindred of
the Orphane so offending.

Also, be it further ordained, enacted, and established by authority aforesaid,
for, and in eschewing of diverse variances, contentions, and suits, that daily
heretofore have, and hereafter may ensue: that if any free man's child, man or
woman fortune to be married hereafter, in the life time of his, or their
father, by his consent, and not fully advanced of, and to his, or her full
part, or portion of his or her said Fathers goods, as he shall be worth at the
time of his decease, according to the ancient laws and customs of this said
City: that then every such free man's child, so being married in the life time
of his, or her Father, shall be to all intents and purposes, disabled to
demand any further part or portion of his or her fathers goods, after the
decease of his, or her father, but shall be adjudged, reputed, and taken to be
fully advanced, according as the law and custom of this City has been long
time out of mind, except his or her said father do mention certainly in his
last Will or Testament, or by other writing signed with his own proper name,
or mark the certainety of the sum or sums of money, goods and cattels, and
the value of them that the Father gave, paid or departed withal, or otherwise
assured, or hereafter shall give, pay, depart withal, or otherwise make
assurance of unto him, or her, before, at or after the marriage of him or her,
or otherwise in his life time, for and toward their advancements, in the name
of his, or her part, or portion.

And then every such Orphane, or child, which after the decease of his or her
said father, can bring forth the said Testament, or other writing signed or
marked with the fathers hand or mark, wherein the certainety of such money,
goods, or cattels, as they have or shall have received of their said Father, or
by the same Father, assured by especialty, or otherwise, shall have as much of
the ready money, goods, cattels, and debts of the said Father, as (with that
which he or they shall have received toward their advancements, in the life of
their said Father) shall make up a full child's part, of his goods and cattels,
as he shall be worth at the time of his decease. The same to be demanded,
asked, and claimed, or sued for against the executor, or executors,
administrator, or administrators, of the goods, and cattels of the said Father,
by bill Original, to be commenced to our Sovereign Lord the Kings Court,
holden in the utter Chamber of the Guild Hall of the said City, before the said
L. Mayor and Aldermen of the same City for the time being, any Law or Custom
heretofore made or used to the contrary notwithstanding. In which action, no
wager of Law, or Essoine, shall be admitted or allowed.

Provided always, and it is further enacted, that if any freee man's son, being
of full age (which shall hereafter be married with the consent of his Father,
or any other person, being of full age, which shall hereafter marry any free
man's daughter) do at the time of the Espousals, or any time after, confess
themselves by writing fully satisfied, of his or their portion, or do
otherwise acquit and discharge the Father of such free man's sons or
daughters, of all their part and portion due, or to be due, by the Law and
Custom of the City; that then every such person, so confessing, acquitting, or
otherwise discharging, shall be reputed and taken as fully advanced of his or
their whole part or portion, and shall not be enabled to demand any further or
greater part of the substance, goods, and cattels of his or her Father: this
Law, or any other Law or Custom heretofore had, made, or used to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And further, for as much as it is thought very prejudicial and hurtful to
the fatherless children and Orphans, when the mother, or mother in Law, being
Executrix of the last Will and Testament of her late husband, by whom, and
after whose death, the Orphans are entitled to an Orphanage, (according to
the said laudable Customs of this City) do diverse times marry, or contract
Matrimony, some with Forriners, and persons unknown, and some with Free men,
or ever a just Inventory of the Goods, Cattels, Plate, Jewels, ready Money of
the Testators, be by them brought in: By reason whereof, many times they (either
for fear or affection of their husbands, or for some other sinister cause) do
bring in very suspicious Inventories, omitting therein either ready Money,
Plate, Jewels, or Debts, or some other thing or things, whereby some benefit
should redound to the fatherless children, to the great loss and hinderance
of the Orphans, and sometimes slander to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the
City, notwithstanding their great care and travail that they take for the good
ordering, and true answering of the said Orphans:

It is therefore, by like authority, ordained, established, and enacted, that
if after the first day of November next ensuing, any Widow, which is, or shall
be made Executrix of the Testament and last Will of her late Husband (being a
free man) or shall take upon her the administration of the Goods and Cattels of
her late Husband (being a free man) do not upon her Oath bring in and exhibit,
or cause to be brought in and exhibited before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
this said City for the time being, at and in a Court of Aldermen, a just and
perfect Inventory (to their knowledge) of all the Goods, Cattels, Plate, and
Jewels, ready Money, and Debts, as were her said Husbands at the time of his
death, appraysed according to the Law of the said City, before she do ensure
her self in marriage, or contract marriage, or else according to the Laws of
the Realm, do perfectly solemnize or consummate marriage with any person
before such time as aforesaid, that then every person so offending, shall
forfait and lose eight shillings of every pound, of her Portion, of the goods
of her late Husband, due to her by the laudable Custom of the said City, the
same to go to the use of such Orphane, or Orphans, as then shall be
entitled to have or demand any Orphanage or Portion, after the death of his or
her late Father* the same to be demanded, asked, claimed, or sued for, against
such Executrix, or Administratrix, by Bill original of debt, to be commenced
in our Sovereign Lord the Kings Court, holden in the utter Chamber of the
Guild Hall of the said City, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the same
City for the time being, any Law, etc. In which action no wager, etc.

For the election of Governors at Christ's Hospital, etc.
FOr the election of Governors belonging to the several Hospitals: At time
and place appointed.
the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen do wear their black Gowns.

A Note of Observation.
THe four Pleaders, Festival times and general days.
the Chamberlain, Towne-Clarke, Common Sergeant, two Judges of the Sheriffs
Court, the Secondaries, the Vnder-Chamberlaine, and Bridgemasters, are to
attend the Lord Mayor at his house, before his going abroad on all Festival
times, and general days.

Courts of Aldermen.
COurts of Aldermen in ordinary, Court days, and of exception.
are kept at the Guild Hall, every Tuesday and Thursday through the whole year;
except Holidays, the month of August, until Bartholomew day be past, the
week before Christmas, Shrove-Tuesday, and the week before Easter.

The Laws of the Market.
FIrst, in all the Markets of this City, no Victual shall be sold, but by the
price set by the Mayor of this City.

2 No man shall forestall any Victual coming to the Market, as for to buy in
any Inn or other privy place, or yet coming to the Market, whether it be
found in the hands of the buyer or of the seller, under pain of forfeiture of
the same: and no Inne-holder shall suffer nothing to be sold in his house,
upon pain of forfeiture of forty shillings.

3 No man shall regrate any Victual which is in the Market, or buy any
Victual to ingrate in the Market, so that the Commons can or may have any part
of such Victual, as in especial, such as be known for Hucksters, or other
people, occupying their living by such Victual as they would so ingrosse,
under pain of forfeiture of such Victual so regrated: Provided always, that
any Steward for any noble Feast, may buy or ingrate such Victual as is
convenient for the same Feast.

4 No Butter shall be sold, but according to the weight, for the time of the
year allowed.

5 No Poulters shall deceiveably occupy the Market, to sell any stale Victual,
or such as be Poulters of this City, for to stand in strange clothing so to
do, under pain of forty shillings, and the forfeiture of such Victual, forty
shillings.

6 No Hucksters shall stand or sit in the Market, but in the lower place, and
the ends of the Market, to the intent they may be perfectly known, and the
Stranger-market-people have the preeminence of the Market, under pain of three
shillings four pence, if the Hucksters disobey the same.

7 No unwholesome or stale Victual shall be sold under pain of xi. s. and
forfeiture of the same Victual.

THE STATVTES OF THE STREETS OF THIS CITY, against Annoiances.
FIrst, no man shall sweep the filth of the Street into the Chancell of the
City, in the time of any rain, or at any other time, under pain of six
shillings eight pence.

2 No man shall cast, or lay in the Streets, Dogs, Cats, or other Carren, or
any noisome thing contagious of Air. Nor no Inholder shall lay out dung out of
his house, but if the Cart be ready to carry the same away incontinently,
under pain of forty shillings.

3 No Brewer shall cast wilfully dregs or dross of Ale or Beer into the
Channel, under pain of two shillings.

4 No man shall encumber the streets with Timber, Stones, Carts, or such like,
under pain of forfeiture of the same thing that so encumbreth the streets,
which is twenty shillings fine, if he remove it not at the warning of the
Sergeant of the Market.

5 Every builder of houses ought to come to the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Chamberlain, for a special license for hourd of, by him to be made in the
high Street, and no builder to encumber the Streets with any manner of thing,
taking down for the preparing of his new building, under pain of forty
shillings, except he make a hourd of forty shillings.

6 No man shall set any Carts in the Streets by night time, under the pain of
twelve pence, and recompense to such persons as shall be hurt thereby, if any
such be, twelve pence.

7 No Budge-man shall lead but two horse^, and he shall not let them go
vnled, under pain of two shillings.

8 No man shall ride, or drive his Car or Cart atrot in the Street, but
patiently, under pain of two shillings.

9 No man shall gallop his horse in the Street, under pain of two shillings.

10 No man shall shoot in the Street, for Wager or otherwise, under like pain
of two shillings.

11 No man shall bowl, or cash any stone in the Street, for wager, or gain,
or such like, under pain of two shillings.

12 No man shall dig any hole in the Street for any matter, except he stop it
up again, under pain of two shillings, and recompense to any person hurt
thereby, two shillings.

13 No man shall bury any dung, or goung, within the Liberties of this City,
under pain of forty shillings.

14 No Goungfermour shall carry any Ordure till after nine of the Clock in the
night, under pain of thirteen shillings four pence.

15 No Goungfermour shall spill any Ordure in the Street, under pain of
thirteen shillings four pence.

16 No man shall bait Bull, Bear, or Horse in the open street, under pain of
twenty shillings.

17 No man shall have any Kine, Goats, Hogs, Pigs, Hens, Cocks, Capons, or
Ducks in the open Street, under pain of forfeiture of the same.

18 No man shall maintain any biting Curs, or mad Dogs, in the streets, under
pain of two shillings, and recompense unto every party hurt therewith, two
shillings.

19 No Carts that shall be shod with Spig-naile, that shall come upon the
streets of this City, under pain of three shillings four pence.

20 No Carts using daily carriage within this City, nor Car shall have Wheels
shod with any Iron, but bare, under pain of six shillings.

21 No man shall burn any Straw, Rushes, or other thing, Linen or Woollen in
the streets, by night or by day, under pain of three shillings four pence.

22 No man shall blow any Horn in the night within this City, or Whistle after
the hour of nine of the clock in the night, under pain of imprisonment.

23 No man shall use to go with Vizards, or disguised by night, under like
pain of imprisonment.

24 That Night-walkers, and Evesdroppers endure like punishment.

25 No Hammer-man, as a Smith, a Pewterer, a Founder, and all Artificers,
making great sound, shall not work after the hour of nine in the night, nor
before the hour of four in the morning, under pain of three shil. four pence.

26 No man shall cast into the Ditches of this City, or the Sewers of this
City, without the walls, or into the walls, Grates, or Gullets of this City,
any manner of Carren, stinking Flesh, rotten Fish, or any Rubbish, Dung, Sand,
Gravel, Weeds, Stones, or any other thing to stop the course of the same,
under pain of cleansing them at his own cost and charge, under pain of
imprisonment.

27 No man shall make any Widrawtes in any of the Towne-Ditches, or the
Towne-Gullets, under pain of twenty shillings.

28 No man shall build nigh the Walls of this City, without license of the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Chamberlain, under pain of throwing down the same, and
no license may be granted, except that the Chamberlain freely at all times have
convenient and needful ingresse, and entry, going out, and clear recourse.

29 No man shall go in the streets by night or by day with Bow bent, or
Arrows under his Girdle, nor with Sword unscabberd, under pain of
imprisonment; or with Hand-Gun, having therewith Powder and Match, except it
be in an usual May Game or Sight.

30 No man shall after the hour of nine at the Night, keep any rule whereby
any such sudden outcry be made in the still of the night, as making any
Affray, or beating his Wife, or Servant, or Singing, or Reve^ing in his house,
to the disturbance of his neighbors, under pain of 3. shil. 4. pence.

31 No man shall make any Affray, upon any Officer, which with good demeanor
does his message by commandment of my Lord Mayor, or any Alderman, or M.
Sheriffs, or M. Chamberlain, or misbehave himself in any railing upon any
Judge of this City, or their Officers, which by commandment are sent to bring
any breaker of this Law and Custom to Ward, or to distress, or such like,
upon pain of Imprisonment of forty days, and forfeiture of the double
penalty: for the offenses asseasing, railing upon any Alderman, or Mayor in his
office, is judgment of the Pillory: railing upon Master Chamberlain in his
office, forty days imprisonment: beating, threatening, and railing of an
Officer, is imprisonment, after as the trespass is.

32 Memorandum, That every offense found in this City, it is accustomed that
the Officer, a Free man, finding it, which is called primus Inventor, has
half the penalty by the grace of the Court.

33 Also, every Free man may find any offense, but he has no power to bring
the party before any Judge of this City without an Officer, except the party
will come to his answer by free will.

34 No man has power to Arrest, Attach, or make distress of any goods
forfeitable, or offenses, except the Constable or Sergeant of the Mace.

35 No Butcher, or his servant shall not use to drive any Ox or Oxen, atrot in
the streets, but peaceably: and ifan Ox happen to be let go when he is
prepared to slaughter, the Butcher shall forfeit two shil. besides recompense,
if any person be hurt thereby.

36 No Butcher shall scald Hogs, but in the common scalding house, upon pain
of six shillings eight pence.

37 No Butcher shall sell any Measell Hog, or unwholesome flesh, under pain of
ten pounds.

38 No Butcher shall sell any old stale Victual: that is to say, above the
slaughter of three days in the Winter, and two in the Summer, under pain of
ten pounds.

39 None unreasonable Victual for all manner of Victuals.

40 No Victualer of this City shall give any rude or unsetting language, or
make any clamor upon any man or woman in the open Market, for cheapning of
Victual, under pain of three shillings four pence.

41 No Butcher shall cast the inwards of Beasts into the streets, cleaves of
Beasts feet, Bones, Horns of Sheep, or other such like, under pain of two
shillings.

42 The Pudding-cart of the Shambles shall not go before the hour of nine in
the night, or after the hour of five in the morning, under pain of six
shillings eight pence.

43 No man shall cast any Vrineboles, or Ordure-boles into the streets by day
or night, before the hour of nine in the night: And also he shall not cast it
out, but bring it down, and lay it in the Channel, under the pain of three
shillings four pence. And if he do cast it upon any persons head, the party
to have a lawful recompense, if he have hurt thereby.

44 No man shall hurt, cut, or destroy any Pipes, Sesperals, or Windvents
pertaining to the Conduit, under pain of imprisonment, and making
satisfaction, though he does it out of the City, if he may be taken within
the City.

45 No man within this City may make any Quill, and break any Pipe of the
Conduit, coming through his house, or nigh his ground, under pain of the
Pillory, or take any water privily unto his house.

46 Casting any corrupt thing, appoysoning the water, is Lourgulary and Felony.

47 Whosoever destroy or perish any Cocks of the Conduit, must have
imprisonment, and make satisfaction.

Old Laws and Customs of this City.
48 NO man shall set up shop, or occupy as a Freeman, before he be sworn in
the Chamber of London, and admitted by the Chamberlain, under pain of*

49 No man shall set over his Apprentice to any other person, but by license of
Master Chamberlain, and there to be set over, under pain of*

50 No man which is a Foreign, shall not buy nor sell within the liberties of
this City with another Foreign, under pain of forfeiture of the goods so
foreign bought and sold.

51 No Freeman shall be disobedient for to come at Master Chamberlaines
commandment, to any summons to him given by any officer of the Chamber, under
pain of imprisonment.

52 Master Chamberlain has power to send a free man to Ward, so that he
incontinently after send to the Lord Mayor, the cause why that he is punished,
so that the Lord Mayor release him not, but by the Chamberlaines assent: and if
he be a great Commoner, and disobeying to the Chamberlain, Master Chamberlain
may refer it to a Court of Aldermen.

Master Chamberlain has authority for to send or command any Apoprentice to
the Counter for their offenses: and if their offenses be great, as in defiling
their Masters houses by vicious living, or offending his Master by theft, or
disslander, or such like, then to command him to Newgate.

Apprentice Enrolled, his Master pays two shillings six pence.

Apprentice set over, he that receives, two shillings.

Apprentice made Free, he pays four shillings.

Apprentice never Enrolled, and made free, his Master pays thirteen
shillings two pence.

A man made Free by his Fathers Copy, pays eighteen pence.

A Proclamation made in the time of the Maioralty of Sir Michael Dormer, Knight.

An Act of Common Council, made in the Even of Saint Michael, Anno Regis
Henrici Octavi xxxj. That no person should lay any Wares in the Street, or
beyond the edge of their Stall, upon pain of forfeiture the first time six
shillings eight pence: the second time thirteen shillings four pence: and the
third time, the Ware so laid.

AN ACT FOR THE REFORMATION OF DIVERSE ABUSES USED IN the Wardmote Inquest:
Together with the Articles of the charge of the said Inquest.
By the Mayor. To the Alderman of the Ward.
Wardmote Inquest for a year.
WE charge and command you, that upon Saint Thomas day the Apostle next
coming, you do hold your Wardmote, and that you have before us at our general
Court of Aldermen to be holden in the Guild Hall, the Monday next after the
Feast of the Epiphany next coming, all the defaults that shall be presented
before you by Inquest in the said Wardmote, and the said Inquest shall have full
power and authority by one whole year, to enquire and present all such
defaults as shall be found within your said Ward, as oftentimes as shall be
thought to you expedient and needful, which we will, shall be once every
month at the least.

Inquest dying.
AND if it happen any of your said Inquest to dye, or depart out of your said
Ward within the said year, that then in place of him or them so dying, or
departing out of your said Ward, you cause to be chosen one able person to
inquire and present with the other in manner and form aforesaid.

Non appearance.
AND that at the said general Court, you give before us the names and sur-names
of al them of your said Ward, that come not to your said Wardmote, if they be
duly warned, so that due redress and punishment of them may be had, as the
case shall require, according to the Law.

Watch, Light, Vizard.
AND that ye do provide, that at all times convenient, covenable Watch be
kept: and that Lanthornes with light by Nightertaile in old manner accustomed,
be hanged forth, and that no man go by nightertaile without light, nor with
Vizard, on the peril that belongs thereto.

Common Council.
AND also that you do cause to be chosen men of the most sufficient, honest,
and discreet men of your said Ward, to be for your said Ward of the Common
Council of this City for the year ensuing, according to the custom in that
behalf yearly used. And also that you do cause the said men so to be chosen
to be of the Common Council, to be sworn before you and in your presence,
according to the oath for them used, and of old time accustomed, the Tenor of
which oath hereafter ensues.

The Oath.
YE shall swear, that ye shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the King that
now is, and to his heirs and successors Kings of England, and readily ye
shall come when ye be summonned to the Common Council of this City, but if ye
be reasonably excused, and good and true counsel ye shall give in all things,
touching the Commonwealth of this City, after your wit and cunning: and that
for favor of any person ye shall maintain no singular profit against the
common profit of this City, and after that you be come to the Common Council,
you shall not from thence depart, until the Common Council be ended, without
reasonable cause, or else by the Lord Majors License. And also any secret
things that be spoken on said in the Common Council, which ought to be kept
secret, in no wise you shall disclose, as God you help.

Constables, Scavengers, Beadle, Raker.
AND that also in the said Wardmote you cause to be chosen certain other
honest persons to be Constables, and Scavengers, and a common Beadle, and a
Raker to make clean the streets and lanes of all your said Ward, according to
the custom yearly used in that behalf, which Constables have, and shall have
full power and authority to distraine for the ^a^^ary and quarterage of the
said Beadle and Raker, as oftentimes as it shall be behind unpaid.

Roll of names.
ALso, that you keep a Roll of the names, sur-names, dwelling places,
professions and trades of all persons dwelling within your Ward and within what
Constables precinct they dwell, wherein the place is to be specially noted by
the street, lane, alley, or sign.

Constable. Roll.
ALso that you cause every Constable from time to time, to certify unto you,
the name, surname, dwelling place, profession, and trade of every person, who
shall newly come to dwell within his Precinct, whereby you may make and keep
your Roll perfect: and that you cause every Constable for his Precinct to that
purpose to make and keep a perfect Roll in like manner.

Inholder, Lodger, Sojourner.
ALso that you give special charge that every Inholder, and other person
within your Ward, who shall receive any person to lodge or sojourne in his
house above two days, shall before the third day after his coming thither,
give knowledge to the Constable of the Precinct where he shall be so received,
of the name, surname, dwelling place, profession, and trade of life, or place
of service of such person, and for what cause he shall come to reside there:
and that the said Constable give present notice thereof to you: and that the
said Inholder lodge no suspected person, or men or women of evil name.

Search. New comers.
ALso that you cause every Constable within his Precinct, once every month at
the farthest, and oftener, if need require, to make diligent search and inquiry,
what persons be newly come into his Precinct to dwell, sojourne, or lodge: and
that you give special charge, that no Inholder or other person shall resist or
deny any Constable, in making such search or inquiry, but shall do his best
endeavor to aid and assist him therein.

Frank pledge.
ANd for that of late there is more resort to the City of persons evil
affected in Religion, and otherwise than in former times have bin: You shall
diligently inquire if any man be received to dwell or abide within your Ward,
that is not put under frank pledge, as he ought to be by the custom of the
City, and whether any person has continued in the said Ward by the space of
one year, being above the age of twelve years, and not sworn to be
faithful and loyal to the Kings Majesty, in such sort as by the Law and
custom of the City he ought to be.

Beadle.
TO all these purposes the Beadle of every Ward shall employ his diligence, and
give his best furtherance.

Fire.
ALso that you have special regard that from time to time, there be convenient
provisio^ for Hooks, Ladders, and Buckets, in meet places within the several
Parishes of your Ward, for avoiding the peril of fire.

Streets.
ALso that the Streets and lanes of this City, be from time to time kept clean
before every Church, house, shop, warehouse, door, dead wall, and in all
other common passages and streets of the said Ward.

Hucksters of Ale and Beer.
AND where by diverse acts of Common Council, before time made and established
for the Commonweal of this City, amongst other things it is ordained and
enacted, as hereafter ensues:

Also it is ordained and enacted, That from henceforth no Huckster of Ale or
Beer, be within any Ward of the City of London, but honest persons, and of
good name and fame, and so taken and admitted by the Alderman of the Ward for
the time being, and that the same Hucksters do find sufficient surety before
the Mayor and Aldermen for the time being, to be of good guiding and rule: and
that the same Hucksters shall keep no bawdry, nor suffer no letchery,
dice-playing, carding, or any other unlawful games, to be done, exercised, or
used within their houses: and to shut in their doors at nine of the clock in
the night from Michaelmas to Easter, and from Easter to Michaelmas, at ten of
the clock in the night, and after that hour sell none Ale or Beer. And if
any Huckster of Beer or Ale, after this act published and proclaimed, sell any
Ale or Beer within any Ward of the City of London, and be not admitted by the
Alderman of the same Ward so to do, or find not sufficient surety as it is
above rehearsed, the same Huckster to have imprisonment, and make fine and
ransom for his contempt, after the discretion of the Mayor and Aldermen: and
also that the said Hucksters suffer no manner of common eating and drinking
within their Cellars or Vaults contrary to the ordinance thereof ordained and
provided, as in the said act more plainly appears at large: we charge you
that you do put the same in due execution accordingly.

Measures sealed.
AND also that ye see all Tiplers and other sellers of Ale or Beer as well of
privy Osteries, as Brewers and Inholders within your Ward, not selling by
lawful measures sealed and marked with the letter C. crowned, according as in
that behalf it is ordained and purveighed, be presented, and their names in
your said Indentures be expressed, with their defaults, so that the
Chamberlain may be lawfully answered of their amersements.

Stranger borne.
ANd also that you suffer no stranger borne out of the Realm, to be of the
Common Council, nor to exercise or use any other Office within this City, nor
receive or accept any person into your Watch, privy or open, but Englishmen
borne: and if any stranger borne out of this Realm, made Denizen by the Kings
Letters Patents, or any other after his course and lot be appointed to any
watch, that then ye command and compel him or them to find in his stead and
place one Englishman to supply the same.

Billets and firewood.
AND also that you cause an abstract of the Assize appointed by act of
Parliament, for Billers and other firewood, to be fair written in Parchment,
and to be fixed or hanged up in a Table in some fit and convenient place in
every Parish within your Ward, where the common people may best see the same.

Streets. Pain 40. s.
AND furthermore we charge and command you, that you cause such provision to be
had in your said Ward, that all the streets and lanes within the same Ward be
from time to time cleansed and clearly voided of ordure, dung, mire, rubbish,
and other filthy things whatsoever they be, to the anoyance of the Kings
Majesty's subjects.

Vagarants.
AND also that at all times, as you shall think necessary, you do cause
search to be made within your said Ward, for all vagarant Beggars, suspicious
and idle people, and such as cannot show how to live, and such as shall be
found within your said Ward, that you cause to be punished and dealt with
according to the law and the statute in such case ordained and provided.

Iury-men.
AND also we will and charge you the said Alderman, that your self certify
and present before us, at the same general Court to be holden the foresaid
monday next after the Feast of Epiphany, all the names and sur-names truly
written of such persons within your said Ward, as be able to pass in a grand
Jury by themselves: and also all the names and sur-names truly written of such
persons, being and dwelling within your said Ward, as be able to pass in a
petty Jury, and not able to pass in a grand Jury by themselves, that is to
say, every grand Jury man to be worth in goods an hundred Marks, and every
petty Jury man forty Marks, according to an Act in that case made and
provided: and the same you shall indorce on the backeside of your Indenture.

Harlots.
ITem, for diverse reasonable and urgent considerations, us especially moving,
we straightly charge and command you on the King our Sovereign Lords behalf,
that you diligently provide and foresee, that no manner of person or persons
within your said Ward, of what condition or degree soever he or they be of,
keeping any Tavern or Alehouse, Aleseller or victualling house, or place of
common resort to eat and drink in, within the same Ward, permit or suffer at
any time hereafter, any common women of their bodies, or Harlors to resort and
come into their said house, or other the places aforesaid to eat or drink, or
otherwise to be conversant or abide, or thither to haunt or frequent, upon
pain of imprisonment, as well of the occupier and keeper of every such house
or houses, and all other the places before remembered, as of the said common
women or Harlots.

Articles.
ALso that you do give in charge to the Wardmote Inquest of your Ward, all the
Articles delivered to you herewith.

An Act for the Reformation of diverse abuses, used in the Wardmote Inquest.
Commons, Dinners, Banquetings.

ITEM, Where the Wardmote Inquests within the several Wards of this City, for
the maintenance of Honesty, Virtue, and good Living; and for the abolishment,
exiling, and suppressing of all kind of Vice, evil Rule, and Iniquity,
according to the ancient laudable Laws and Customs of the said City, are
yearly severally charged and sworn, upon the day of S. Thomas the Apostle,
before the Aldermen of the said Wards, chiefly and principally to the end and
intent, that they with all diligence should truly and duly inquire and present
all such Enormities, Nusances, Misorder, and Offenses, as are, or at any time
within the space of one whole year then next ensuing, shall be severally used,
committed, or done within the said Wards, and have day yearly to make their
said Presentiments, until the Monday next after the Feast of the Epiphany: The
said Inquests heretofore little or nothing at all regarding (as it is very
manifest and not unknown, the more is the pity) their said Oaths, or yet the
great commodities, Vtility, Quietness, Honor, and Worship, that might or
should grow and ensue to the said City, and inhabitants of the same, through
their good, industrious, and indifferent proceedings, for the advancement of
Virtue, and repressing of Vices, have drawn it in a manner into a very
ordinary course and common Custom, to consume and spend a great part of their
said time, that they have yearly given unto them, when they receive their said
charge; partly in setting up among themselves a certain Commons, and making
and keeping many costly and sumptuous Dinners, Suppers, and Banquets, inviting
and calling to the same at sundry times, in a manner, all the Inhabitants of
the said several Wards, to the no little charges of the same Inhabitants, and
partly in passing and occupying much part of the same time in playing at Dice,
Tables, Cards, and such other unlawful Games both to the great costs, charges,
and expenses of the said Inquests (whereof the greater part most commonly are
but poor men) and also to the very lewd, pernicious, and evil example of all
such as have any access or recourse unto the same Inquests. And where also the
said Inquests have of late usurped to dispense with such persons, as they by
their search, and otherwise, have founden to offend and transgress the Laws,
in using and occupying of unlawful Weights and Measures, taking of the said
Offenders certain Fines (as it is said) the said Inquests have commonly used
to employ toward the maintenance of their said Feasting and Banqueting,
directly against the due order of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Laws, and the
public wealth of all his Highness Subjects within the said City, and much to
the reproach and dishonor of the same City.

For remedy and Reformation thereof, be it Ordained Enacted, and Established by
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, in this present Common Council
assembled, and by authority of the same, That all and every the Wardmote
Inquests of the said City, from henceforth to be yearly charged and sworn
within the several Wards at the time before rehearsed, shall at all times and
places meet and convenient for the due execution of their said charge, meet and
assemble themselves together, and that they and every of them after their said
meetings, inquisition, and treating of their said necessary matters, shall go
home to their own several houses to Breakefast, Dinner, and Supper, during
all the said accustomed time of their charge and Session abovesaid: And that
none of the said Inquests shall from henceforward set up any manner of Commons,
or keep or maintain any manner of Dinners, Suppers, or Banquets among
themselves, or use at their said Assemblies and Sessions, any of the Games
above mentioned, or any other whatsoever unlawful Games or Plays at any time,
before the giving up of the said Presentiments at the time above remembered. Or
shall take or receive any manner of Fine or Fines, for the concealment and
discharging of any of the Offenses before recited: but truly present the same
Offenses, and every of them, according to their Oaths, upon pain of
imprisonment by the discretion of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the said City
for the time being.

Fire and Candle, etc. Recreation.
PRovided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall
be lawful for all the every of the said Inquests, to take and receive toward
the charges of their Fire and Candles, and other necessaries during the time of
their said Session, all and every such sums of money, as any honest person or
persons of their free will and benevolent mind, will give or offer unto them:
and when they have made their said Presentiments, to go and assemble themselves
together for their Recreation and solace, where they shall think it good: and
there not only to bestow and spend the twenty shillings, which every Alderman
within his Ward, according to a certain order lately taken, shall yearly give
unto them at the time of the delivery of the said Presentiments, toward their
said charges in this behalf, but also the residue of the said money received
and gathered, as it is aforesaid, of the benevolence of their said loving
friends, if any such residue shall fortune to remain. Any Clause or Article in
this present Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Not failing hereof, as ye tender the Common weal of this City, and
advancement of good Justice, and as ye will answer for the contrary at your
uttermost peril.

The Articles of the charge of the Wardmote Inquest.
Peace.
YE shall swear, that ye shall truly enquire if the Peace of the King our
Sovereign Lord be not kept as it ought to be, and in whose default, and by
whom it is broken or disturbed.

Frank pledge.
ALso if any man be received within this Ward, but if he be under Free pledge,
that is to say, be sworn after the Alderman at his Court, or else before the
said Alderman, between this and the Monday next after the Feast of the Epiphany
next coming.

Outlawes, Traitors, Fellons, etc.
ALso if there dwell any man within the Ward, that is outlawed or indicted of
Treason or Felony, or be any receiver of Traitors or Fellons.

Thames.
ALso ye shall enquire, and truly present all the offenses and defaults done
by any person or persons within the River of Thames, according to the intent
and purport of an Act made by our late Lord King Edward the sixth, in his high
Court of Parliament, and also of diverse other things ordained by Act of Common
Council of this City, for the redress and amendment of the said River, which
as now is in great decay and ruin, and will be in short time past all remedy,
if high and substantial provision and great help be not had with all speed
and diligence possible: as more plainly appears in the said Act of
Parliament, and the said Act of Common Council of this City.

Congregations.
ALso if any manner of person make Congregation, or be receiver or gatherer of
evil companies.

Riotor, Barrator.
ALso if any man be a common Riotor, or a Barrator, walking by nightertaile
without light, against the rule and custom of this City.

Peace, hue and cry.
ALso if there be any man within this Ward, that will not help, aid, nor
succor the Constables, Beadle, and other ministers of this City in keeping of
the peace, and arrest the evil doers with rearing of hue and cry.

Hucksters, receivers of Apprentices Artificers, etc.
ALso if there be any Huckster of Ale and Beer, that commonly uses to receive
any Apprentices, servants, Artificers or Laborers, that commonly use to play
at the Dice, Cards, or Tables, contrary to the form of the statute in that case
ordained and provided.

Inholder, Taverner, Victualer.
ALso if there be any Inholder, Taverner, Brewer, Huckster, or other
Victualer, that hold open their houses after the hour limited by the Mayor.

Curfue.
ALso if any Parish Clarke do ring the Bell, called the Curfue Bell, after
Curfue rungen at the Churches of Bow, Barking Chruch, and Saint Giles without
Creplegate.

Bawds, maintainers of quarrels.
ALso ye shall enquire if any Putour, that is to say, man-Bawd, or woman-Bawd,
common hazerdours, contectour, maintainer of quarrels, champartours, or
embracers of Inquests, or other common mis-doers be dwelling within this Ward,
and present their names.

Strumpet, Adulterer, Witch, Scold.
ALso if any Baud, common strumpet, common Adulterer, Witch or common Scold be
dwelling within this Ward.

Hot-house.
ALso if there be any house, wherein is kept and holden any hot-house, or
sweating-house, for ease and health of men, to the which be resorting or
conversant any strumpets, or women of evil name or fame, or if there be any
hot-house or sweating ordained for women, to the which is any common recourse
of young men, or of other persons of evil fame and suspect conditions.

Also, if there be any such persons that keep or hold any such hot-houses,
either for men or women, and have found no surety to the Chamberlain for their
good and honest behavior, according to the Laws of this City, and lodge any
manner of person by night, contrary to the ordinance thereof made, by the which
he or they shall forfeit twenty pounds to the Chamber, if they do the contrary.

Thames, ditches, streets, etc.
ALso if any manner of person cast or lay dung, ordure, rubbish, seacole dust,
rushes, or any other thing noyant, in the River of Thames, Walbrooke, Fleet, or
other ditches of this City, or in the open streets, ways, or lanes within this
City.

Channel.
ALso if any person after a great rain falls, or at any other time sweep any
dung, ordure, rubbish, rushes, Seacole dust, or any other thing noyant, down
into the channel of any street or lane, whereby the common course there is let,
and the same things noyant driven down into the said water of Thames.

Hogs, Kine, Oxen, Ducks.
ALso if any manner of person nourish Hogs, Oxen, Kine, Ducks, or any beasts
within this Ward, to the grievance and disease of their Neighbors.

Usury.
ALSO if any Usurers or false chevesancers be dwelling within this Ward.

Persons indicted in one Ward, flying into another.
ALso where before this time it is ordained and enacted as hereafter follows.
Item, for to eschew the evils of misgoverned persons that daily when they be
indicted in one Ward, fly into another: It is ordained by the Mayor and
Aldermen, that as soon as a man or woman suspect, first do come to dwell
within any house, in any Ward within the City, the Constables, Beadles, or
other Officers of the same, shall be charged by their Oaths, at the general
Court, to enquire and espy from whence they come. And if they find by their
own confession, or by the record of any of the Books of any Alderman of the
City, that they be indicted or cast of evil and noyous life, and will not find
surety for their good abearing and honest governance to the Alderman for the
time being, that then they shall not dwell there from thenceforth, but shall
be warned to avoid within three or four days, or more or less, after, as it
shall be seen to the Alderman of the Ward for the time being, and that the
Landlord that lets the house, or his attorney, shall be also warned to
make them to avoid out of his house aforesaid, within the said time limited by
the Alderman: and if they be found there after the time, that then not only
the said dishonest persons shall have imprisonment of their bodies after the
discretion of the Mayor and Aldermen, but also the said Landlords, letters of
the said houses, shall forfeit to the Guild Hall, as much as they should have
had for letting of the said house, or should be paid by the year, if the said
persons or others had dwelled in the said house.

Coloring foreign goods.
ALso if any Freeman against his Oath made, conceal, cover, or color the
goods of Forrains, by the which the King may in any wise lose, or the
franchises of this City be imblemished.

Foreign buying and selling.
ALso if any Foreign buy and sell with any other Foreign within this City or
the Suburbs thereof any goods or Merchandises, the same goods or Merchandises
be forthwith forfeit, to the use of the Comminalty of this City.

Freemen not resident.
ALso if every Freeman, which receives or takes the benefit, and enjoys the
franchises of this City, be continually dwelling out of the City, and has
not, nor will not (after his oath made) be at scot and lot, nor partner to the
charges of this City, for the worship of the same City, when he is duly
required.

Orphans, Wards, Marriages.
ALSO if any man conceal the goods of Orphans of this City, of whom the Ward
and marriage of right belongs to the Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Officers.
AND if any Officer by color of his Office, do extortion unto any man, or be
maintainer of quarrels against right, or take carriage, or arrest victual
unduely.

Boatman, Ferriour.
ALso if any Boatman or Ferriour be dwelling in the Ward, that takes more for
Boatmanage or ferriage, than is ordained.

Purprestures.
ALso if any man make Purprestures, that is to say, encroach, or take of the
common ground of this City, by land or by water, as in walls, pales, stoopes,
grieces, or doors, or cellers, or in any other like within the Ward; or if any
porch, pent-house, or jetty be too low, in letting of men that ride beside, or
carts that go thereforth.

Pent-houses, Ietties, Stalls, etc.
ALso that Pentises and Ietties be at the least the height of nine foot, and
that the stalls be not but of two foot and a half in breadth, and to be
flexible or moveable, that is to say, to hang by Iemewes or garners, so that
they may be taken up and let down.

Way, Watercourse.
ALso if any common way or common course of water be foreclosed or let, that
it may not have his course as it was wont, to the noyance of the Ward, and by
whom it is done.

Pavements.
ALso if any pavement be defective, or too high in one place, and too low in
another, to the disturbance of riders and goers thereby, and carts that go
thereupon.

Regrators, Forestallers.
ALso if any Regrator or Forestaller of victual, or of any other Merchandises
which should come to this City to be sold, be dwelling in this Ward: a
Regrator is as much to lay, as he that buyeth up all the victual, or
Merchandises, or the most part thereof, when it is come to the City or the
Suburbs of the same at a low price, and then afterward sells it at his own
pleasure, at a high and excessive price: a Forestaller is he that goes out of
the City, and meets with the victual or Merchandise by the way, coming unto
the City to be sold, and there buyeth it, both these be called in the Law,
Inimici publici patriae, which is to say, open enemies to a Country.

Price of victual.
ALso if any Butcher, Fishmonger, Poulter, Vintner, Hostler, Cook, or seller of
Victual, do sell Victual at unreasonable prices.

Hay.
ALso if any Hostler sell Hay, Oats or Provender at excessive prices, taking
greater gain thereby then is reasonable and lawful.

Victual unwholesome. Price.
ALso if any Victualer sell any Victuals not covenable, or unwholesome for man's
body, or else dearer than is proclaimed by the Mayor.

Measures unsealed.
YE shall diligently make search and inquiry, whether there be any Vintner,
Inholder, Alehouse-keeper, or any other person or persons whatsoever within
your Ward, that do use or keep in his or their house or houses, any Cans,
Stone pots, or other measures which be unsealed, and by Law not allowed to sell
Beer or Ale thereby, and whether they do sell any of their best Beer and Ale
above a penny the quart, or any small Ale or Beer above a half penny the
quart, and whether any of them do sell by any measure not sealed. If there be
any such, you shall seize them, and send them to the Guild Hall to the
Chamberlaines Office, and present their names and faults by Indenture, so often
as there shall be any occasion so to do.

Weights and Measures.
YE shall also make search in the Shops and Houses of all the Chandlers, and of
all others which sell by Weight or Measure, dwelling within your Ward, and see
that their Scales be not one heavier then another, and that their Measures, as
well Bushels as lesser Measures, as well those that sell Sea-coales by (which
ought to be heaped) that they be in breadth according to the new Standard,
sealed as all others; and that all Yards and Else be their just lengths and
sealed, that the poor and other his Majesty's subjects be not deceived. And
further, if any do buy by one Weight or Measure, and sell by others: and if in
your search you find any false Weights, Measures, or Scales, ye shall seize
them and send them unto the Guild Hall to the Chamberlain: and you shall also
do the like, if you shall find any that do sell any thing by Venice Weights,
contrary to the Law, and his Majesty's Proclamations, present their names and
faults.

Inholder, Browne-Baker.
ALso if any Inholder bake any Bread to sell within his house: and if any Baker
of sour Bread bake white Bread to sell, or mark not his Bread, or else take
more for the baking then three pence for a Bushel.

House, Tyle.
ALso ye shall enquire, if any house be covered otherwise, then with Tile,
Stone, Lead, for peril of fire.

Leper, Beggar.
ALso if any Leper, Faitour, or mighty Beggar be dwelling within this Ward.

Bakers, Brewers.
ALso if any Baker or Brewer bake or brew with Straw, of any other thing which
is perilous for fire.

Painted Vizage.
ALso if any man go with painted Vizage.

Candlelight.
ALso if there be any man that hangs not out a Lantern with a Candle
therein burning after the Usage, according to the commandment thereupon given.

Tall-wood, Billets, Faggots.
ALso if any person bring or cause to be brought to this City or the Liberties
thereof, to be sold, or sell, offer or put to sale, any Tall-wood, Billets,
Faggots, or other firewood, not being of the full assize which the same ought
to hold.

Wood, Country.
ALso if any Free man of this City, use to resort into the Countries near to
this City, and there to ingrosse and buy up much Billet, Tallwood, Faggot,
Tofard, or other Firewood, and convey the same by water unto this City, and
there lay it upon their Wharfes and other places, and so keep it till they may
sell it at high and excessive prices at their own wills.

Also if any Wood-monger, or any other, sell any Billets or other Firewood
above the price set by the Lord Mayor.

Cheese, Butter.
ALso if any Citizen of this City, by himself, or any other person for him or
to his use, use to resort into the Country, and there buy and ingrosse great
quantity of Cheese and Butter, as well barrelled as otherwise, and after
conveigh it by water or otherwise to this City to be sold at dear and
excessive prices.

Freemen to show their Copies.
ALso forasmuch as it is thought that diverse and many persons dwelling within
the Liberties of this City, daily occupy as Freemen, whereas indeed they be
none, nor never were admitted into the Liberties of this City, ye shall
therefore require every such person dwelling within this Ward, whom ye shall
suspect of the same, to show you the Copy of his Freedom, under the Seal of
the Office of the Chamberlain of the said City; and such as ye shall find
without their Copies, or deny to show their Copies, ye shall write and present
their names in your Indentures.

Melting Tallow.
ALso you shall inquire and truly present all such persons as use melting of
Tallow, contrary to an Act of Common Council in that case made and provided.

Fire-Presses.
ALso you shall truly present all persons which have or use any Fire-Presses
within the said City or Liberties of the same, for pressing or dressing of
Nether-stockes, Wollenclothes, or other things.

Also you shall enquire of all Armorers (...) other Artificers, (...) to work
(...) which have or (...) Reardor^^, or any other places dangerous or peri^^ous
for fire.

Appraysers.
ALso if any have appraised any goods of any Freeman deceased, leaving behind
him any Orphan or Orphans, and the Appraisers not sworn before the Lord Mayor
or the Alderman of the Ward.

Beams.
ALso if any Freeman buy any Wares or Merchandises unweighed, which ought to
be weighed at the Kings Beam, of any stranger or foreign free of the
Liberties of this City, contrary to the Act of Common Council in that case
made and provided.

Clothes.
ALso if any buy or sell any Cloth or Clothes in the house, shop, warehouse,
or other place of any Cloth-worker, or other person against any Ordinance or
Custom of this City, or if any Cloth-worker or other do receive or harbor
any Clothes, before the same be brought to Blackwell-Hall, contrary to the
ordinance made in that behalf.

Carmen.
ALso if any Carman take any money for carriage of any Goods, Wares, and
Merchandises, above the rates ordained.

Buildings, divided Houses, Inmates.
ALso if any make or cause to be made any new Building or Buildings, or divide
or cause to be divided any House or Houses, or receive any Inmate or Inmates
contrary to the Kings Majesty's Proclamation, or contrary to Law, or any
Statute of this Realm.

Hawkers.
ALso if any be dwelling within this Ward, which do offer or put to sale any
Wares or Merchandises in the open Streets or Lane of this City, or go from
house to house to sell the same, commonly called Hawkers, contrary to an Act
made in that behalf.

Freedom.
ALso if any have covenously, fraudently, or unduly obtained the freedom of
this City.

Collectors.
ALso if any Collector of Fifteenes or other duties for the public service of
the King or of this City, do retain in his hands any part of the money
collected to his own use.

Women receivers of Servants.
YE shall also enquire if there be dwelling within your Ward any Woman-broker,
such as refort unto men's houses, demanding of their Maidservants if they do
like of their services: if not, then they will tell them they will help them
to a better service, and so allure them to come from their Masters to their
houses, where they abide as Boorders until they be provided for. In which
time it falls out, that by lewd young men that resort to those houses, they
be oftentimes made Harlots to their undoing, and the great hurt of the
Commonwealth: wherefore if any such be, you shall present them, that order may
be taken for reformation.

Privies.
ALso if any have or use any common Privy, having issue into any common Sewer
of the City.

Vagabonds.
ALso if any Constable, Beadle, or other Officer, be negligent or remiss in
discharging his duty touching the execution of the Statute made for punishment
of Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, or otherwise, and wherein the default
is.

Poor.
ALso if any to whom the execution of the Statute made for relief of the poor
does appertain, be remiss in discharging his duty touching the execution of
the same Statute, and wherein the default is.

Legacies.
ALso if any Executor or other person retain in his hands any Legacy, sum of
money, or other thing given to any charitable use.

Drunkard, Whoremonger, Sabbath-breaker, Jesuit, Seminary Priest, Secular
Priest, popish Recusant, Coozeners, etc.
YE shall inquire whether there be within your Ward any common Drunkard,
Whoremonger, Blasphemer of Gods holy Name, Prophaner of the Sabbath, Jesuit,
Seminary or Secular Priest, or any Receiver, Releever, or Maintainer of any of
them, or any Popish Recusant, Coozener, or swaggering idle Companion, such as
cannot give account how they live; if there be any such, you shall present
them and the names of those that lodge them or aid them.

Mass.
YE shall also enquire, whether any person or persons do or shall say or sing
Mass within your Ward, or be persent at any Mass.

Roman Catholic Religion.
ALso if any person or persons within your Ward being evil affected, do or
shall extol the Roman Catholic Religion above the Religion professed and
established by the Kings Majesty's authority in England, or do or shall
deprave the Religion now professed in this Realm by authority as above, which
may breed discord in the City, and dissension in the Commonwealth, ye shall
carefully present the same persons and their offenses.

Stable-Dung.
ALso if any person or persons that keeps Horses in their houses, do lay his
or their Stable dung, or such kind of stinking filth in any Streets or Lanes
of this City, to the great annoyance of the people passing that way, and do
not lead his Dung-Cart to his Stable door as he ought to do.

Assembly monthly.
YOu shall assemble your selves once every month, or oftener if need require,
so long as you shall continue of this Inquest, and present the defaults which
you shall find to be committed concerning any of the Articles of your charge,
to the end due remedy may be speedily supplied, and the offenders punished as
occasion shall require.

Here end the Articles.
AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT FOR THE PRESERVATION OF the River of Thames, made in the
27. year of the reign of our most dread Sovereign Lord, King HENRY the
eighth.
WHere before this time the River of Thames, among all other Rivers within this
Realm, has been accepted and taken, and as it is indeed most commodious and
profitable unto all the Kings liege people: and chiefly of all other frequented
and used, and as well by the Kings Highness, his Estates, and Nobles,
Merchants, and other repairing to the City of London, and other places, Shires
and Counties adjoining to the same: which River of Thames is, and has been
most meet and convenient of all other, for the safeguard and ordering of the
Kings Navy, conveighance of Merchandises, and other necessaries, to, and for
the Kings most Honorable household, and otherwise, to the great relief and
comfort of all persons within this Realm, till now of late diverse
evil-disposed persons, partly by misordering of the said River, by casting in
of dung and other filth, laid nigh to the banks of the said River, digging and
undermining of the said banks and walls next adjoining to the same River,
carrying and conveighing away of way-shides, shore-piles, boords, timber-worke,
ballast for ships, and other things from the said banks and walls in sundry
places: by reason whereof, great shelfs and risings have of late been made and
grown in the farway of the said River, and such grounds as lie within the
level of the said water mark, by occasion thereof have bin surrounded and
overflowed by rage of the said water, and many great breaches have ensued and
followed thereupon, and daily are like to do, and the said River of Thames to
be utterly destroyed for ever, if convenient and speedy remedy be not sooner
provided in that behalf.

For reformation whereof, be it enacted, established, and ordained by the King,
our Sovereign Lord, and by the assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal,
and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, That if any person or persons hereafter, do or procure any thing to
be done in the annoying of the stream of the said River of Thames, making of
shelfs by any manner of means, by mining, digging, casting of dung, or
rubbish; or other thing in the same River, or take, pluck, or conueigh away
any boords, stakes, piles, Timberworke, or other thing from the said banks or
walls, except it be to amend, and the same to repair again, or dig or
undermine any banks or walls on the water side of Thames aforesaid, to the
hurt, impairing or damage of any the said walls and banks, then the same
person or persons, and every of them, shall forfeit and pay for every time so
offending, one hundred shillings: the one moity thereof to be to the King our
Sovereign Lord, and the other moity thereof to the Mayor and Comminalty of
London for the time being, the same to be recovered and obtained by the Mayor
and Comminalty of London, by Bill or plaint, writ of debt or information
severally against every offender in any of the Kings Courts, in which actions
and suits, or any of them, the party defendant shall not be essoined or wage
his law, or any protection to be allowed in the same.

And it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if complaint shall
happen to be made to the Lord Chancellor of England, Lord Treasurer, Lord
President of the Kings Council, Lord Privy Seal, or to any of them by any
person or persons or body politic, that Sir Thomas Spert Knight, now having
the Office and ordering, of, and for ballasting of Ships, or any other that
hereafter shall have the Office and order of ballasting of Ships, do take any
ballast for Ships near the said River of Thames, and do not take for parcel
of the said ballasting, the grauel and sand of the shelfs between Greenhyth
and Richmond within the said River of Thames, or in any place or places, that
is or shall be unto the damage or annoyance of the said River of Thames, or
in any part thereof, that then upon every such complaint, the said Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings most honorable
Council, Lord Privy seal, and every of them, calling both the chief
Justices of either bench, or one of them, shall have power and authority from
time to time, to hear and finally determine every such complaint by their
discretion, and to put such order therein, for the taking of ballast for ships
upon every such complaint, as by their discretions shall seem most convenient
for the preservation of the said River of Thames, and the parties offending
such order, shall suffer imprisonment, and make no less fine than 5. pound to
the Kings use for every time offending or breaking the same.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that it shall be lawful to every person
and persons, to dig, carry, and take away sand, gravel or other rubbish,
earth, or thing lying or being in, or upon any shelfe or shelfs within the said
River of Thames, without let or interruption of any person or persons, or
paying any thing for the same, any thing contained in this present Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

AN ACT OF COMMON COUNCIL, CONCERNING the Conservation and Cleansing of the
River of THAMES, made the 28. of September, in the thirtieth year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Henry the 8.
WHere by the Statute made in the 27. year of the Reign of our Sovereign
LORD, King HENRY the eighth, among other, for reformation of the mis-ordering
of the River of Thames, by casting in dung and other filth, many great shelves
and other risings have been of late grown and made within the same River: By
reason whereof many great Breaches have ensued by occasion thereof, which of
like shall be the occasion of the utter destruction of the said River, unless
that the same Law be put in due execution according to the true intent and
meaning thereof.

Wherefore for a further reformation of the same, and to the intent that the
said good and wholesome Statute may be put in more execution, and better
knowledge of the people: It is enacted by the authority of this Common
Council, that Proclamation may be made within this said City, and the same to
be put in writing, and Tables thereof made and set up in diverse places of this
City, that it shall be lawful to every person or persons, to dig, carry away,
and take away Sand, Gravel, or any Rubbish, Earth, or any thing lying or being
in any Shelfe or Shelves within the said River of Thames, without let or
interruption of any person or persons, and without any thing paying for the
same, and after that to sell the same away, or otherwise occupy or dispose the
said Gravel, Sand, or other thing at their free liberty and pleasure. And that
all Paviours, Brick-layers, Tilers, Masons, and all other that shall occupy
Sand or Gravel, shall endeavor themselves with all their diligence, to occupy
the said Sand or Gravel, and none other, paying for the same reasonably, as
they should and ought to pay for other Sand or Gravel dug out of other men's
grounds about the said City, which after is filled again with much filthy
things, to the great infection of the inhabitants of the said City, and all
other repairing unto the same. And that further, humble suit may be made to
the Kings Highness, that all persons having lands or tenements along the said
River side, upon certain pain by his Highness, and the Lords of his
Honorable Council to be limited, shall well and sufficiently repair and
maintain all the Walls and Banks adjoining unto their said Lands, that so the
Water may not, nor shall break in upon the same: and the same to be continued
till the time that the said noble River be brought again to his old course and
former estate. And that strong grates of iron along the said water side, and
also by the street side, where any Watercourse is had into the said Thames be
made by the inhabitants of every Ward so along the said Water, as of old time
has been accustomed. And that every grate be in height four and twenty
inches at the least, or more, as the place shall need, and in breadth one from
another one inch; and the same to be done with all expedition and speed. And
if the occupiers of the said Lands and Tenements make default contrary to the
Ordinance aforesaid: or else if any person or persons in great Raines and other
times, sweep their Soylage, or filth of their houses into the Channel, and the
same after is conveyed into the Thames, every person so offending, shall
forfeit for every such default twenty pence, and that upon complaint to be
made to any Constable, next adjoining to the said place where any such default
shall be found, it shall be lawful for the said Constable, or his sufficient
Deputy for the time being, from time to time to distraine for the same offense:
and to retain the same irreplegiable, and like Law to be observed and kept.
And like penalty to be paid for every person that burns Rushes and Straw in
their houses, or wash in the common streets or lanes, and to be recoverd as
aforesaid, and the one moity thereof to be to the Mayor and Comminalty, and the
other moity to be divided between the said Constable that takes pain, and
the party finder of the said default. And if the Constable or his Deputy,
refuse to do his duty according to the true meaning of this Act, that then the
Constable or his Deputy, which shall so refuse to do his duty as aforesaid,
shall forfeit and pay for every time so offending, three shillings four pence.
And the same penalty of the said Constable to be recovered and obtained by
distress irreplegiable, to be taken by any of the Officers of the Chamber of
London, to the use of the Mayor and Comminalty of London.

And further, that no person or persons having any Wharfe or House by the said
Water side, make not their Lay-stalls nigh to the River aforesaid, except only
the common Lay-stalls, where the common Rakers of this City use to repose, and
lay all their soylage, to be carried a way by them with their Dung-boats. And
that the said Rakers shall lay their said Dung, carried in their Dung-boats, to
such convenient place or places as shall be appointed by the Lord Mayor of
LONDON, for the time being, with the advice of his brethren, the Aldermen of
the same, and to no other place or places, upon pain to forfeit for every such
default five pounds, to be recovered in any of the Kings Courts within the
City of LONDON, by Bill, Plaint, moity of Debt, or information by any person
that will or shall pursue for the same: the one moity thereof to be unto the
Mayor and Comminalty of London, and the other moity to him or them that will or
shall pursue for the same; in which actions or suits, no wager of Law nor
essoigne shall be allowed.

The Oath of the Constables within the City of LONDON.
YE shall swear, that ye keep the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, well
and lawfully after your power. And ye shall arrest all them that make,
contect, Riot, Debate, or afray, in breaking of the said Peace, and lead them
to the house or Compter of one of the Sheriffs. And if ye be withstood by
strength of misdoers, ye shall rear on them an Outcry, and pursue them from
street to street, and from Ward to Ward, till they be arrested: and ye shall
search at all times, when ye be required by the Scavengers or Beadles, the
common noysance of your Ward. And the Beadle and Raker ye shall help to
rear, and gather their Sallary and Quarter age, if ye be thereunto by them
required. And if any thing be done within your Ward against the Ordinance of
this City, such defaults as ye shall find there done, ye shall them present to
the Mayor and Ministers of this City: and if ye be let by any person or
persons, that ye may not duly do your office, ye shall certify the Mayor
and Council of the City, of the name or names of him or them that so let (...).

Ye shall also swear, that during the time that ye shall stand in the
Office, and occupy the room of a Constable, ye shall, once at the least every
month, certify and show to one of the Clerks of the Majors Court, and in the
same Court, as well the names as surnames of all Freemen, which ye shall know
to be deceased within the month, in the Parish wherein ye be inhabited, as
also the names and surnames of all the Children of the said Freemen so
deceased, being Orphans of this City. And thus ye shall not leave to do, as
God you help, etc.

God save the King.
The Oath of the Scavengers.
YE shall swear, that ye shall diligently oversee that the Pavements within
your Ward, be well and sufficiently repaired, and not made too high in
noysance of your Neighbors: and that the Ways, Streets, and Lanes be
cleansed of Dung and all manner of fil^b for the honesty of this City. And that
all the Chimnies, Furnaces, and Reredoes be of stone sufficiently and
defensively made against peril of fire. And if ye find any the contrary, ye
shall show it to the Alderman of the Ward, so that the Alderman may ordain for
the amendment thereof. And thus ye shall do, as God you help.

God save the King.

Instructions for the Apprentices in the City of LONDON.
YOU shall constantly and devoutly, on your knees every day, serve God Morning
and Evening, and make conscience in the due hearing of the Word preached, and
endeavor the right practice thereof in your life and conversation: You shall
do diligent and faithful service to your Master for the time of your
Apprentiship, and deal truly in what you shall be trusted: You shall often
read over the Coveants of your Indenture, and see and endeavor your self to
perform the same to the uttermost of your power: You shall avoid all evil
Company, and all occasions which may tend, or draw you to the same, and make
speedy return when you shall be sent of your Masters or Mistress errands: You
shall avoid idleness, and be ever employed either for Gods service, or in your
Masters business: You shall be of fair, gentle, and lowly speech and
behavior to all men, and especially to all your Governors. And according to
your carriage, expect your reward, for good or ill, from God and your friends.

God save the King.

The Oath of every Freeman of this City of LONDON.
YE shall swear, that ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord, King
CHARLES, and to the Heirs of our said Sovereign Lord the King. Obeysant and
obedient ye shall be to the Mayor and Ministers of this City, the Franchises
and Customs thereof ye shall maintain, and this City keep harmless in that
which in you is. Ye shall be contributory to all manner of charges within
this City, as Summons, Watches, Contributions, Taxes, Tallages, Lot and Scot,
and to all other charges, bearing your part as a freeman ought to do. Ye
shall color no Forraines goods, under, or in your name, whereby the King or
this City might or may lose their Customs or Advantages. Ye shall know no
Foreign to buy or sell any Merchandise with any other Foreign within this
City or Franchise thereof, but ye shall warn the Chamberlain thereof, or
some Minister of the Chamber. Ye shall implead or sue no Freeman out of this
City, whiles ye may have right and Law within the same City. Ye shall take none
Apprentice, but if he be free borne (that is to say) no bond-mans Son, nor
the Son of any Alien, and for no less term then for seven years, without
fraud or deceit: and within the first year ye shall cause him to be enrolled,
or else pay such Fine as shall be reasonably imposed upon you for omitting the
same: and after his terms end, within convenient time (being required) ye
shall make him free of this City, if he have well and truly served you. Ye
shall also keep the Kings Peace in your own person. Ye shall know no
Gatherings, Conventicles, or Conspiracies made against the Kings Peace, but ye
shall warn the Mayor thereof, or let it to your power. All these points and
Articles ye shall well and truly keep, according to the Laws and Customs of
this City to your power. So God you help.

God save the King.

Commune Concilium tentum die Veneris primo die Iunii, An. Regni Regis Henrici
octavi, etc. decimo octavo, in praesentia Iohannis Allen Maioris, Gulielmi
Butler Militis, Iohannis Milbourne Militis, Iohannis Mundi Militis, Thomae
Baldri Militis, Gulielmi Bailey Militis, Thomae Semer Militis, Iacobi Spencer
Militis, Iohannis Rudstone, Radulphi Dodmer, Iohannis Brown, Nicholai Lambert,
Stephani Peacocke, Iohannis Harding, Nicho. Iennings, Hen. Dacres, Johan.
Canulen, and Christopheri Askew, viz.
AT this Common Council, it is agreed, granted, ordained, and enacted, That if
hereafter any Free man or Free woman of this City, take any Apprentice, and
within the term of seven years suffer the same Apprentice to go at his large
liberty and pleasure: and within, or after the said term, agree with his said
Apprentice for a certain sum of money, or otherwise for his said service,
and within or after the end of the said term, the said Free man present the
said Apprentice to the Chamberlain of the City, and by good deliberation, and
upon his Oath made to the same City, the same Free man or Free woman assures
and affirms to the said Chamberlain, that the said Apprentice has fully
served his said term as Apprentice: Or if any Free man or Free woman of this
City, take any apprentice, which at the time of the said taking has any Wife:
Or if any Free man or Free woman of this City, give any wages to his or her
Apprentice, or suffer the said Apprentices to take any part of their own
getting or gains: Or if any Free man or Free woman of this City hereafter
color any Forraines goods, or from henceforth buy or sell for any person or
persons, or with or to any person or persons, being Foreign, or Forrainers,
Clothes, Silks, Wine, Oils, or any other goods or merchandise whatsoever they
be; whether he take any thing or things for his or their wages or labor, or
not: Or if any person or persons being free of this City, by any color or
deceitful means from henceforth, do buy, sell, or receive of any Apprentice
within this City, any Money, Goods, Merchandise, or Wares, without the assent
or license of his Master or Mistress: and upon examination duly proved before
the Chamberlain of the said City for the time being: And the same reported by
the mouth of the said Chamberlain at a Court to be holden by the Mayor and
the Aldermen of the same City in their Council Chamber: That as well the said
Master as the said Apprentice, shall for evermore be dis-franchised.

God save the King.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE NAMES AND FIRST CAUSES OF THE INSTITVTION of Cities and
peopled Towns: And of the commodities that do grow by the same: and namely,
of the City of LONDON. Written by way of an Apology (or defense) against the
opinion of some men, which think that the greatness of that City stands not
with the profit and security of this Realm.
CIties and well peopled places be called Oppida in Latin, either ab open
danda, or ab opibus, or ab opponendo se hostibus. They be named also Civitates
a coeundo, and (urbes) either of the word urbare, because the first enclosure
of them was described with the draught of a Plow, or else ab orb, for the
round compass that they at the first had.

In the Greek a City is termed (...), either of the word (...), multus, or of
(...), id est, habitare, alere, gubernare.

In the Saxon (or old English) sometimes Tun, which we now call Town, derived
of the word Tynan, to enclose or tyne, as some yet speak. But for as much as
that word was proper to every Village, and enclosed dwelling, therefore our
Ancestors called their walled Towns, Bu^h or Bi^i^, and we now Bury and Borow,
of the Greek word (...), (as I think) which signifies a Tower or a high
building.

The walls of these Towns had their name of vallum, because at the first they
were but of that earth which was cast out of the trench, or ditch wherewith
they were environed.

But afterward, being made of matter more fit for defense, they were named A
muniendo maenia. By the Etymology of these names it may appear, that Commonweals, Cities and Towns were at first invented, to the end that men might
lead a civil life amongst themselves, and be saved harmless against their
enemies: Whereupon Plato says, Civitates ab initio utilitatis causa
constitutae sunt. Aristotle, 1. Politicorum 2. says, Civitas a natura profecta
est: homo enim animal aptum est ad coetus, and proinde civitatis origo ad
vivendum, institutio ad been vivendum refertur. And Cicero, lib. primo de
inventione, in the beginning says, Fuit quoddam tempus cum in agris homines
passim bestiarum more vagabantur, etc. quo quidem tempore, quidam (magnus viz.
vir and sapiens) dispersos homines in agris, and tectis silvestribus abditos,
ratione quadam compulit in unum locum, atque eos in unamquamque rem induxit
utilem and honestam. Vrbibus vero constitutis fidem colere, and justitiam
retinere discebant, and aliis parere sua voluntate consuescebant, etc. The same
man discourses notably to the same effect, in his Oration Pro Sestio, a little
after the midst thereof, showing that in the life of men dispersed, vis,
bears all the sway: but in the civil life and society, ars, is better
maintained, etc. This thing well saw King William the Conqueror, who in his
laws, folio 125. says, Burgi and Civitates fundata, and edificata sunt, ad
tuitionem gentium and populorum Regni, and idcirco observari debent cum omni
liberate, integritate and ratione. And his Predecessors, King Ethelstane, and
King Canutus in their Laws, fol. 62. and 106. had commanded thus: Oppida
instaurantur, etc.

Seeing therefore that as Cicero, 2. officior. says, Proxime and secundum
Deos, homines hominibus maxim utiles esse possunt. And that men are
congregated into Cities and Commonwealths, for honesty and utilities sake,
these shortly be the commodities that do come by Cities, Co^minalties, and
Corporations. First, men by this neerenesse of conversation, are withdrawn
from barbarous ferity and force, to a certain mildness of manners and to
humanity and justice: whereby they are contented to give and take right, to and
from their equals and inferiors, and to hear and obey their heads and
superiors. Also the Doctrine of God is more fitly delivered, and the discipline
thereof more aptly to be executed, in peopled Towns than abroad, by reason of
the facility of common and often assembling. And consequently, such inhabitants
be better managed in order, and better instructed in wisdom: whereof it came
to pass that at the first, they that excelled others this way, were called
Astuti, of the Greek word (...), which signifies a City, although the term
be now declined to the worst part, and do betoken evil, even as Tyrannus
Sophista, and some such other originally good words are fallen: And hereof also
good behavior is yet called Vrbanitas, because it is rather found in Cities,
than elsewhere. In some, by often hearing, men be better persuaded in Religion,
and for that they live in the eye of others, they be by example the more
easily trained to justice, and by shamefastness restrained from injury.

And whereas Commonwealths and Kingdoms cannot have, next after God, any surer
foundation, than the love and good will of one man toward another, that also
is closely bred and maintained in Cities, where men by mutual society and
companying together, do grow to alliances, Comminalties and Corporations.

The liberal sciences and learnings of all sorts, which be Iumina
reipublicae, do flourish only in peopled Towns, without the which a Realm
is in no better case than a man that lacks both his eyes.

Manual Arts or handy crafts, as they have for the most part been invented in
Towns and Cities, so they cannot any where else be either maintained or
amended. The like is to be said of Merchandise, under which name I comprehend
all manner of buying, selling, bartering, exchanging, communicating of things
that men need to and fro. Wealth and riches, which are truly called, Subsidia
belli, and ornamenta pacis, are increased chifely in Towns and Cities, both to
the Prince and people.

The necessity of the poor and needy is in such places both sooner to be
espied, and has means to be more charitably relieved.

The places themselves be surer refuges, in all extremities of foreign
invasion, and the inhabitants be a ready hand and strength of men with munition
to oppress intestine sedition.

Moreover, for as much as the force of the wars of our time consists
chiefly in shot, all other Soldiers being either horsemen or footmen, armed
on land, or Mariners at the Sea: It seems to me, that Citizens and Townsmen
be as fit to be employed in any of these services, that on horse back only
excepted, as the inhabitants that be drawn out of the Country.

Furthermore, even as these societies and assemblies of men in Cities and great
Towns, are a continual bridle against tyranny, which was the cause that
Tarquin, Nero, Di^nisius, and such others have always sought to weaken them.
So, being well tempered, they are a strong fort and Bulwark not only in the
Aristocritie, but also in the Lawful Kingdom or just royalty.

At once propagation of the Religion, the execution of good policy, the
exercise of charity, and the defense of the country, is best performed by
Towns and Cities: and this civil life approaches nearest to the shape of
that mystical body whereof Christ is the head, and men be the members:
whereupon both at the first, that man of God Moses, in the common wealth of the
Israelites, and the Governors of all Countries in all ages sithence, have
continually maintained the same. And to change it, were nothing else but to
Metamorphose the world, and to make wild beasts of reasonable men. To stand
longer upon this, it were in re non dubia, uti oratione non necessaria; and
therefore I will come to London.

The Singularities of the City of LONDON.
WHatsoever is said of Cities generally, makes also for LONDON specially:
Howbei t these things are particularly for our purpose to be considered in it.
The situation; the former estimation that it has had; the service that it has
done; the present estate and government of it, and such benefits as do grow to
the Realm by the maintenance thereof.

This Realm has only three principal Rivers, whereon a Royal City may well
be situated: Trent in the North, Severne in the South-West, and Thames in the
South-East: of the which, Thames, both for the strait course in length,
reaches furthest into the belly of the land; and for the breadth and stillness
of the water, is most navigable up and down the stream: by reason whereof,
London standing almost in the middle of that course, is more commodiously
served with provision of necessaries, then any Town standing upon the other
two Rivers can be, and does also more easily communicate to the rest of the
Realm, the commodities of her own intercourse and traffic.

This River opens indifferently upon France and Flanders, our mightiest
neighbors, to whose doings we ought to have a bent eye and special regard:
and this City stands thereon in such convenient distance from the Sea, as it
is not only near enough for intelligence of the affairs of those Princes,
and for the resistance of their attempts: but also sufficiently removed from
the fear of any sudden dangers that may be offered by them: whereas for the
Prince of this Realm to dwell upon Trent, were to turn his back, or blind
side, to his most dangerous borderers: and for him to rest and dwell upon
Severne, were to be shut up in a cumbersome corner, which opens but upon
Ireland only, a place of much less importance.

Neither could London be pitched so commodiously upon any other part of the
same River of Thames, as where it now stands. For if it were removed more to
the West, it should lose the benefit of the ebbing and flowing: and if it were
seated more toward the East, it should be nearer to danger of the enemy, and
further both from the good Air, and from doing good to the inner parts of the
Realm: neither may I omit, that none other place is so plentifully watered
with springs, as London is.

And whereas amongst other things, Corn and Cattle, Hay and Fuel be of
great necessity: of the which, Cattle may be driven from afar, and Corn
may easily be transported. But Hay and Fuel, being of greater bulk and
burden, must be had at hand: only London, by the benefit of this situation and
River, may be sufficiently served therewith. In which respect and Alderman of
London reasonably (as me thought) affirmed, that although London received
great nourishment by the residence of the Prince, the repair of the
Parliament, and Courts of Justice, yet it stood principally by the advantage of
the situation upon the River: for when as on a time it was told him by a
Courtier, that Queen Mary, in her displeasure against London, had appointed to
remove with the Parliament and Term to Oxford; this plain man demanded,
Whether she meant also to divert the River of Thames from London, or no? And
when the Gentleman had answered, No; Then quoth the Alderman, by Gods grace we
shall do well enough at London, whatsoever become of the Term and Parliament.
I my self being then a young Scholar at Oxford, did see great preparation
made toward that Term and Parliament, and do well remember that the common
opinion and voice was, that they were not holden there, because provision of
Hay could not be made in all the Country to serve for ten whole days together,
and yet is that quarter plentifully stored with Hay for the proportion of the
shire it self.

For proof of the ancient estimation of London, I will not use the authority
of the British History, nor of such as follow it (although some hold it
credible enough that London was first Trinobantum civitas, or Troia nova, that
famous City in our Histories, and then Luds Town, and by corruption London, as
they report) because they be not of sufficient force to draw the gainsayers.
Neither will I stand much upon that honorable Testimony which Gervas.
Tilberiens. gives to London in his book De otiis Imperialibus, saying thus,
concerning the blessing of God toward it.

In Vrbe London, exceptione habet divulgatum id per omnes aeque gentes Lucani
Proverbium.

Invida fatorum series summisque negatum Stare diu:

Name ea annis 354. ante Romam condita, nunquam amisit principatum, nec bello
consumpta est.

But I will rather use the credit of one or two ancient foreign Writers, and
then descend to latter Histories. Cornel. Tacitus, lib. 4. Annal. says,
Londinum copia negociatorum, and comeatu maxim celebris; and Herodian in the
life of Severus the Emperor, says, Londinum urbs magna and opulenta; Beda
lib. Ecclesiastic. 10. chap. 29. shows that Pope Gregory appointed two
Archbishops Sees in England, the one at London, the other at York. King
Ethelstane in his Laws appointing how many Mint-Masters should be in each
City, allotteth eight to London, and not so many to any other City. The Penner
of those Laws that are said to be made by Edward the Confessor, and confirmed
by William the Conqueror, says, London est caput Regni, and Legum. King Henry
the first, in the third Chapter of his Laws, commands that no Citizen of
London should be amerced above an hundred shillings for any pecuniary pain.
The great Chapter of England, that Helena, for which there was so long and so
great war and contention, in the ninth Chapter says, Civitas London habeat
omnes suas Libertates antiquas, etc. About the time of King John, London was
reputed, Regni firmata Columna, as Alex. Necham writes: And in the beginning
of the Reign of King Richard the second, it was called Camera Regis, as Thomas
Walsingham reports. I pass over the recital of the Saxon Charter of King
William the Conqueror; or the Latin Charters of Henry the first and second;
of Richard the first; of John; and of Edward the first; all which gave unto the
Citizens of London great Privileges, and of Edward the third, who reciting all
the grants of his Predecessors, not only confirmed, but also increased the
same: and of the latter Kings, who have likewise added many things thereunto.
Only I wish to be noted by them, that during all this time, all those wife
and politic Princes have thought it fit, not only to maintain London in such
plight as they found it, but also to adorn, increase, and amplify it with
singular tokens of their liberal favor and good liking. And whether there be
not now the same or greater causes to draw the like or better estimation and
cherishing, let any man be judge, that will take the pains to compare the
present estate of London, yet still growing to better, with the former
condition of the same.

It were too much to recite particularly the Martial services that this City
has done from time to time: neither do I think that they be all committed to
writing; only for a taste, as it were, I will note these few following.

Almost threescore years before the Conquest, a huge Army of the Danes, (where
of King Sweyne was the Leader) besieged King Etheldred in London (then the
which, as the story says, then he had none other refuge) but they were
manfully repulsed, and a great number of them slain.

After the death of this Sweyne, his son Canutus (afterward King of England)
besieged London, both by land and by water: but after much labor, finding it
impregnable, he departed: and in the same year repairing his forces, he
girded it with a new siege, in the which the Citizens so defended themselves,
and offended him, that in the end he went away with shame.

In the dissnsion that arose between King Edward the Confessor, and his Father
in law Earl Goodwin (which was the mightiest subject within this Land that
ever I have read of) The Earl with a great Army came to London, and was, for
all that, by the countenance of the Citizens resisted, till such time as the
Nobility made reconciliation between them. About seventy years after the
Conquest, Maude the Empress made war upon King Stephen for the right of the
Crown, and had taken his person prisoner, but by the strength and assistance
of the Londoners and Kentishmen, Maude was put to flight at Winchester, and her
Brother Robert then Earl of Gloucester, was taken in exchange, for whom King
Stephen was delivered; I dispute not whose right was better, but I avouch the
service, seeing Stephen was in possession.

The History of William Walworth the Mayor of London, is well known, by whose
manhood and policy, the person of Richard the second was rescued, the City
saved, Wat Tyler killed, and all his stragglers discomfited, in reward of which
service, the Mayor and other Aldermen were Knighted.

Jack Cade also having discomfited the Kings Army, that was sent against him,
came to London and was there manfully and with long fight resisted, until that
by the good policy of the Citizens, his Company was dispersed.

Finally, in the tenth year of the reign of King Edward the fourth, and not
many days before the death of Henry the sixth, Tho. Nevill, commonly called
the Bastard of Fauconbridge, armed a great Company against the King, and being
denied passage through London, he assaulted it on diverse parts: but he was
repulsed by the Citizens, and chased as far as Stratford, with the loss of a
great many.

Thus much of certain their principal, and personal services, in war only:
for it were infinite to repeat the particular aides of men and money which
London has ministered: and I had rather to leave it to be conjectured at, by
comparison to be made between it, and other Cities, whereof I will give you
this one note for an example. In the twelfth year of the reign of King Edward
the second, it was ordered by Parliament, that every City of the Realm should
make out Soldiers against the Scots: at which time London was appointed to
send two hundred men, and Canterbury, being then one of our best Cities, forty,
and no more. And this proportion of five to one, is now in our age increased,
at the least five to one, both in Soldiers and subsidy. As for the other
services that London has done in times of peace, they are to be measured by
consideration of the commodities, whereof I will speak anon. In the mean
season let the estate and government of this City be considred, to the end that
it may appear that it stands well with the policy of the Realm.

Caesar in his Commentaries is witness, that in his time the Cities of
Britain had large Teritories annexed unto them, and were several estates of
themselves, governed by particular Kings or Potentates, as in Italy and Germany
yet be: and that Mandubratius was King of the Trinobants, whose chief City
London is taken to have been. And I find not that this government was
altered, either by Caesar, or his successors, notwithstanding that the Country
became to be tributary unto them: but that it continued, until at length the
Britains themselves reduced all their peoples into one Monarchy, howbeit that
lasted not any long season: for upon Vortiger their King, came the Saxons our
Ancestors, and they drove the Britains into Wales, Cornwall, and Britain in
France, and in process of war divided the Country amongst themselves into an
Eptarchy, or seven Kingdoms, of the which one was called the Kingdom of the
East Saxons, which having in manner the same limits that the Bishopric of
London now enjoys, contained Essex, Middlesex, and a part of Hertfordshire,
and so included London. Again it appears, that in course of time, and about
1800. years after Christ, Egbert (then King of the West Saxons) Vt pisces
saepe minutos magnus come, overcame the rest of the Kings, and once more
erected a Monarchy, the which till the coming in of the Normanes, and from
thence even hitherto has continued.

Now I doubt not (whatsoever London was in the time of Caesar) but that under
the Eptarchy and Monarchy it has been a subject, and no free City, though
happily endowed with some large privileges: for King William the Conqueror
found a Portreeve there, whose name was Godfrey (by which name he greeteth him
in his Saxon Chre) and his office was none other than the charge of a Bayliffe,
or Reeve, as by the selfsame name continuing yet in Gravesend, and certain
other places may well appear. But the Frenchmen using their own language,
called him sometime a Provost, and sometime a Bayliffe; whatsoever his name and
Office were, he was Perpetuus Magistratus, given by the Prince, and not chosen
by the Citizens, as it seems, for what time King Richard the first needed
money toward his expedition in the Holy Land, they first purchased of him the
liberty to choose yearly from amongst themselves two Bailiffes: and King John
his successor, at their like suit changed their Bayliffes into a Mayor, and two
Sheriffs. To these Henry the third added Aldermen; at the first elegible
yearly, but afterward by King Edward the third made perpetual Magistrates,
and Justices of the peace within their Wards, in which plight of government it
presently stands. This shortly as I could, is the Historical and outward
estate of London: now come I to the inward pith and substance.

The estate of this City is to be examined by the quantity, and by the quality.

The quantity therefore consists in the number of the Citizens, which is very
great, and far exceeds proportion of Hippodamus, which appointed 10000. and
of others which have set down other numbers, as meet stints in their opinions
to be well governed; but yet seeing both reason and experience have f^eed us
from the law of any definite number, so that other things be observed, let that
be admitted: neither is London, I fear me, so great as populous: for well
says one, Non idem est magna Civitas and frequens, magna est enim quae multos
habet qui arma far possunt: Whatsoever the number be, it breeds no fear
of sedition: for as much as the same consists not in the extremes, but in a
very mediocrity of wealth and riches, as it shall better appear anon. And if
the causes of English Rebellions be searched out, they shall be found in
effect to be these twain, Ambition and Covetousness, of which the first
reigns in the minds of high and noble personages, or of such others, as seek
tobee gracious and popular, and have robbed the hearts of the multitude,
whereas in London if any where in the world, Honos vere onus est, and every man
rather shunneth than seeks the Maiorality, which is the best mark amongst
them, neither has there been any strong faction, nor any man more popular than
the rest, for as much as the government is by a Pattern, as it were, and always
the same, how often soever they change their Magistrate. Covetousness, that
other Sire of sedition, possesses the miserable and needy sort, and such as
be naughtypackes, unthrifts, which although it cannot be chosen, but that in a
frequent City as London is, there shall be found many, yet bear they not any
great sway seeing the multitude and most part there is of a competent wealth,
and earnestly bent to honest labor. I confess that London is a mighty arm
and instrument to bring any great desire to effect, if it may be won to a man's
devotion: whereof also there want not examples in the English History. But for
as much as the same is by the like reason serviceable and meet to impeach any
disloyal attempt, let it rather be well governed then evil liked therefore;
for it shall appear anon, that as London has adhered to some rebellions, so
has it resisted many, and was never the Author of any one. The quality of this
City consists either in the Law and government thereof: or in the degrees and
condition of the Citizens, or in their strength and riches.

It is besides the purpose to dispute, whether the estate of the government
here be a Democratie, or Aristocratie, for whatsoever it be, being considered
in it self, certain it is, that in respect of the whole Realm, London is but
a Citizen, and no City; a subject, and no free estate; an obedienciary, and no
place endowed with any distinct or absolute power: for it is governed by the
same Law that the rest of the Realm is, both in causes Criminal and Civil, a
few customs only excepted, which also are to be adjudged, or forjudged by
the common Law. And in the assembly of the estates of our Realm (which we call
Parliament) they are but a member of the Comminalty, and send two Burgesses for
their City, as every poor Borough does, and two Knights for their County, as
every other Shire does, and are as straightly bound by such Laws, as any part
of the Realm is: for if contribution in subsidy of money to the Prince be
decreed, the Londoners have none exemption, no not so much as to assesse
themselves: for the Prince does appoint the Commissioners.

If Soldiers must be mustered, Londoners have no Law to keep themselves at
home; if provision for the Princes household be to be made, their goods are not
privileged. In sum therefore, the government of London differs not in
substance, but in ceremony from the rest of the Realm, as namely, in the names
and choice of their Officers, and in their Guildes and Fraternities,
established for the maintenance of Handicrafts and Laborers, and for equity
and good order, to be kept in buying and selling. And yet in these also are
they to be controlled by the general Law: for by the Statutes of 28. Edward
the third, chap. 10. and of the first of Henry the fourth, chap. 15. the points
of their misgovernment are inquirable by the inhabitants of the foreign Shires
adjoining, and punishable by such Iusticiars as the Prince shall thereunto
depute: to conclude therefore, the estate of London for government, is so
agreeable a Symphony with the rest, that there is no fear of dangerous discord
to ensue thereby.

The multitude (or whole body) of this populous City is two ways to be
considered, generally, and specially: generally, they be natural Subjects, a
part of the Commons of this Realm, and are by birth for the most part a
mixture of all Countries of the same, by blood Gentlemen, Yeomen, and of the
basest sort without distinction; and by profession busy Bees, and travelers
for their living in the hive of this Commonwealth; but specially considered,
they consist of these three parts, Merchants, Handicrafts-men, and Laborers.
Merchandise is also divided into these three sorts; Navigation, by the which,
Merchandises are brought, and carried in and out over the Seas: Invection, by
the which, commodities are gathered into the City, and dispersed from thence
into the Country by land: and Negotiation, which I may call the keeping of a
retayling or standing Shop. In common speech, they of the first sort be called
Merchants, and both the other Retaylers. Handicrafts-men be those which do
exercise such Arts as require both labor and cunning, as Goldsmithes, Tailors,
and Haberdashers, Skinners, etc. Laborers and Hirelings, I call those Quorum
operae non arts emuntur, as Tully says, of which sort be Porters, Carmen,
Watermen, etc. Again, these three sorts may be considered, either in respect
of their wealth, or number: in wealth, Merchants, and some of the chief
Retaylers have the first place: the most part of Retaylers, and all Artificers,
the second or mean place: and Hirelings, the lowest room: But in number, they
of the middle place be first, and do far exceed both the rest: Hirelings be
next, and Merchants be the last. Now out of this, that the estate of London,
in the persons of the Citizens, is so friendly interlaced, and knit in league
with the rest of the Realm, not only at their beginning by birth and blood
(as I have showed) but also very commonly at their ending by life and
conversation (for that Merchants and rich men being satisfied with gain, do
for the most part) marry their children into the Country, and convey
themselves after Ciceroes counsel, Veluti-ex pontu in agros and possessiones:
I do refer, that there is not only no danger toward the common quiet
thereby, but also great occasion and cause of good love and amity. Out of this,
that they be generally bent to travel, and do fly poverty, Per mare, per
saxa, per ignes, as the Poet says* I draw hope, that they shall escape the
note of many vices, which idle people do fall into. And out of this, that they
be a great multitude, and that yet the greatest part of them be neither too
rich nor too poor, but do live in the mediocritie: I conclude with Aristotle,
that the Prince needs not to fear sedition by them, for thus says he,
Magnae vrbes, magis sunt a seditione liberae, quod in eis dominetur
mediocritas, nam in parvis nihil medium est, sunt enim omnes vel pauperes vel
opulenti. I am now to come to the strength and power of this City, which
consists partly in the number of the Citizens themselves, whereof I have
spoken before, partly in their riches, and in their warlike furniture: for as
touching the strength of the piece it self, that is apparent to the eye, and
therefore is not to be treated of.

The wealth and warlike furniture of London, is either public or private, and
no doubt the common treasure cannot be much there, seeing that the revenue
which they have, hardly suffices to maintain their Bridge, and Conduits, and
to pay their officers and servants. Their Toll does not any more then pay their
Fee-Farme that they pay to the Prince. Their Issues for default of appearances
be never levied, and the profits of their Courts of Justice do go to
particular men's hands. Arguments hereof be these two, one, that they can do
nothing of extraordinary charge, without a general contribution: another, that
they have suffered such as have borne the chief office amongst them, and were
become Bankrupt, to depart the City without relief, which I think they
neither would nor could have done, it the common Treasure had sufficed to cover
their shame; hereof therefore we need not be afraid. The public Armor and
munition of this City remains in the Halls of the Companies, as it does
through out the whole Realm, for a great part, in the Parish Churches; neither
is that kept together, but only for obedience to the Law, which commands it;
and therefore if that threaten danger to the State, it may by another law be
taken from them, and committed to a more safe Armory.

The private riches of London, rests chiefly in the hands of the Merchants
and Retaylers; for Artificers have not much to spare; and Laborers had need
that it were given unto them. Now, how necessary and serviceable the estate of
Merchandise is to this Realm, it may partly appear by the practice of that
peaceable, politic, and rich Prince, King Henry the seventh, of whom Polidore
(writing his life) says thus, Mercatores Ille saepenumero pecunia multa data
gratuite ^uvabat, ut mercatura ars una omnium cunctis aeque mortalibus tum
commoda, tum necessariae, in suo Regno copiosior esset. But chiefly by the
inestimable commodities that grow thereby: for who knows not that we have
extreme need of many things, whereof foreign Countries have great store, and
that we may spare many things whereof they have need? or who is ignorant of
this, that we have no Mines of Silver or Gold within our Realm, so that the
increase of our Coin and Bulloine comes from elsewhere, and yet
nevertheless, we be both fed, clad, and otherwise served with foreign
commodities and delights, as plentiful as with our domestical? which thing
comes to pass by the means of Merchandise only, which imports
necessaries from other countries, and exporteth the superfluities of our own.
For seeing we have no way to increase our Treasure, by Mines of Gold or Silver
at home, and can have nothing without Money or Ware from other Countries
abroad, it follows necessarily, that if we follow the Counsel of that good
old Husband Marcus Cato, saying, Oportet patremfamilias vendacem esse, non
emacem, and do carry more commodities in value over the Seas, than we bring
hither from thence: that then the Realm shall receive that overplus in money:
but if we bring from beyond the Seas Merchandise of more value, than that which
we do send over may countervaile, then the Realm pays for that overplus in
ready money, and consequently is a loser by that ill husbandry: and therefore in
this part great and heedfull regard must be had, that Symmetria and due
proportion be kept, lest otherwise either the Realm be defrauded of her
treasure, or the Subjects corrupted in vanity, by excessive importation of
superfluous and needless Merchandise, or else that we feel penury, even in
our greatest plenty and store, by immoderate exportation of our own needful
commodities. Other the benefits that Merchandise brings, shall hereafter
appear in the general recital of the commodities that come by London, and
therefore it rests that I speak a word of Retaylors, and finally show that
much good grows by them both. The chief part of Retayling, is but a
handmaid to Merchandise, dispersing by piece-meale that which the Merchant
brings in gross: of which trade be Mercers, Grocers, Vinteners,
Haberdashers, Ironmongers, Millayners, and all such as ^ell wares growing or
made beyond the Seas, and therefore so long as Merchandise it self shall be
profitable, and such proportion kept, as neither we lose our treasure thereby,
nor be cloyed with unnecessary foreign wares, this kind of Retayiing is to be
retained also.

Now, that Merchants and Retaylors of London be very rich and great, it is so
far from any harm, that it is a thing both praiseworthy and profitable: for
Mercatura (says Cicero) si tenuis est, sordida putanda est, sin magna est and
copiosa, non est vituperanda. And truly Merchants and Retaylers do not
altogether intus Canere, and profit themselves only: for the Prince and Realm
both are enriched by their riches: the Realm wins treasure, if their Trade
be so moderated by authority, that it break not proportion, and they besides
bear a good fleece, which the Prince may sheare when he sees good.

But here before I conclude this part, I have shortly to answer the accusation
of those men, which charge London with the loss and decay of many (or most) of
the ancient Cities, corporate Towns and Markets within this Realm, by drawing
from them to her self alone, say they, both all trade of traffic by Sea, and
the Retayling of Wares, and exercise of Manuali Arts also. Touching Navigation,
which I must confess, is apparently decayed in many port Towns, and
flourishes only or chiefly at London, I impute that partly to the fall of the
Staple, the which being long since a great Trade, and bestowed sometimes at one
Town, and sometimes at another within the Realm, did much enrich the place
where it was, and being now not only diminished in force, but also translated
over the Seas, cannot but bring some decay with it, partly, to the impayring of
Havens, which in many places have impoverisht those Towns, whose estate does
ebb and flow with them, and partly, to the dissolution of Religious houses, by
whose wealth and haunt, many of those places were chiefly fed and nourished. I
mean not to rehearse particular examples of every sort: for the thing it self
speaks, and I haste to an end. As for Retaylors thereof, and Handicrafts-men,
it is no marvel if they abandon Country Towns, and resort to London: for not
only the Court, which is now adays much greater, and more gallant than in
former times, and which was wont to be contented to remain with a small
company, sometimes at an Abbey or Priory, sometimes at a Bishops house, and
sometimes at some mean Manor of the Kings own, is now for the most part
either abiding at London, or else so near unto it, that the provision of things
most fit for it, may easily be setched from thence: but also by occasion
thereof, the Gentlemen of all shires do fly, and flock to this City, the
younger sort of them to see and show vanity, and the elder to save the cost and
charge of hospitality, and housekeeping. For hereby it comes to pass, that
the Gentlemen being either for a good portion of the year out of the Country,
or playing the Farmers, Grasiers, Brewers, or such like, more than Gentlemen
were wont to do within the Country, Retaylers and Artificers, at the least of
such things as pertain to the back or belly, do leave the Country Towns,
where there is no vent, and do fly to London, where they be sure to find
ready and quick Market. And yet I wish that even as many Towns in the
Low Countries of King Philips do stand some by one handy Art, and some by
another: so also that it might be provided here, that the making of some
things, might (by discreet dispensation) be allotted to some special Towns,
to the end, that although the daintiness of men cannot be restrained, which
will needs seek those things at London, yet other places also might be
relieved at the least by the Workemanshippe of them.

Thus much then of the estate of London, in the government thereof, in the
condition of the Citizens, and in their power and riches. Now follow the
enumeration of such benefits, as redound to the Prince and this Realm by this
City: In which doing, I profess not to rehearse all, but only to recite and
run over the chief and principal of them.

Besides the commodities of the furtherance of Religion, and Justice: The
propagation of Learning: The maintenance of Arts: The increase of riches, and
the defense of Countries (all which are before showed to grow generally by
Cities, and be common to London with them) London brings singularly these
good things following.

By advantage of the situation, it disperseth foreign Wares, (as the stomach
does meat) to all the members most commodiously.

By the benefit of the River of Thames and great Trade of Merchandise, it is
the chief maker of Mariners, and Nurse of our Navy and Ships, which (as men
know) be the wooden walls for defense of our Realm.

It maintains in flourishing estate, the Countries of Norfolk, Suffolk,
Essex, Kent, and Sussex, which as they lie in the face of our most puissant
neighbor, so ought they above others, to be conserved in the greatest strength
and riches: and these, as it is well known, stand not so much by the benefit
of their own soil, as by the neighborhood and neerenesse which they have to
London.

It relieveth plentifully, and with good policy, not only her own poor
people, a thing which scarcely any other Town or Shire does, but also the poor
that from each quarter of the Realm do flock unto it, and it imparteth
liberally to the necessity of the Universities besides. It is an ornament to
the Realm by the beauty thereof, and a terror to other Countries by reason of
the great wealth and frequency. It spreads the honor of our Country far
abroad by her long Navigations, and makes our power feared, even of barbarous
Princes. It only is stored with rich Merchants, which sort only is tolerable:
for beggarly Merchants do bite too near, and will do more harm than good to
the Realm.

It only of any place in this Realm, is able to furnish the sudden necessity
with a strong Army. It avails the Prince in Tronage, Poundage and other his
customs, much more than all the rest of the Realm.

It yields a greater Subsidy than any one part of the Realm, I mean not for
the proportion of the value of the goods only, but also for the faithful
service there used, in making the assesse; for no where else be men taxed so
near to their just value as in London: yea many are found there, that for
their countenance and credit sake, refuse not to be rated above their ability,
which thing never happens abroad in the country. I omit that in ancient time,
the Inhabitants of London and other Cities, were accustomably taxed after the
tenth of their goods, when the Country was assessed at the fifteenth, and rated
at the eighth, when the Country was set at the twelfth: for that were to awake
a sleeping dog, and I should be thought dicenda, tacenda, locutus, as the Poet
said.

It only does, and is able to make the Prince a ready pressed or loan of money.

It only is found fit and able to entertain strangers honorably, and to
receive the Prince of the Realm worthily.

Almighty God (qui nisi custodiat Civitatem, frustra vigilat custos) grant,
that his Majesty evermore rightly esteem and rule this City, and He give
grace, that the Citizens may answer duty, as well toward God and his Majesty,
as toward this whole Realm and Country, Amen.

An Appendix containing the examination of such causes, as have heretofore
moved the Princes, either to fine and ransom the Citizens of LONDON, or to
seize the Liberties of the City it self.
THese all may be reduced to these few heads: for either the Citizens have
adhered in aid or arms, to such as have warred upon the Prince, or they have
made tumult, and broken the common peace at home: or they have misbehaved
themselves in point of government and justice: or finally, and to speak the
plain truth, the Princes have taken hold of small matters, and coined good
sums of money out of them.

To the first head I will refer whatsoever they have done, either in those
wars that happened between King Stephen and Maud the Empress, being
competitors of the Crown: or between King John and his Nobles assisting Jews
the French Kings son when he invaded the Realm: for it is apparent by all
Histories, that the Londoners were not the movers of these wars, but were only
used as instruments to maintain them. The like is to be said of all the
offenses that King Henry the third, whose whole reign was a continual
warfare, conceived against this City, concerning the bearing of Armor against
him: for the first part of his reign was spent in the continuation of those
wars that his Father had begun with Jews. And the rest of his life he
bestowed in that contention, which was commonly called The Barons wars. In
which Tragedy London, as it could not be otherwise, had now and then a part,
and had many a snub at the Kings hand for it. But in the end, when he had
triumphed over Simon Mountford at Evesham, London felt it most tragical: for
then he both seized their Liberties, and sucked themselves dry: and yet Edictum
Kenelworth, made shortly after, has an honorable testimony for London,
saying, Te London laudamus, etc. As for the other offenses that he took
against the Londoners, they pertain to the other parts of my division.

Next after this, against whom the Londoners did put on arms, follows King
Edward the second, who in the end was deprived of his Kingdom, not by their
means, but by a general defection, both of his own wife and son, and
almost of the whole Nobility and Realm besides. In which trouble, that furious
assault and slaughter, committed by them upon the Bishop of Excester, then
Treasurer of the Realm, is to be imputed, partly to the sway of the time
wherewith they were carried, and partly to a private displeasure which they had
to the Bishop.

Finally, comes to hand King Richard the second: for these three only in all
the Catalogue of our Kings, have been heavy Lords to London, who also had much
contention with his Nobility, and was in the end deposed. But whatsoever
countenance and aid the City of London brought to the wars and uprores of
that time, it is notoriously true, that London never led the Dance, but ever
followed the Pipe of the Nobility. To cloze up this first part therefore I
affirm, that in all the troublesome actions during the reign of these three
Kings, as also in all that heaving in, and hurling out, that afterward happened
between King Henry the sixth, and King Edward the fourth, the City of London
was many times a friend and fautor, but never the first motive or author of any
intestine war or sedition.

In the second room I place a couple of tumultuous affraies, that chanced in
the days of King Richard the first: The one upon the day of his Coronation
against the Jews, which, contrary to the Kings own Proclamation, would needs
enter the Church to see him sacred, and were therefore ctuelly handled by the
common people. The other was caused by William with the long beard, who after
that he had inflamed the poor people against the richer sort, and was called
to answer for his fault, took Bow Church for Sanctuary, and kept it
Castle-like, till he was fired out.

Here is a place also for the stoning to death of a Gentleman, servant to the
half Brother of King Henry the third, which had before provoked the Citizens
to fury, by wounding diverse of them without any cause 1257. for the riotous
fray between the servants of the Goldsmiths and the Tailors, 1268. for the
hurly burly and bloodshed between the Londoners and the men of Westminster,
moved by the Youngmen upon an occasion of a wrestling on Saint James day, 1221.
and made worse by one Constantine an ancient Citizen: for the brawle and
business that arose about a Bakers loaf at Salisbury place 1391. for the
which and some other misdemeanors, King Richard the second was so incensed by
evil counsel against the Londoners, that he determined to destroy them, and
raze their City, and for the fight that was between the Citizens and Sanctuary
men of Saint Martins 1454. under King Henry the sixth. And finally, for the
misrule on evil May day 1519. and for such other like if there have been any.

To the third head may be referred the seizer of their liberties, for a false
judgment given against a poor widow, called Margaret Viel, 1246. The two
several seizers in one year 1258. for false packing in collections of money
and other enormities: And finally, the seizer made by King Edward the first,
for taking of bribes of the Bakers 1285. But all this security in seizing and
resuming of the liberties, which was in old time the only ordinary punishment
was at length mitigated by King Edward the third, and King Henry the fourth, in
their statutes before remembered.

In the last-place it and those offenses, which I repute rather taken than
given, and do fall within the measure of the Adage, Vt cane^ caedas, cito
invenias baculum: for King John in the tenth of his reign deposed the
Bailiffes of London, because they had bought up the wheat in the Market, so
that there was not to serve his Purveyors. King Henry the third his son
compelled the Londoners to pay him 5000. pound, because they had lent to Jews
the French the like sum, of a good mind to dispatch him out of their City and
the Realm, at such time as the Protector and the whole Nobility fell to
composition with him for his departure. And the same King fined them at three
thousand marks, for the escape of a prisoner out of Newgate, of whom they took
no charge: for he was a Clarke, prisoner to the Bishop of London, under the
custody of his own servants; and as for the place, it was only borrowed of
the Londoners to serve that turn. Hitherto of these things to this end, that
whatsoever misdemeanor shall be objected out of History against London, the
same may herein appear, both in his true place, and proper color.

The Author to the Reader.
BEcause amongst other mine Authors I have oftentimes alleged Fitz-Stephens,
as one more choice then other, namely, for the ancient estate of this City,
more then four hundred years since: and also the said Author being rare, I
have in this place thought good by impression to impart the same to my loving
friends, the learned Antiquaries, as the Author wrote it in the Latin tongue.
And first to note in effect, what Master Bale in commendation of the said
Author writes.

William Stephanides, or Fitz-Stephen, a Monk of Canterbury, borne of
worshipful Parents in the City of London, well brought up at the first under
good Masters, did more and more increase in honest conditions and learning: for
ever in his young years there appeared in him a certain light of a
Gentleman-like disposition, which promised many good things, afterward by him
performed. Such time as others spent in brawles and idle talk, he employed in
wholesome exercises for the honor of his Country, following therein the example
of Plato: and was very studious both in humanity and divinity.

The City of London, his birth place, the most Noble of all other Cities of
this Land, and the Princes Seat, situated in the South part of this Island, he
loved above all the other, so that at length he wrote most elegantly in Latin
of the site, and rites of the same. Leland in diverse of his Books commends
him for an excellent Writer. He lived in the Reign of King Stephen, wrote in
the Reign of Henry the second, and deceased in the year of Christ, 1191. in
the Reign of Richard the first.

DESCRIPTIO NOBILILISSIMAE Civitatis LONDONIAE.
De Situ ejusdem.
INter nobiles Vrbes orbis, quas fama celebrat, civitas Londonia, Regni
Anglorum seeds una est, quae famam sui latius diffundit, opes and merces
longius transmittit, caput altius extollit. Foelix est aeris salubritate,
Christiana Religione, firmitate munitionum, natura situs, honor civium,
pudicitia matronali, ludis etiam, quam iucunda, and Nobilium faecunda virorum:
quae singula semotim libet inspicere.

De Clementia aeris.
IBi siquidem emollit animos hominum clementia Coeli, non ut sint in venerem
putres, ut ne feri sint and bestiales, potius benigni and liberales.

De Religione.
ESt ibi in Ecclesia beati Pauli Episcopalis seeds, quondam fuit Metropolitana,
and adhuc futura creditur, si remeaverint cives in Insulam: nisi forte Beati
Thomae Martyris titulus Archiepiscopalis, and praesentia corporalis, dignitatem
illam Cantuariae (ubi nunc est) conservet perpetuam. Sed cum utramque urbium
harum Sanctus Thomas illustraverit, Londoniam ortu, Cantuariam occasu: ipsius
sancti intuitu, cum iustitiae accessu, habet altera adversus alteram, quod
amplius alleget. Sunt etiam (quod ad Christianae fidei cultum pertinet) tum in
Londonia, tum in suburbano, 13. maiores Ecclesiae conventuum, praeter minores
parochianas, 126.

De Firmitate Vrbis.
HAbet ab Orient arcem Palatinam, maximam and fortissimam, cuius and area, and
muri a fundamento profundissimo exurgunt: cemento cum sanguine animalium
temperato. Ab occidente duo castella munitissima: muro urbis alto and magno,
duplatis Heptapylae portis intercontinuante, turrito ab Aquilone per
intercapedines, Similiterque ab Austro Londonia murata and turrita fuit: sed
fluvius maximus piscosus Thamensis, mari influo refluoque qui illac allabitur,
maenia illa tractu temporis alluit, labefactavit, deieci^. Item sursum ab
occidente Palatium Regium eminet super fluvium eundem, aedificium
incomparabile, cum autemurali, and propugnaculis, duobus millibus ab urbe;
suburbano frequenti continuante.

De Hortis.
VNdique extra domos suburbanorum Horti civium arboribus consiti, spatiosi, and
speciosi, contigui habentur.

De Pascuis and Sationalibus.
ITem a Borea suno agri paseui, and pratorum grata planities, aquis fluvialibus
interfluis: ad quas molinorum versatiles rotae citantur cum murmr iocoso.
Proxime patet foresta ingens, salcus nemorosi ferarum, latebrae cervorum,
damarum, aprorum, and taurorum sylvestrium: Agri urbis sationales non sunt
teiunae glareae, sed pingues Asiae campi qui faciunt laetas segetes, and suorum
cultorum repleant horrea cerealis ingere culmi.

De Fontibus.
SVnt and circa Londoniam ab Aquilone suburbani fontes praecipui aqua dulci,
salubri, perspicua, and per claros rivo trepidante lapilles. Inter quos Fons
Sacer, Fons Clericorum, Fons Sancti Clementis nominatiores habentur, and
adeuntur celebriori accessu, and maiori frequentia scholarum and vrbanae
iuventutis in scrotinis aestivis ad auram exeuniis. Vrbs sane bona, cum bonum
habeat Dominum.

De honor Civium.
VRbs ista viris est honoratae, armis decorata, multo habitatore populosae, ut
tempore bellicae cladis sub rege Stephano bello apti, ex ea exeuntes
ostentatui, haberentur 20000. armatorum equitum, 60. mill peditum
aestimarentur. Cives Londoniae ubicunque locorum prae omnibus aliis civibus
ornatu morum, vestium and mensae, locutione, spectabiles and noti habentur.

De Matronis.
Vrbis Matronae ipsae Sabinae sunt.

De Scholis.
IN Londonia tres principales ecclesiae Scholas celebres habent de privilegio
and antiquae dignitate. Plerunque tamen favore personae al^^^us, vel aliquorum
doctorum, qui secundum Philosophiam noti and praeclari habentur, and aliae ibi
sunt Scholae de gratia and permissione. Diebus festis ad ecclesias festivas
magistri coventus celebrantur. Disputant scholares, quidam demonstrative,
Dialectice alii: alii recitant enthymematae: hi melius perfectis utuntur
Syllogismis. Quidam ad estemationem exercentur disputatione, quae est inter
colluctantes. Alii ad veritatem, ea quae est perfectionis gratia: sophisiae
simulatores agmine and inundatione verborum beati iudicantur. Alii
paralogizantur: Oratores aliqui quandoque orationibus Rhetoricis aliquid dicunt
apposiie ad persuadendum, curantes artis praecepta servare, and ex
contingentibus nihil omittere. Fueri diversarum scholarum versibus inter se
conrixantur: and de principiis artis Grammaticae, regulis praeteritorum vel
futurorum contendunt: Sunt alii qui epigriimatibus, rithmis and metris utuntur,
vetere illa triviali dicacitate, licentia Fescennina socios suppressis
nominibus liberius lacerant, Laedorias inculantur and scommata, salibus
Socraticis sociorum, vel forte maiorum vitia tangunt, vel mordacius dente
rodunt Theonino. Auditores mulium, ridere parali ingemidant tremulos naso
crispante cachinnos.

De dispositione Vrbis.
SIngulorum officiorum exercitores, singularum rerum venditores, singularism
operarum suarum locatores, quotidiano mane per s. sunt locis distincti omnes,
ut officiis. Praeterea est in Londonia supra ripam fluminis inter vina in
navibus, and cellis vinariis venalia, publica coquina: ibi quotidie pro tempore
est invenire cibaria fercula, assa, frixa, elixa, pisces, pisciculos, carnes
grossiores pauperibus, delicatiores divitibus, venationum, avium, avicularum.
Si subito veniant ad aliquem civium amici fatigati ex itinere, nec libeat
ieiunis expectare, ut novi cibi emantur, cequantur, dant famuli manibus limphas
panesque, interim adripam curritur, ibi presso sunt omnia desiderabilia.
Quantal bet militum vel perigrinorum infinitas intrat urbem, qualibet dici vel
noctis hora, vel ab urbe extitura, ne vel hi nimium ieiunent, vel alii impransi
exeant, illuc si placeat divertunt, and se promodo suo singuli reficiunt: qui
se curare volunt molliter, accipenserem vel aliam avem vel attagen Ionicum non
quaerant, appositis quae ibi inveniuntur deliciis: Haec equidem publica,
coquina est and civitati plurimum expediens, and ad Civitatem pertinens: Hinc
est quod legitur in Georgia Platonis, juxtae medicinam esse coquorum officium,
simulantium and adulationem quartae particulae civilitatis. Est ibi extra unam
portarum statim in suburbio quidam planus campus re and nomine. Omni sexta
feria, nisi sit major festivitas prae ceptae solemnitatis, est ihi celebre
spectaculorum nobilium equorum venalium. Spectaturi vel empturi veniunt, qui in
urbe adsunt, comites, harones, milites, cives plurimi. Iuvat videre gradarios
succussatura nitente suaviter ambulantes: pedibus later aliter simul erectis,
quasi a subalternis, and demissis: Hinc equos, qui armigeris magis convenient,
durius incedentes, sed expedite tamen, qui quasi a contra dictoribus pedes
simul elevant and deponunt: Hinc nobiles pullos juniores, qui nondum fraeno
been assueti, altius incedunt, and mollia crura reponunt: Hinc summarios
membris validis and vegetis. Hinc dextrarios precioses, elegantis formae,
staturae honestae, micantes auribus, cervicibus arduis, clunibus obesis.

In horum incessu spectant emptores, primo passum suaviorem, postea motum
citatiorem, qui est quasi a contrariis pedibus anterioribus simul solo amotis
and admotis, and posterioribus similiter. Cum talium soni pedum cursus imminet,
and aliorum forte qui similiter sunt in genere suo ad vecturam validi, ad
cursuram vegeti: clamor attollitur, vulgares equos in partem ire praecipitur:
Sessores alipidum pueri tres simul, aliquando bini ex condicto and bini
certamini sepraeparant docti equis imperitare, indomitorum lupatis temperant
fraen^s ora: hoc maxim praecavent, ne alteralteri concursum praeripiat. Et qui
similiter pro modo suo ad certamen cursus illius attollunt; tremunt artus,
morae impatientes, stare loco nesciunt, facto signo membra extendunt, cursum
rapiunt, agilitate pervicaci feruntur: certant c^ssores laudis amore, spe
victoriae, equis admissis subdere calcaria, and nec minus urgere eos virgis and
ciere clamoribus. Putares omnia in motu esse, secundum Heraclitum, and falsam
omnino Zenonis sententiam, dicentis, quoniam, non continget moveri, neque
stadium pertransire. Part alia stant serosim rusticorum peculia, agrorum
instrumenta, sues longis lateribus, vaccae distentis vberibus, corpora magna
boum, lanigerumque pecus: stant ibi aptae aratris, trahis and bigis equae:
quarundam ventres foetibus tument: alias editi foetus obeunt pulli lasciviores,
sequela inseparabilis.

Ad hanc urbe^ ex omni natione quae sub coelo est, navalia gaudent institores
habere commercia. Aurum mittit Arabs, species and thura Sabaeus, Arma Scythes,
oleum palmarum divite silva. Pingue solum Babylon, Nilus lapides preciosos.
Seres purpureas vestes. Norwegi, Russi, varium, grisium, sabelinas: Galli sua
vina. Vrbe Roma secundum Chronicorum fidem satis antiquior est. Ab eisdem
quippe patribus Trojanis haec prius a Bruto condita est, quam a Remo and
Romulo. Vnde and adhuc antiquis eisdem utuntur legibus communibus institutis.
Haec similiter illi regionibus est distincta: habet annuos pro consulibus
vicecomites: habet senatoriam dignitatem and magistratus minores: Eluviones and
aquaeductus in vicis: Ad genera causarum deliberativae, demonstrativae,
judicialis loca sua, fora singula: habet sua diebus statutis comitia. Non puto
urbem esse, in qua sint probabiliores consuetudines, in ecclesiis visitandis,
ordinatis Dei honorandis, festis feriandis, eleemosynis dandis, in hospitibus
suscipiendis, in desponsationibus firmandis, matrimoniis contrahendis, nuptiis
celebrandis, conviviis ornandis, conivis hilarandis, etiam in exequiis curandis
and cadaveribus humandis. Solae pestes Londini sunt, immoderata stultorum
potatio, and frequens incendium. Ad haec omnes fere Episcopi, Abbates, and
Magnates Angliae, quasicives and municipes sunt urbis Londoniae: sui ibi
habentes aedifi^ia praeclara, vbi se recipient, ubi divites impensas faciunt,
ad consilia, ad conventus celebres in urbem evocati, a Domino rege, vel
Metropolitano suo, seu propiis tracti negotiis.

De Ludis.
AMplius and ad ludos urbis veniamus, quoniam non expedit utilem tantum and
seriam urbem esse, nisi dulcis etiam sit, and iucunda. Vnde and in sigillis
summorum Pontificum, usque ad tempor a Leonis Papae, ex altera part Bullae,
sculpto per impressionem piscatore Petro, and supra eum clave quasimanu Dei de
coelis ei porrecta and circa eum versu,

Tu pro me navem liquisti, suscipe clavem.

Ex altera part impressa erat urbs, and Scriptura ista, Aurea Roma. Item ad
laudem Caesaris Augusti, and Romae dictum est:

Nocte pluit tota, redueunt spectacula mane,

Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habes.

Londonia pro spectaculis theatralibus, pro ludis scenicis, ludos habet
sanctiores, repraesentationes miraculorum, quae sancti Confessores operati
sunt, sea repraesentationes passionum, quibus claruit constantia Martyrum.
Praeterea quotannis die, quae dicitur Carnivale, ut a puerorum ludis incipiamus
(omnes enim pueri fuimus) scholarum singuli pueri suos apportans magistro suo
gallos gallinaceos pugnatores, and totum illud antemeridianum datur ludo
puerorum vacantium, spectare in scholis suorum pugnas gallorum. Post Prandium
exit in campos omnis iuventus vrbis ad lusum pilae celebrem. Singulorum
stud^orum scholares suam habent pilam: singulorum officiorum urbis exercitores
suam singuli pilam in manibus. Majores natu patres and divites urbis, in equis
spectatum veniunt certamina juniorum, and modo suo inveniuntur cum juvenibus,
and excitari videtur in eis motus caloris naturalis, contemplatione tanti motus
and participatione gaudiorum adolescentiae liberioris. Singulis diebus
dominicis in Quadragesima post prandia, exit in campos juvenum recens examen in
equis bellicosis: in equis certamine primis: quorum quisque aptus and in gyros
currere doctus equus. Erumpunt a portis catervatim filii civium laici,
instructi lanceis and scutis militaribus, juniores hastalibus ferro dempto
praefurcatis, simulachra belli cient and agonisticam exercent militarem.
Adveniunt and plurimi Aulici, Rege in vicino posito, and de familiis Consulum
and Baronum ephebi: nondum cingulo donati militiae gratia concertandi. Accendit
singulos spes victoriae: equi feri adhinniunt, tremunt artus, fraenos mandunt,
impatientes morae stare loco nesciunt. Cum tandem, Sonipedum rapit ungula
cursum, sessores adolescentes divisis agminibus, hi praecedentibus instant, nec
assequuntur hi socios dejiciunt and praetervolant. In feriis Paschalibus ludunt
quasi praelia navalia: in arbore ^iquidem mediamna scuto fortior innexo,
navicula remo and raptu fluminis cita, in prora stantem habet juvenem, scutum
illud lancea percussurum: qui si scuto illi Linceamillidens frangat eam, and
immotus persistat, habet propositum, voti compos est: si vero lancea integra
fortiter percusserit, in profluentem amnem dijicitur: Navis motu suo acta
praeterit. Sunt tamen hinc inde secus scutum duae naves stationariae, and in
eis juvenes plurimi, ut eripiant percussorem flumine abscorptum cum primo
emersus comparet, vel summa rursus cum bullit in unda. Supra pontem and in
solariis suprae fluvium, sunt qui talia spectent, multum rideri parati. In
festis tota aestate juvenes ludentes exercentur, in saliendo in arcu, in lucta,
jactu lapidum, amentatis missilibus ultra metam expediendis, parmis duellionum.
Puellarum Cytherae^ ducit choros, and pede libero pulsatur tellus, usque
imminente Luna. In hyeme singulis fere festis ante prandium, vel apri Spumantes
pugnant pro capitibus, and verres falmineis accincti dentibus addendi
Succidiae, vel pingues tauri Cornupetae, seu ursi immanes cum objectis
depugnant canibus. Cum est congelata palus illa magna quae maenia urbis
aquilonalia alluit, exeunt lusum super glaciem densae juvenum turmae: Hi ex
cursu motu captato citatiore, distantia pedum posita, magnum spatium latere
altero praetenso perlabuntur. Alii qu^si magnos lapides molares de glacie seeds
sibi taciunt: sessorem unum trabunt plurimi p^aecurrentes, manibus se tenentes:
in tanta citatione motus aliquando pedibus lapsi cadunt omnes proni. Sunt alii
super glaciem ludere doctiores, singuli pedibus suis aptantes, and sub
talaribus suis alligantes ossa, tibias scilicet animalium, and palos ferro
acuto superposito tenentes in manibus, quos aliquando glaciei allidunt: tanta
rapacitate feruntur, quanta avis volans, vel pilum balistae. Interdum autem
permagna procul distantia ex condicto, duo aliqui ita ab oppositis veniunt,
concurritur: palos erigunt, se invicem percutiunt: vel alter, vel ambo cadunt,
non sine laesione corporali, cum post casum etiam vi motus feruntur ab invicem
procul: and qua part glacies caput tangit, totum radit, totum decorticat.
Plerumque tibia cadentis, vel brachium, si super illud ceciderit, confringitur.
Sed aetas avida gloriae, juventus cupida victoriae, ut in veris praeliis
fortius se habeant, ita in simulatis exercentur. Plurimi civium delectantur,
ludentes in avibus coeli, Nisis, accipitribus, and hujusmodi, and in canibus
milit antibus in silvis. Habentque cives suum jus venandi, in Middlesexia,
Hertfordscira, and to a Chiltra, and in Cantia usque ad aquam Graiae.
Lundonienses tunc Trinovantes dicti, Caium Iulium Caesarem, qui nullas nisi
sanguine fuso vias habere gaudebat, repulerunt. Vnde Lucanus,

Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis.

Civitas Londonia reperit aliquos, qui regna plurima, and Romanum sibi
subdiderunt imperium: and plurimos alios, quos mundi Dominos virtus euixit ad
Deos, ut fuerat in Apollinis oraculo Bruto promissum:

Brute sub occasu solis, trans Gallica Regna,
Insula in Oceano est undique clausa mari:
Hanc pete: namque tibi seeds erit illa pe^ernis,
Haec fiet natis altera Troja tuis.
Hic de stripe tua reges nascentur, and ipsis
Totius terrae subditus orbis erit.
In temporibus Christianis nobil^m illum edidit imperatorem Constantinum, qui
urbem Romam, and imperialia insignia omnia Deo donavit, and beato Petro and
Silvestro Papae, cui and stratoris exhibuit officium, and se non amplius
Imperatorem, sed Sanctae Ecclesiae Romanae defensorem gavisus est vocari: and
ne pax Domini Papae occasion praesentiae ejus secularis strepitus tumultu
concuteretur, ipse ab urbe Domino Papae collata discessit, and sibi civitatem
Bizantium edificavit. Lundonia and modernis temporibus, reges illustres
magnificosque peperit. Imperatricem Matildem, Henricum regem tertium, and
beatum Thomam Archiepiscopum Christi Martyrem gloriosum, quali non candidiorem
tulit, nec quo fuerit devinctior alter omnibus bonis totius orbis Latini.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE MOST HONORABLE CITY OF LONDON.
The Situation thereof.
AMong the Noble Cities of the World, honored by fame, the City of LONDON is
one, the chief Seat of the Kingdom of England, whose renown is spread abroad
far and near, but transporteth her wares and commodities much further, and
so advances her greatness. It is happy by reason of the Aires wholsomnesse,
by Christian Religion, her munition also and strength, the nature of the
situation, the honor of the Citizens, the chastity of grave Matrones. Very
pleasant also with sports and pastimes, and replenished with Honorable
Personages. All which I think meet severally to consider.

The temperatenesse of the Air.
IN this place, the calmnesse of the Air does mollify men's minds, not
corrupting them with venereall lusts, but preserving them from savage and rude
behavior, and seasons their inclinations with a more ingenious temper.

Of Religion.
THere is in the Church of Saint Paula Bishops See: It was formerly
Metropolitan, and as it is thought, shall recover the said dignity again, if
the Citizens shall return back into the Island, except perhaps the
Archepiscopall title of Saint Thomas the Martyr, and his bodily presence, do
perpetuate this honor to Canterbury, where now his Relics are. But seeing
Saint Thomas has graced both these Cities, namely, London with his birth, and
Canterbury with his death; one place may allege much against the other for the
beholding of that Saint, and further additions to their holiness. Now,
concerning the worship of God in the Christian faith: There are in London and
in the Suburbs 13. Churches belonging to Covents, besides 126. lesser Parish
Churches.

Of the strength of the City.
IT has on the East part a Tower Palatine large and strong, whose Court and
Walls are secured with a very deep foundation, the mortar is tempered with the
blood of beasts. On the West side are two Castles well fenced. The Wall of the
City is high and spacious, with seven gates, which are made double every way,
and on the North side distinguished with Turrets. Likewise on the South side,
London has been enclosed with Walls and Towers, but the large River of Thames
being well stored with Fish, and in which the Tide ebbes and flows, by
continuance of time has washed and worn away those walls. Further, above in
the West part, the Kings Palace is eminently seated upon the same River, an
incomparable building, having a Wall before it, and some Bullwarks; it is two
miles from the City, and a continual Subvrbs does lie between.

Of the Gardens.
Near to the houses of the Subvrbs, the Citizens have Gardens and Orchards
planted with trees, large, beautiful, and one joining to another.

Of Pasture and Tillage.
ON the North side are Fields for Pasture, and open Meadows, very pleasant,
into which the River-waters do flow, and Mills are turned about with a
delightful noise. Next, lies a great Forest, in which are woody places, and
Beasts for game. In the Coverts whereof do lurk the Stag, the Bucke, the
wild Bore, and the Bull. The arable Lands are no hungry pieces of gravel
ground, but like the rich fields of Asia, which bring plentiful Corn, and
fill the Barnes of the owners with a dainty crop of the fruits of Ceres.

Of their Wells.
THere are on the North part of London principal Fountains of water, sweet,
wholesome, and clear, streaming forth among the glistering pebble stones: In
this number Holy-well, Clerken-well, and Saint Clements well, are of most note
and frequented above the rest, when Scholars and the youth of the City take
the Air abroad in the Summer evenings. Certainly the City is good, seeing it
has a good Lord.

Of the Citizens honor.
THe Honor of this City consists in proper Men, brave Armor, and multitude of
Inhabitants. In the fatal wars under King Steven, there went out to a
Master, men fit for war, esteemed to the number of 20000. horsemen armed, and
60000. footmen. The Citizens of London are known in all places, and respected
above all others, by their civil Demeanor, their good Apparel, their Table,
and their Discourse.

Of their Matrones.
THe Matrones here may be paralleld with the Sabine women.

Of their Schools.
IN London three famous Schools are kept at three principal Churches, which
they retain by privilege and ancient dignity. Notwithstanding by favor of
some persons, or Teachers, who are known and well reputed for their
Philosophy; there are other Schools upon good will and sufferance. Upon the
Holidays, assemblies flock together about the Church, where the Master has
his abode. There the Scholars dispute; some use demonstrations, others
topicall and probable arguments: Some practice Enthimems, others are better at
perfect Syllogismes: Some for a show dispute, and for exercising themselves,
and strive like adversaries: Others for truth, which is the grace of
perfection. The dissembling Sophisters turn Verbalists, and are magnified when
they overflow in speech; some also are intrapt with deceitful arguments.
Sometime certain Orators, with Rhotoricall Orations, speak handsomely to
persuade, being careful to observe the precepts of Art, who omit no matter
contingent. The Boys of diverse Schools wrangle together in versifying, and
canvase the principles of Grammar, as the rules of the Preterperfect and Future
Tenses. Someafter an old custom of prating, use Rimes and Epigram: these can
freely quip their fellows, suppressing their names with a festinine and
railing liberty: these cast out most abusive jests, and with Socraticall
witnesses either they give a touch at the vices of Superiors, or fall upon
them with a Satyricall bitterness. The hearers prepare for laughter, and make
themselves merry in the mean time.

How the Affairs of the City are disposed.
Several Craftmen, and sellers of Wares, and Workmen for hire, all are
distinguished every morning by themselves, both in their places and
imploiments. Besides, there is in London upon the Rivers bank, a public place
of Cookery, between the Ships laden with Wine, and the Wines laid up in
Cellers to be sold: there ye may call for any dish of meat, roast, fried, or
sodden, Fish both small and great, ordinary flesh for the poorer sort, and more
dainty for the rich, as Venison and Foul. If friends come upon a sudden,
wearied with travel, to a Citizens house, and they be loath to wait for curious
preparations, and dressings of fresh meat, the servants give them Water to
wash, and Bread to stay their stomach, and in the mean time go to the water
side, where all things are at hand answerable to their desire. Whatsoever
multitude, either of Soldiers or other strangers, enter into the City at any
hour, day or night, or elle are about to depart, they may turn in, bait
there, and refresh themselves to their content, and so avoid long fasting, and
not go away without their dinner. If any desire to fit their dainty tooth,
they need not to long for the Accipenser, or any other Bird; no not the rare
Godwit of I^nia. This public victualing place is very convenient, and belongs
to the City. Hereupon we read in Platoes Gorgias, that the office of Cooks is
near to Physic, and the ^latrery of dissemblers is the fourth part of
civility. Without one of the gates is a certain field, plain both in name and
situation. Every Friday, except some Festival come in the way there is a great
market of horses: some come out of the City to buy or look on, Earls, Barons,
Knights, and many Citizens resort thither. It is a pleasant sight there to
behold the Nags to jog on with an ambling pace, and their feet on either side
up and down together by turns, or else cro^^ing horses which are more
convenient for men that bear arms; these although they set a little harder,
go away readily, and lite up and set down together the contrary feet on
either side. Here are also young Colts of a good breed, that have not been
well accustomed to the bridle; these fling about, and by mounting bravely, show
their mettle. Here are principal horses, strong and well-limmed. Here also are
breast horses, fit to be joined by couples, very fair and handsome, and sleeke
about the ears, carrying their necks aloft, being well flesht, and round about
the buttocks.

The buyers at first look at their soft and slow pace, and after cause them to
put on with more speed, and behold them in their gallop. When these Coursers
are ready to run their race, and perhaps some others, which in their kind
are both good for carriage and strong for travail: The people give a shout,
and the common Hackneys are commanded to go aside The boys that ride, make
matches among themselves, two and two together, being expert in governing their
horses, which they rule and curb with a sharp bridle, laboring by all means
that one get not before the other. And the very beasts, after their fashion,
do not cease to strive, while their joints tremble, and impatient of delay,
endure not standing still in a place. When the token is given, they stretch out
their bodies and run speedily away, the Riders spurring them on for the love
of praise, or hope of victory. You would think every thing were in motion with
Heraclitus, and Zenoes opinion to be false, saying that nothing moves from
place to place. In another part stand the country people with Cattle, and
commodities of the field, large Swine, and Kine with their Vdders strutting
out, fair bodied Oxen and Sheep. There are also Cart-horses fit for the Dray,
or the Plough, and some Mares big with Foale, together with others that have
their wanton Colts following them close at their side.

To this City Merchants bring in Wares from every Nation under heaven: The
Arabian sends his Gold; the Sabean his Frankincense and other Drugs; the
Scythian his provision from the plentiful wood of Date trees; Babylon bestows
the fruits of a fertile soil; and Nylus his precious stones; the Seres send
Purple garments; they of Norway and Russia, Trowts, Furs, and Sables. According
to the report of Chronicles, it is more ancient then the City of Rome: for both
being descended from the same Trojan stock, Brute builded this, before Remus
and Romulus the other. Whereupon it comes to pass, that their ancient Laws
do so agree: For this our City is distinguished by Wards and several limits;
it has Sheriffs every year, answerable to their Consuls; it has Aldermen,
enjoying the dignity of Senators, besides inferior Magistrates; it has also
Conduits and conveyances for water in the streets. Concerning causes in
question; there are several places and Courts for matters Deliberative,
Demonstrative, and Judicial: upon set days also they have their Common
Council and great Assemblies. I think there is no City that has more
approved Customs, for frequenting the Churches, for honoring Gods Ordinances
observing of Holy Days, giving Alms, entertaining Strangers, confirmation of
Contracts, making up and celebrating of Marriages, setting out of Feasts,
welcomming the Guests; and moreover, in funeral rites, and burying of the
dead. The only plagues of London are immoderate drinking of idle fellows, and
often fires. Moreover, almost all Bishops, Abbots, and Noble men of England,
are as it were, Citizens and Freemen of London; there they have fair
dwellings, and thither they do often resort, and are called into the City to
Consultations and solemn meetings, either by the King, or their Metropolitan,
or drawn by the peoples affairs.

Of Exercise and Pastimes.
LEt us also come at last to their Sports and Exercises; for it is expedient
that a City be not only commodious for gain, and serious, but also pleasant
and delightful. Therefore to the time of Pope Leo, the Popes gave in their
Seals, on one side of their Bull, Saint Peter like a Fisherman, and over him a
Key reached forth to him as it were from Heaven by the hand of God, and this
verse about it: For me thy Ship
thou did forsake,
Therefore the Key
of Heaven take.


On the other part was stamped a City with this Inscription, Golden Rome. Also
this was written to the praise of Caesar

Augustus, and Rome:
All night the Sky distills
down watery showeres,
The morning cleeres again
to show the play.
Great Jove and Caesar
have their several hours,
And in this Universe
by turns bear sway.
London, in stead of common Enterludes belonging to the Theater, has plays of
a more holy subject, representations of those miracles which the holy
Confessors wrought, or of the sufferings wherein the glorious constancy of
Martyrs did appear. Besides that, we may begin with the Schools of youth,
seeing once we were all children; Yearly at Shrovetide the Boys of every
School bring fighting Cocks to their Masters, and all the forenoone is spent
at School, to see these Cocks fight together. After dinner, all the youth of
the City goes to play at the Ball in the fields, the Scholars of every
School have their Balls. The teachers also that train up others in seats and
exercises, have every one their Ball in their hands. The ancient and wealthy
Citizens come on horseback to see these yongsters contending at their sport,
with whom in a manner they participate by motion, stirring their own natural
heat in the view of youth, with whose mirth and liberty they seem to
communicate. Every Sunday in Lent, after dinner, a company of young men ride
out into the fields on horses which are fit for war, and principal runners:
every horse among them is taught to run his rounds. The Citizens sons issue
out through the gates by troops, furnished with Lances and warlike Shields: the
younger sort have their Pikes not headed with iron, where they make a
representation of battle: There resort to this exercise many Courtiers, when
the King lies neere-hand, and young striplings out of the families of Barons
and great persons, which have not yet attained to the warlike Girdle, do
train and skirmish. Hope of victory inflames every one: the neighing and
fierce horses bestir their joints, and chew their bridles, and cannot endure to
stand still; at last they begin their race, and then the young men divide
their troops; some labor to outstrip their leaders, and cannot reach them;
others fling down their fellows, and get beyond them. In Easter Holy Days
they counterfeit a Sea-sight: a Pole is set up in the middle of the River, with
a Target well fastened thereon, and a young man stands in a Boat which is rowed
with Oars, and driven on with the tide, who with his Spear hits the Target in
his passage; with which blow, if he break the Spear, and stand upright, so
that he hold footing, he has his desire: but if his Spear continue unbroken
by the blow, he is tumbled into the water, and his Boat passes clear away:
but on either side this Target, two Ships stand in Ward, with many young men
ready to tak him up after he is sunk: as soon as he appears again on the
top of the water; the spectators stand upon the Bridge, and other convenient
places about the River to behold these things, being prepared for laughter.
Upon the Holy Days, the youth is exercised all Summer, in Leaping, Shooting,
Wrestling, casting of Stones, and throwing of Javelins fitted with loopes for
the purpose, which they strive to fling beyond the mark; they also use
Bucklers, like fighting men. As for the Maidens, they have their exercise of
Dancing. In Winter, almost every Holy Day before dinner, the foaming Bores
fight for their heads, and prepare with deadly Tushes to be made Bacon; or
else some lusty Bulls, or huge Bears, are baited with Dogs. When that great
Moorish Lake at the North part of the City wall is frozen over, great companies
of young men go to sport upon th ye, then fetching a run, and setting their
feet at a distance, and placing their bodies sidewise, they slide a great way.
Others take heaps of ye, as if it were great Mil-stones, and make seats: many
going before, draw him that sits thereon, holding one another by the hand; in
going so fast, sometime they all fall down together: some are better practiced
to the ye, and bind to their shoes, Bones, as the legs of some beasts, and
hold Stakes in their hands, headed with sharp iron, which sometimes they
strike against the ye; and these men go on with such speed, as does a Bird in
the Air, or Darts shot from some warlike Engine: sometime two men set
themselves at a distance, and run one against another, as it were at tilt,
with these Stakes, wherewith one or both parties are thrown down, not without
some hurt to their bodies; and after their fall, by reason of the violent
motion, are carried a good distance one from another: and wheresoever the ye
does touch their head, it rubs off the skin and bruiseth it: and if one fall
upon his leg or his arm, it is usually broken: But young men being greedy of
honor, and desirous of victory, do thus exercise themselves in counterfeit
battles, that they may bear the brunt more strongly, when they come to it in
good earnest. Many Citizens take delight in Birds, as Spar-hawkes,
Gosse-hawkes, and such like, and in Dogs to hunt in the woody ground. The
Citizens have authority to hunt in Middlesex, Hertfordshire, all the Chilterns,
and in Kent, as far as Gray-water. The Londoners, once called Trinovants,
repulsed C. Julius Caesar, who commonly paved his way with blood: whereupon
Lucan;

He was afraid,
and foiled by Britons hand,
That first presumed
to invade their land.
The City of London can bring out some who subdued many Kingdoms, and the
Empire of Rome, and many others who (being great Lords heirs) were deified in
another world: as Apolloes Oracle did promise Brute:

Brute, thou shall find
an Island in the West,
Beyond the Gauls,
environed with the maine;
Direct thy journey
thither for thy rest,
And there a second Troy
shall rise again.
Kings from thy Hieres,
and Conquerours shall spring.
Who will the world
into subjection bring.
In the times of Christianity, it brought forth the Noble Emperor Constantine,
who gave the City of Rome, and all the Imperial Arms to God, and to Saint
Peter, and Silvester the Pope, whose Stirrup he refused not to hold, and
pleased rather to be called, Defendour of the holy Roman Church, than Emperor
any more. And lest the peace of our Lord the Pope should suffer any
disturbance, by the noise of secular affairs, he left the City, and bestowed
it on the Pope, and founded the City of Constantinople for his own habitation.
London also in these latter times has brought forth famous and magnificent
Governors; Maud the Empress, Henry the third, King, and Thomas the
Archbishop, a glorious Martyr of Christ, then whom no man was more innocent, or
more devoted to the general good of the Latin world.

AN ABSTRACT OR BRIEF RELATION OF THE TWO MANORS OR Lordships of
Stebunheath, alias, Stepney; and Hackney, in the County of Middlesex; with the
free customs, benefits, and privileges to them belonging; and how they are
holden by the Copyhold Tenants, of the right Honorable, Thomas Lord
Wentworth: with some other especial and remarkable notes, both of reverend
Antiquity, and modern memory.
Concerning the Indenture of Covenants, etc.
WHereas (of late) differences have arisen between the right Honorable Thomas
L. Wentworth, The cause of the now compounding.
Lord of the Manors of Stepney and Hackney, and his Lordships Copyhold Tenants
of the said Manors, for and concerning some of the customs, benefits, and
privileges of the said Tenants: It has now pleased the said Thomas Lord
Wentworth, in consideration of three thousand pounds, The consideration given
for it.
of lawful money of England, in the thirtieth year of the Reign of our late
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, by the Copyholders of the said Manors, unto
the right Honorable Henry Lord Wentworth (his Lordships Father) then satisfied
and paid: As also of other three thousand and 5. hundred pounds more, to him
the said Thomas Lord Wentworth now paid, by Indenture bearing date the 20. day
of June, in the 15. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King James of
England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the 50. made between him the
said Thomas Lord Wentworth, The Deed of Covenants.
Lord of the said Manors on the one part, and Sir John Iolles Knight, and
Alderman of London, and diverse other of the Copyhold Tenants of the said
Manors (whose names are particularly in the said Indenture recited) on the
other part: for the appeasing and final end of the said differences, and for
prevention of the like, and all other which (in time to come) might happen,
arise or grow, betwixt the said Lord his heirs or assigns, Lords of the said
Manors, and the said Copyhold Tenants, their heirs or assigns, to covenant,
grant, conclude, and fully agree to the effect following, that is to say:

Imprimis, that the said Thomas Lord Wentworth is, The Lord Thomas is seized in
Fee.
and until a perfect Act of Parliament shall be had and made, whereby all the
liberties, privileges, benefits, customs, immunities, discharges, additions,
alterations, enlargements, matters and things, in the Scedules to the said
Indenture annexed, mentioned; shall be for ever confirmed, shall be and
continue seized of a good, absolute and indefeazeable estate of Inheritance in
fee-simple to him and his heirs for ever in possession, of, and in the said
Manors, and either of them, and of the Copyhold Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments of the said Copyhold Tenants before mentioned, parties to the
said Indenture. And that he now has, And has power to confirm the following
Articles.
and then shall have full power and lawful authority, to ratify, confirm,
establish and make good, all and singular the covenants, articles, alterations,
enlargements, free-customes, immunities, discharges and agreements contained in
the said Indenture and Scedules, or either of them, to the said Copyhold
Tenants respectively, and to their several and respective heirs and assigns,
of and in the several and respective Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, whereof they are seized of any estate by Copy of Court-Roule.

And that the said Thomas Lord Wentworth, That these Articles for ever be
observed.
his heirs, assigns, and all other Lords of the said Manors, shall for ever
hereafter observe, perform, fulfill, allow, ratify, make good and keep all
the said Articles, certainty of fines, usages, customs, privileges, benefits,
immunities, discharges, compositions and agreements in the said Indenture and
Scedules contained: And shall not at any time hereafter leavy, take, require,
or demand any other fines, suites, customs, works or services, or in any
other manner, than in the said Scedules are specified: And the rents which for
the said Copyhold Tenements, by the space of two years now last past, have
been yielded and paid by the Copyhold Tenants thereof. And also that the said
Tenants, their heirs and assigns, shall for ever hereafter peaceably and
quietly have, hold, maintain, and enjoy their several and respective
Copy-holds, with their appurtenances, according to the several grants thereof
to them made; and under the several rents for the same respectively, now due
and payable according to the true meaning of the said Indenture and Scedules,
without let, suit, or hindrance, interruption, alteration, question, or
contradiction whatsoever of him the said Lord Wentworth, his heirs or
assigns, or under any other claiming any estate, right, title, use, interest,
office, profit, charge, or demand, under his Lordship, his heirs or assigns,
or under the said Henry Lord Wentworth deceased.

And that the said Thomas Lord Wentworth, That hereafter none of these Lands
shall be severed from the Manor.
his heirs or assigns has not, nor hereafter shall grant or convey, severed
from the Manor thereof, the same is now holden; any of the Messuages,
Cottages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments of the said Copyholders, for any
other estate or term, other than by Copy of Court-Roule, according to the
custom of the said Manors, except the freehold to be severed, at the desire
of such person, as then shall be Copyholder thereof respectively: And that
the certainty of sines, free customs, immunities, liberties, privileges,
articles, discharges, and agreements in the said Scedules contained, for and
concerning the several Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, whereof the said parties to the said Indenture are Copyholders;
shall (for ever) be, and be had, used, accounted, adjudged, taken and enjoyed,
as the true customs, usuages, privileges, immunities, discharges, and
liberties, of and within the said Manors, and either of them not to be
violated, altered, changed, or denied by the Lord or Lords of the said Manors,
or either of them now or hereafter, at any time or times in any wise being.
That a decree shall be had in the Chancery, to confirm the now agreements*


Item, that for the better ratifying, establishing, confirming, strengthening;
perfecting, and making good of all and singular the said Articles, covenants,
agreements, certainty of fines, usuages, customs, enlargements, and
alterations of usuages and customs, compositions, liberties, privileges,
freedoms, immunities, discharges, matters and things in the said Indenture and
Scedules contained, and for the setting forth of what estate the said Thomas
Lord Wentworth is now, and then shall be seized of the said Manors and
premises, upon a Bill of complaint against his Lordship, in his Majesty's
Court of Chancery to be exhibited: his Lordship will appear, and make such
answer, and further such proceedings, that thereupon a perfect decree (with the
free consent and agreement of his Lordship) may be had, and there enrouled
against his Lordship, his heirs and assigns. By which the said Articles,
covenants, agreements, certainty of fines, usuages and customs, and all the
compositions, liberties, privileges, freedoms, immunities, discharges,
matters and things in the said Indenture and Scedules, or any of them
contained; shall be decreed, ratified, established and made good, and put in
ure, used and enjoyed for ever.

That he the said Thomas Lord Wentworth, That an Act of Parliament shall be
procured, to confirm the same for ever.
his heirs and assigns, at his and their own proper costs and charges, will
procure at the first Session of the next Parliament of our Sovereign Lord the
Kings Majesty, his heirs or successors, one Statute or Act of Parliament, by
force whereof the said Articles, covenants, agreements, certainty of fines,
usuages, customs, compositions, enlargements, and alterations of usuages,
customs, compositions, liberties, privileges, benefits, freedoms,
immunities, discharges, matters and things in the said Indenture and Scedules,
or either of them expressed; shall be established, ratified, enacted and
confirmed to be, and to continue for ever of force, and to be put in ure and
used for ever hereafter, in such state, manner and form, quality, condition
and degree, as the same are in the said Indenture or Scedules, or any of them
expressed, for and concerning the Lands, Tenements, The Tenants must pay twenty
pounds toward the charges of it.
and Hereditaments, whereof they now are Copyholders, or reputed Copyholders.
Toward the charges of procuring of which the said Act of Parliament, the said
Tenants are to pay unto the said Thomas Lord Wentworth, his heirs or
executors, within one month next after the obtaining and passing thereof, the
sum of twenty pounds.

That he the said Thomas L. Wentworth, For better assurance within five years.
his heirs and assigns, at any time within five years next ensuing the date
of the said Indenture, before such Act of Parliament, as aforesaid, had and
obtained, at the costs in the law of the said Copyhold Tenants, or some of
them, upon request made unto him the said Thomas Lord Wentworth, his heirs or
assigns, by the said Sir John Iolles, Knight and Alderman of London, William
Gough, Edmund Barber, John Eglesfield, The names contained in the Indenture.
Isaac Cotton, Thomas Best, Richard Hoskins, George Saris, Henry Dethicke,
John Howland, Thomas Yardly, John Lowden, Richard Cheyney, Gresham Hoogan,
William Palmer, Nicholas Dickens, Nicholas Diggins, Peter Summer, John Bennet,
Richard Edwards, Michael Bonner, and Nicholas Hollam, or any ten of them, or
any ten of the Heirs or Assigues of them, shall and will make, do,
acknowledge, execute and suffer all and every such further acts, deeds and
assurances, for better settling, assuring and confirming of the usuages,
customs, benefits, liberties, privileges, immunities, discharges, certainty
of fines, compositions, agreements, matters and things in the said Indenture
and Scedules contained, as by them, or any ten of them shall be reasonably
devised, advised and required. That every one of the said Copyhold Tenants,
That leases may be let for thirty one years and four meneths without license.
their heirs and assigns, shall and may freely hereafter from time to time,
grant, lease or demise by deed or otherwise (without license or Copy of Court
Roll) such or so much of their said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, to
such person and persons, and for such term and estate, not exceeding one and
thirty years and four months, in possession from the time of the making of
any such grant or demise; as to them, and every, or any of them respectively,
shall be thought fit or necessary, without any forfeit of estate, seizure,
claim, disturbance, denial or impeachment of his Lordship, his heirs or
assigns, or any of his or their Officers. So always, that such grant, lease
and leases so to be made, be at the first or second general Court, (for the
Manor whereof, the Lands or Tenements so happening to be granted, leased or
demised are parcel) to be holden next after the making thereof, be published
in open Court of that Manor, before the homage there, and a remembrance
thereof to be required to be made in the Roules of the said Court, for the
date, term and quantity of Lands, Cottages, or Tenements so granted, leased
or demised. Which remembrance, the said Thomas Lord Wentworth convenanteth and
grants for him, his heirs and assigns; to and with the said Sir John
Iolles, and the rest of the said Copyhold Tenants, upon the tender of a
certainty thereof in writing, to the Steward, or Deputy Steward that Manor
for the time then being, together with six pence in money, for the entering
thereof, shall be in the Court Roules of that Manor duly, and in convenient
time, and without delay enrolled, and a note thereof delivered by the Steward,
or his Deputy, to the party so leasing, or any for him, without any other
consideration, see or reward, to be given or paid for the same.

That whereas the said Thomas Lord Wentworth, Recital of the Letters Patents
from the King to my L. concerning the Freehold.
by his Highness Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, dated the
nineteenth day of July, in the thirteenth year of his Majesty's reign of
England, and forty eighth of Scotland, Has obtained license to grant to such
of his Majesty's liege people as he shall think fit, Messuages, Cottages,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, parcel, or reputed parcel of the said
Manors: To hold to them, their heirs and assigns (in free and common Socage)
respectively, of his said Manors of Stepney and Hackney, by such and the same
rents and services, and other profits, as in the conveyances thereof shall be
expressed, and not to hold of the King in Capite, nor of any of his Majesty's
Honors, or Manors in Knights service, as by the said Letters Patents more at
large may appear. If the Act of Parliament be not procured, the^ the Tenants
(upon request) shall be made Free holders.
Now if the said Thomas Lord Wentworth shall not at the first Session of the
next Parliament procure such an Act of Parliament, to be good and effectual
in law for the purposes aforesaid: Then his Lordship will at all times, after
the end of the said first Session of the said next Paliament, upon reasonable
requests, and at the costs of the Tenants (whom it shall concern) their heirs
or assigns, make, do and execute such reasonable acts, devices, and
assurances in Law; whereby the said Copyholders, their heirs or assigns
respectively, shall hold and enjoy their, and every of their said Copy-holds,
Messuages, Houses, Lands, Cottages and Hereditaments, with the like ways,
easements, commons and commodities, as are thereto now belonging, or now
therewith used or enjoyed. And the freehold and inheritance thereof
respectively to them and to their respective heirs and assigns for ever, to
be holden of such of the same Manors, whereof the same is now holden in free
and common Socage, for and under the several and respective yearly rents for
all services and demands, as they or any of them do now severally and
respectively pay for the same, as by them, or their Council learned, shall be
reasonably devised and required.

That the said Copyhold Tenants, For enjoying the Common.
their heirs and assigns respectively, shall and may for ever hereafter,
without any let, impediment, interruption, denial or contradiction of his
Lordship, his heirs or assigns, or any claiming under the said Lord Henry
Wentworth deceased, not only during the time they shall be Copyholders, but
also afterward, when they have obtained the freehold and inheritance of their
several and respective Copy-holds; peaceably hold and enjoy such and the like
Commons of pasture, and in such manner, in all the Commons, wastes and common
able places of the said Manors, as they or any of them hertofore have had,
used, held, taken, or enjoyed, or might lawfully have taken or enjoyed.
Nevertheless, it is agreed, that neither the said Indenture and Scedules, nor
any covenant therein contained, The Tenants not compounding, are excepted from
all benefit hereby.
shall in any wise extend or enure, to the benefit or advantage of any other
Copyhold Tenants of the said Manors, other than the Copyhold Tenants, named
parties to the said Indentures, their heirs and assigns, and that for such
and the same Lands, Tenements, Cottages, and Hereditaments, with the
appurtenances only, as they or any of them now hold, or claim to hold, by
Copy of Court-Roule of the said Manors, or one of them, as by the said
Indenture (whereunto relation be had) more plainly and at large appears.

Memorandum, that the said Indenture of the twentieth of June, together with a
duplicity thereof, were acknowledged by the said Thomas Lord Wentworth the 21.
day of July 1617. before Sir Matthew Carew Knight, The enrolling of the Deed,
and where it is left.
to be enrolled, and is enrolled in the Chancery accordingly. The one part of
which Indentures, is left in the custody of the Company of Goldsmiths in the
City of London, and the other in the custody of the Brethren of the Trinity
house at Radcliffe: In trust, and to the use of the said Copyhold Tenants,
named parties to the said Indentures.

The ninth day of July 1617. in the said fifteenth year of his Majesty's
Reign, A Statute of 12000. pounds for performance of Covenants.
the said Thomas Lord Wentworth acknowledged a statute of the sum of twelve
thousand pounds of lawful money of England, unto Alexander Prescot and John
Gore, Aldermen of London, Thomas Jones common Sergeant of London, Francis
Fulner and George Whitmore Esquires, and Robert Mildmay Grocer; In trust for,
and to the use of the Copyholders named in the Indentures, and thereof is a
defeasance by Indenture, dated the same day to this effect (viz.) That if the
said Thomas Lord Wentworth do perform the covenants and agreements, The
defeasance.
contained in the aforesaid Indenture of the twentieth of June: Then the same
Statute to be void, and that the said Conusees shall deliver up the same
Statute to the said Thomas Lord Wentworth, his heirs, executors,
administrators or assigns, so soon as the said Act of Parliament shall be
procured, according to the intent and true meaning of the said recited
Indenture.

To this end, the said Statute and defeasance are left in the Chamber of the
City of London, Where the Statute and Defeasance are kept.
to be kept in such sort, as that the said Conusees may have the same to be
delivered according to their Covenant. And the Chamberlain of the said City
has charged himself with the receipt thereof, by order of the Court of the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen 1617. Sir John Leman being then Mayor, and Master
Cornelius Fish Chamberlain.

In Trinity Term, in the said fifteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, The
proceedings in the Chancery.
to a Bill of complaint was by the Copyholders, named parties to the said
Indenture of the twentieth of June, exhibited against the said Thomas Lord
Wentworth in his Majesty's high Court of Chancery; whereto the said Thomas Lord
Wentworth did appear, and by his answer confessed the contents of the said
Bill to be true. Whereupon, a perfect Decree (with the free consent and
agreement of the said Thomas Lord Wentworth, The Decree.
bearing date the two and twentieth day of July, in the said fifteenth year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King James) was obtained. And by the same,
the said free customs, orders, immunities, etc. and all and whatsoever
contained in the said Indenture of the twntieth of June, and the Scedules unto
the same Indenture annexed, are for ever established and confirmed. The said
Decree is likewise there enrolled. The true Copy of the said Scedules follows.

The Scedules, containing the free Customs, Orders, Immunities, Discharges,
Benefits, and Privileges of the Manors of Stepney, alias, Stebunheath and
Hackney, in the County of Middlesex: Agreed unto, approved, allowed, and
ratified, as well by the Right Honorable, Thomas, Lord Wentworth, Lord of the
said Manors; as also by his Lordships Copyhold, or Customary Tenants, or
reputed Copyhold, or Customary Tenants of the said Manors, or of either of
them, named parties to the said Indenture, where unto those Scedules are
annexed. By which, all and every the same Copyholders or Customary Tenants,
their, and every of their Heirs and Assigns, are to hold, use, and enjoy,
inherit, alien, demise, or dispose all and every, or any the said Lands,
Messuages, Tenements, Cottages, and Hereditaments, which they, every, or any of
them respectively do hold, claim, or enjoy, byforce, or pretext of any grant
heretofore made by the Copy of Court Roll of the said Manors, or either of
them, the day of the date of the said Indentures: That is to say, the twentieth
day of June, in the years of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord JAMES, by the
grace of God of England, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
the fifteenth, and of Scotland the fiftieth.
These Copy-holds are of inheritance, held of the Lord by the Rod, according to
the custom.
IMprimis, by the Customs of the said Manors, and either of them, all the
Copyhold Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, which the particular persons
(named parties to the Indentures, whereunto these Scedules are annexed) do
hold or enjoy, and (time whereof the contrary has not been within the memory
of man) have been Copyhold and customary Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
of inheritance, demised and demiseable by Copy of Court Roll of the Manors
aforesaid, or one of them respectively, according to the Customs of the Manor
whereof the same are holden. And all Copies of Court Rolls of the same Manors,
and either of them, by all the time aforesaid, for the same Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, have been made, and ought to be made, to hold of the Lord
by the Rod, according to the Custom of the Manor whereof the same is holden,
by the Rents and services therefore due and accustomed. And all the said Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments have been passed, and are to pass and go from
such persons, as (according to the contents of these Scedules) have power, How
Surrenders are to be made.
and are enabled to make Surrenders to any other person or persons by way of
Surrender, to be made to the hands of the Lord, See further in the 19. Article.
by the acceptance of the Steward of the Manor, or his Deputy for the time
being, in Court or out of Court; or by the acceptance of the Reeve of the
Manor, whereof the same are holden, or by his Deputy within the same Manor,
or elsewhere, in presence of six Customary Tenants; or by any Headborough of
some Township or Hamlet within that Manor, in presence of six customary
Tenants, in or out of the same Manors. Which Surrender or Surrenders have
been, and shall, and may be to the use of any person or persons, and their
Heirs for ever in Fee-taile, or for life or lives, with Remainders or without
Remainders, as Lands may be assured by the course of the common Laws of this
Realm, or else to the use of the last Will and Testament of the Surrenderers,
or of any other persons, according to the intent and limitation of such last
Will and Testament.

Quit-rents are to be paid yearly at Michaelmas.
ITem, the Rents of all the Tenants, both Freeholders and Copyholders, which
hold any Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments of the said
Manors, or of either of them, are yearly payable only at the Feast of Saint
Michael the Arch-Angell, to the Lord and his Heirs: the same to be collected
by the Reeves of the said Manors (severally and respectively to be yearly
chosen, as hereafter is expressed) or their Deputies. And all and every the
said customary Copyhold Tenants, to pay the several yearly Rents, now
yearly due and payable for their several Copy-holds. And if any of the said
Copy-holds, An entire Quit-rent come into several hands, shall be apportioned.
for which any entire Quit-rent is now paid, shall hereafter come into several
hands, the Rent thereof shall then be apportioned by the Homage, at the Court
of the Manor whereof the same are holden; and so much only as by the Homage
shall be appointed to be paid (pro rata) shall be paid to the Lord for the
time being.

At what Courts Tenants are bound to appear.
ITem, all and every Copyhold Tenant of the said Manors, or either of them,
which now be, or hereafter for the time being shall be, ought to appear
yearly at two several general Courts holden for the Manor, whereof his
Lands or Tenements are holden, upon warning, as hereafter follows. And also
so many of them, at all other set or appointed Courts, set, appointed, and kept
for the said Manor whereof their Lands are holden, under the number of
eighteen, as shall be (for that purpose) especially warned thereunto by the
Reeve, or his sufficient Deputy for the time being. And the said Tenants shall
do their suits and services according to their tenures; except they be
essoined, licensed, or have some other lawful excuse, upon the pain hereafter
following. The two general Courts ye rely held.
Which two general Courts have been commonly kept (and are to be kept
yearly) the one of them on Tuesday, the ninth day after Easter day; and the
other, about the Feast of Saint Andrew the Apostle, upon reasonable warning:
That is to say, in the Churches and Chapels within the said Manors, openly
upon the Sunday sevennight, or Sunday fortnight, before the day of such Courts
to be holden.

Tenants failing to appear, and not essoined, or reasonable excuse, shall be
amended.
ITem, if any of the Copyhold, or Customary Tenants of the said Manors, or of
either of them, do or shall make default of their appearance at any of the
said two general Ceuris, to which their suits shall be due; Or if such
Copyhold Tenants, as shall be especially and lawfully warned to appear at any
of the said Courts (in form aforesaid) yearly to be holden, do make default
(to which the said suit is or shall be due) and warning openly given (as
aforesaid) of the day and place of the holding of the same general Courts, and
upon special and lawful warning to be given for the said set or purchased
Courts: That then they that shall so make default (except they be essoined, or
have some other lawful or reasonable excuse) shall be amerced by the Homage of
the said Court, The manner of amercing.
to be taxed and afferred by two Afferrors of the said Court: that is to say,
by two Tenants of the Homage, or of either of them for the time being, has
always used to choose, and shall choose one for the Lord, and the residue of the
Homage have chosen, and hereafter shall choose the other.

What the Tenants are to be allowed at set Courts.
ITem, if any Tenant be summoned to appear at any set Court, or Courts to be
holden within the said Manors, or in any of them, and does appear upon the
said summons, he ought, and is to have for his pains four pence, and his
dinner, or eight pence and no dinner; which ought and is to be paid (by the
said custom) by such person or persons, who shall be the cause that any such
Tenants do appear for his or their matter: So it be not any matter or cause
that concerns an enquiry or presentment to be made, only for the Lord for the
time being, his Heiros and Assigns.

The like allowance for view, partitions, and other summons.
ITem, the Copyhold Tenants of the said Manors, and of either of them, ought
to have every of them like allowance, upon every view by them to be made, and
upon every partition by them to be made, or upon other summon to appear
betwixt Tenant and Tenant, when they be appointed thereunto by precept from the
Steward of the said Manors, or of either of them for the time being, or by his
sufficient Deputy.

How Tenants way be righted against Encroachments, Annoyances, etc.
THe Homage of the Court of the said Manors, or of any of them, may appoint
six or seven Tenants, upon any complaint to them made, by any person or
persons, being Tenants of the said Manors, or of either of them in open Court:
that he or they be wronged by any Incroachment, or any other Annoyance to
their Copyhold Tenements, which Tenants shall (after the said Court) view the
same Incroachment, Annoyance, and Impediment, or place whereof any such
complaint shall be made. And thereupon, to present or notify the same by a day
to the Steward, or to the Homage at the next general Court; that there may be
set a pain or amerciament, or both, for the same, by the Homage at the said
next Court, according to the quality of the offense.

The Homage at every general Court, is to present deceased Tenants.
ITem, the Homage of either of the said Manors, are to make presentment at
every general Court to be holden for the said Manors, or of either of them, of
all the Customary or Copyhold Tenants, that they shall know shall be deceased
after the Court then last past, or at any time before the said Court, whose
deaths were not then found and presented, and that held any Copyhold, or
Customary, or reputed Copyhold or Customary Lands or Tenements of the said
Manors, or of either of them. And also (as near as they can) present what
Lands every of them died seized of, and of what estate, and when he died, and
who is the next Heir or Heirs to the same person or persons so dying seized,
and of what age or ages the said Heir or Heirs shall then be of, as near as
they can.

Also they must present the deaths of Freeholders, etc.
ITem, the Homage likewise ought to present the deaths of the Freeholders, and
when they dyed, and who be their next heir or heirs, and the ages of their
heirs, which held any Lands or Tenements of the said Manors, or of either of
them, and the nature of their tenures, so near as they can: To the intent the
Lord may have his relief, which is but the value of one years quit-rent, of
the Tenements holden of the said Manors, or of either of them by Socage tenure.

What shall be done, if the next heir be not known.
IF the Homage at any of the said Courts of either of the said Manors, shall
not know who is next heir or heirs to any of the said customary Tenants so
dying seized, when they shall make their presentiments; that then they shall
make their presentment so accordingly, and then upon the said presentment at
the next general Court then after, the Steward of the said Manors of either
of them, or his Deputy for the time being, within the said presentment shall so
be made, shall cause a Proclamation to be made in open Court, to the intent
every such heir or heirs may have knowledge to come, and take up the Lands
and Tenements of his or their Ancestors, and so the Steward or his Deputy
shall cause a Proclamation to be made, Three Proclamations shall be made in
two years space, for the heir to take knowledge, etc.
from general Court to general Court, until three open and public
Proclamations be made in full Court, at three general Courts: which general
Courts (by the said custom) are used to be holden commonly one half year
after another, or thereabout: So that from the presentment made by the said
homage, of the dying seized of the said last Tenant, unto the last
Proclamation, shall be fully two years.

And if there shall come no heir of the said Lands or Tenements, nor any for
him or them, before the end of the Court next after the Court, whereat the last
of the said three Proclamations shall be made, to male his or their claim,
and prove himself, or themselves to the Homage of the Court, in such sort as
they or the greater part of them shall allow of, to be the next heir or heirs
of the whole blood to the said Tenant deceased, or to have title to the Lands
and Tenements, nor to show and prove, as aforesaid, who is or ought to be next
heir or heirs of the whole blood to the said Tenant deceased, If no heir or
heirs appear, the Lord may then seize the Land.
or next heir or heirs expectant, upon any estate determined: Then the Lord
of the Manor, whereof the same Land is holden for the time being; shall and
may after the next Court, next after the said three Proclamations so to be
made, seize the Lands and Tenements, which were the said persons so dying
seized, whose next heir or heirs, or such as shall have title thereunto
cannot be found, or shall not come and make his or their claim and proof as
aforesaid. And the same L. then to take the issues and profits thereof to his
own use, The Lord may keep it, until a an heir do come.
until such person or persons come, that shall prove him or them next heir or
heirs to the said person or persons so dying seized. If no heir come with in
three years after the 3. Proclamation, then the Land shall escheat to the Lord.
And if none shall come in within three years next after the third and last
Proclamation made as aforesaid, that shall and can convey and prove him or them
to be next heir or heirs of the whole blood, or show or prove, who is or
ought to be next heir or heirs, or to have title as next in Remainder or or
Reversion as aforesaid; that the said Lands and Tenements be forfeited, or
shall escheat unto the Lord of the said Manor or Manors for the time being.

Except, 1. Except women covert baron.
that if the said Land and Tenements shall or ought immediately to descend,
remain, revert, come to any woman Covert, 2. Infants within age*
or Infant within the age of one and twenty years, or to any person or persons
being in prison, 3. Prisoners.
or any person or persons not of Sanae memoriae, 4. Persons Non sanae memoriae.
or that shall not be within the Realm at the time of the death of the said
last Tenant dying so seized, 5. Persons out of the Realm.
or at the time of the first, second or third Proclamation to be made as
aforesaid, that there, in every such case, the Lord (for the time being) shall
have but the profits of the said Lands and Tenements, until such persons, or
his, her or their heir or heirs shall come and make their claim: So that the
said claim be made by the said woman, or her heirs, Five years limitation to
make the claim in.
within five years next after the death of her said husband, or by her husband
and her self during the time of her Coverture: And by such person being within
age, or his heirs, before he shall or should accomplish his full age of one
and twenty years: And by the person of Non sanae memoriae, within five years,
next after he shall recover, and be of Sanae memoriae; and by the heir of such
person of Non sanae memoriae, within five years next after the death of his
said Ancestor, or before: And by the said person that shall so be out of the
Realm, or his heirs, within five years after he shall return; or if he
shall not return, within five years after his death: And by the said person
or persons in prison, within one whole year next after his or their
enlargement from such imprisonment.

No dower for women, nor courtesy of England for men.
ITem, in the said Manors, or either of them, women ought not to have dowers
of any customary Lands or Tenements within the Manors aforesaid, nor any of
them: Nor men to have any estate as Tenants, by the courtesy of England.

Estates of inheritance shall descend according to Gavelkind.
ITem, if any shall be seized of any customary Lands or Tenements, holden of
the said Manors, or of either of them, of an estate of Inheritance and shall
have two sons, or three sons, or more: Or having no sons, shall have
diverse daughters: Or having neither sons nor daughters, shall have diverse
Collateral heirs in one neernesse of blood; or that are to make their resort,
from those that were of the same neerenesse of blood to the Tenant dying: They
shall be all co-heires to their said Father, Mother, or other Ancestor,
touching the said customary Lands and Tenements, according to the custom of
Gavelkind.

Touching descents where the Tenant left issue.
ITem, if any man or woman die seized (as aforesaid) of any customary lands or
Tenements of any state of Inheritance, holden of the said Manors, or of any of
them, and shall have issue two or three sons, or more, whereof one or two or
more of them shall be married, and have issue in the life of their Father or
mother, and shall dye before his or their Father or Mother: Or having no sons,
shall have diverse daughters, whereof one or more shall be married and have
issue, and dye in the life of the Father or Mother: that then the said issue
shall inherit, and be co-heire with the said son or sons, daughter or
daughters that shall survive his, her, or their said Father or Mother, that so
shall dye seized as is aforesaid; whether the said issue be male or female,
according to the custom of Gavelkind.

How Lands shall descend to those of the whole blood, where the Tenant left no
issue.
ITem, if any person or persons dye seized as aforesaid, and shall leave behind
him neither son nor daughter; then the next of his or their kin (being of the
whole blood) shall be heir or heirs to the said person or persons so dying
seized: That is to say, his, her, or their brother or brothers, brother or
brothers children, or childrens children, according to the custom of
Gavelkind: and so forth, as long as any of that issue shall be alive, being of
the whole blood. And in default of such issue, the sisters and sisters
children, according to the custom of Gavelkind: and so forth so long as any
issue shall be alive, and of the whole blood. And for lack of such issue; the
Uncles and their issues, being of the whole blood, so long as any issue shall
be living. And in default of such issue; the Aunts and their children, so long
as any shall be living of the whole blood. And for lack of such issue, the
next of kin of the whole blood, according to the custom of Gavelkind.

Males and Females of one womb, cannot join to be co-heires.
ITem, if any person so dying seized as aforesaid, without issue of his body,
and having diverse Brothers of the whole blood, whereof the one or some of them
shall have been married, and shall have issue, and after issue had, shall dye,
before the said Brother dying seized, as aforesaid; that then the issues of the
said Brother or Brothers, so dying before him that died seized, as aforesaid,
shall join and be co-heire with his Brother or Brothers, that surviveth the
Brother that so dyed seized, as aforesaid, whether the said issue be males or
females. But males and females of one belly or womb, cannot join to be co-heires
together: So that the course of descents is to be observed by the said custom,
according to the custom and nature of Lands in Gavelkinde.

Touching Descents.
ITem, likewise shall the issue of the daughter, that shall dye in the life of
the Father or Mother, be co-heire with the Aunt that lives, being of the
whole blood.

Descents.
ITem, likewise shall the Uncles, and the Uncles Brothers children (being of
the whole blood) be co-heires together as aforesaid.

Descents. (...)

ITem, likewise shall the Aunts, and the Aunts Sisters children join and be
co-heires as aforesaid, and so forth of all other further degrees, of all
Collateral heirs, being of the whole blood, which may convey themselves to be
any Cousins, and heirs of the whole blood to any person or persons, dying
seized of any of the aforesaid customary Lands or Tenements, according to the
custom of Gavelkind.

How Copyholders of inheritance may surrender.
ITem, by the custom of the said several Manors, every Copyholder of
inheritance in fee-simple, may surrender his said Copyhold Lands and
Tenements, or any part or parcel thereof unto the Lord, to the use of any
person or persons, and to his and their heirs for ever, or to his or their
heirs of his or their bodies, or any otherwise in tail, or for life or lives,
or years, or to any person or persons, and his or their heirs: To the intent
the said Copyhold Tenant may declare his last Will and Testament upon the same
Lands and Tenements, See more in the first Article, and in the 20. and 21.
Articles, etc.
or to any other use or uses, unless it be to any corporation or corporations,
or bodies politic or corporate. And every Copyholder in tail, or for life,
lives or years, of either of the said Manors, may in like manner (by the
customs of the said Manors and of either of them) surrender their Copyhold
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, or any part thereof, according to the nature
of their estates: so the same Surrender be made according to the custom
concerning Surrenders, as before in these presents is specified, or hereafter
ensues. And all the same persons, to whose use every Surrender shall be made,
are to have their Copies made to hold of the Lord by the Rod, according to the
custom of the Manor, whereof they have been holden by the Rents and services
therefore due and accustomed. Upon every of which Surrender, The Fines must be
entered into the Copies: See Article 29.
the Fine and Fines for the same hereafter expressed, is by the said custom to
be paid, and to be entered into the several Copies, or the Margents of them.

Surrenders taken by the Headborough or Reeve, inpresence of six Tenants.
ITem, by the custom of the said Manors, and of either of them; every
Surrender taken out of the Court by the Headborough or Reeve, or his Deputy,
and in the presence of six Customary Tenants of the Manor, of which the said
Lands or Tenements surrendered shall be parcel, witnessing the same Surrender
of any person or persons, of his or their customary Lands or Tenements, holden
of the said Manors, or of either of them. And being of the full age of one and
twenty years, or upwards (except women Covert-baron, and such as are not of
perfect mind) to the use of any person or persons; are, and ought to be as
good, as if it were taken in open Court by the said Steward of the Manors, or
of either of them; so that such Surrender be by the Homage presented, as
hereafter follows.

Surrender of women Covert-Baron, in extremity of sickness.
ITem, the Surrender by a woman Covert-baron, being of the age of one and
twenty years, made together with her husband, of the Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, whereof she is seized or estated; is, and shall be a good
Surrender of her Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, whereof she is seized and
estated: and shall be a good Surrender of her Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, holden of the said Manors, or of either of the same: the same
Surrender being made in her extremity of sickness, or likelihood of death, by
the acceptance of the Reeve of the Manor, whereof the Lands and Tenements so
surrendered, are parcel, and his Deputy, or either of them, in the presence of
six customary Tenants, or by the acceptance of the Headborough, in the
presence of six customary Tenants. Concerning the woman's recovery of her
health.
But if any such woman Covert-baron, so surrendering, do after that recover
her health, and do not at the next general Court then following ratify and
confirm the same, before the Steward or his Deputy, in the presence of the
Homage, then the same Surrender is and shall be void. All other Surrenders by
women Covert-baron.
And all other Surrenders made by any woman Covert-baron, except before the
Steward of the Manor, or his Deputy, where she shall be solely examined, or in
extremity of sickness, as is aforesaid, are and shall be void.

All Surrenders taken by the Reeve or Headborough, must be presented at the
first or second next general Court.
ITem, all Surrenders taken of women, as aforesaid, or of men by the Reeve, or
his Deputy, or by a Headborow for the time being, and in the presence of six
Customary Tenants, as aforesaid; shall be, and ought to be, by the Homage
presented, at the first or second next general Court, holden for the Manor
whereof the same is holden, after the taking thereof; or within one year and a
day next after the taking of the same Surrender, if any such general Court be
holden within a year and a day next after the same Surrender so taken. Or else
if no such general Court be holden within a year and a day; then to be by
the Homage presented at the next general Court to be holden for the same
Manor, next after the same year and day; is and shall be a good Surrender, as
if the same had been taken by the Steward or his Deputy of that Manor; or
woman examined, as foresaid, in open Court, or otherwise. All Surrenders taken
by the Reeve or his Deputy, or by a Headborough, and in the presence of six
Tenants, and not presented by the said Homage in manner and form aforesaid, Or
else they shall be void.
are and shall be void. But when any Surrender shall be made by any person,
When Surrenders, to the use of the last will, must be presented, or else void.
to the use of his or her last Will and Testament, to the intent that he or
she may thereby, or thereupon, make and declare his or her last Will and
Testament: that Surrender is to be presented at the first or second Court
general of that Manor, happening next after the decease of the party so
surrendering perfectly known, and not before. But if the same be not at the
first or second Court (next after the death of the same party) presented; or if
the same party has before (in his life time) made any other Surrender of the
same Lands or Tenements, and the same to be presented: Then the said
Surrender, to the use of such last Will and Testament, is, and shall be void.

The Homage must write Billa Vera upon their Presentiments and good Surrenders.
ITem, the Homage must write Billa Vera, upon every Surrender by them
presented, when they find the same Surrenders agreeable to the custom. And
also upon every other of their Presentiments, shall make Billa Vera, when they
be agreeable to the said custom. Or else, if the said Homage receive any
Surrender, or other Bills to them exhibited, which be doubtful or repugnant to
the custom of the Manor whereof the Land is holden, upon every such Surrender
or Bill, Ignoramus shall be made, or the like Superscription, to the intent it
may be known to be doubtful or naught: or else return the same naughty
Surrenders or Bills back again, to the parties that exhibited the same.

What Women Covert-baron may do.
ITem, every Woman being Covert-baron, of the age of one and twenty years or
upwards, having any customary Lands or Tenements to her or her Heirs, for
life, lives, or years, and holden of the said Manors, or of either of them;
may together with her Husband (by the hands of the said Steward, or his
sufficient Deputy) surrender all her said Lands and Tenements, Interest, and
term of years, to the use of her said Husband, or to any other person or
persons at their will and pleasure; Solely examined before the Steward or his
Deputy.
so as she be solely and secretly examined before the Steward, or his
sufficient Deputy.

Surrenders taken out of Court by the Steward or his Deputy.
ITem, all Surrenders taken out of the Court by the Steward of the said
Manors, or of any of them, or his sufficient Deputy, of any person or persons,
being of the full age of one and twenty years or more, and of Sanae memoriae,
of any of their customary Lands and Tenements holden of the said Manors, or of
either of them, be good by the customs of the said Manors, and of either of
them; Must be presented, at the next general Court.
and the same ought to be published and notified to the Homage at the next
general Court, or else those Surrenders are also void.

The Fines are certain, and not arbitrary.
ITem, all the Fines upon admittances for any the now Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, of all and every the persons, named parties to the said
Indenture, holden by Copy of Court Roll, are and ought to be certain, and not
arbitrary, or at the will of the Lord. And the Lord or Lords of the said
Manors, or of either of them, ought to have and take Fines upon admittances,
as hereafter follows, and not other, or greater: That is to say, upon the
admission of the Heir or Heirs after a descent, for every Acre of land (of
what nature and kind soever) sixteen pence, and so after that rate, for greater
or lesser quantities of land. What Fines are due.
And upon admission of one person only, after any Surrender, the like sum of
sixteen pence for every Acre; and so after that rate, for every greater or
lesser quantity of land. But if more then one person be admitted after or upon
any Surrender: If more then one Person be admitted, then etc.
then every of the same persons are to pay half so much as one person ought to
pay, and not more. Likewise upon admission of the Heirs of Heir, after a
descent for every message Customary, with the Courts, Yards, Easements,
Orchards, and Gardens thereunto belonging, for a Fine, the sum of thirteen
shillings four pence, and not more. And for a dwelling house, called a
Tenement, with the Courts, Yards, Orchards, Easements, and Gardens thereunto
belonging, the sum of ten shillings, and not more. And for a Cottage, used
for a dwelling, with Easements and Gardens thereunto belonging, or without
Garden, and not demised for more then three pounds by the year, the sum of
twenty pence. What Fine for a building, not used for a dwelling house.
But for a building, not used for a dwelling house, so much only as according
to the quantity of the land, after the rate of sixteen pence the Acre. And for
greater Cottages used for dwelling, and which shall be let for above three pounds
by the year, with the Courts, Yards, Orchards, and Easements thereunto
belonging, the sum of ten shillings. And the like is of Messuages, Tenements,
and Cottages hereafter to be built. And upon or after any Surrender, at the
admission, the like Fines are to be paid for one person. Admission of man and
wife, a whole Fine.
But if any Surrender be made by any person or persons, to a man and his wife,
then a whole Fine is to be paid for the Husband, and half a Fine is to be
paid for the wife. And if more persons be admitted upon one Surrender; then
every of the same persons are to pay for Fine, half so much as one person
ought to pay, and not more.

All Acres are to be accounted, according to the Statute or Ordinance, De
terris mensurandis, and Orchards and Gardens not belonging to such Messuages,
Tenements, or Cottages are to pay as Lands according to the quantity thereof,
according to the rate aforesaid. And parts of Messuages, parts of Tenements,
and parts of Cottages, are to pay for Fines respectively (in regard of the
whole) according to the rate of the whole. The Fines must be entered in the
margent of the Copies: See Article 19.
And all Fines paid, are to be set down and expressed in the Copy of the
Court Roll thereof, or in the margent of the same Copy. And if any question or
doubt shall hereafter arise, about the discerning and true estimation what, or
which be, or ought to be accounted a Message; and what, or which, a dwelling
house, called a Tenement; and what, or which, a Cottage: the same is to be
referred to the Homage of the Manor at the next general Court, and by the
same to be tried, ordered, determined, and presented, and according to such
presentiments, Fines are to be paid.

If the Lord refuse to admit, then, etc.
ITem, if the Lord or Lords of the said Manors, or either of them, or his or
their Steward (for the time being) shall refuse to admit any person or persons,
to whom or to whose use such Surrender (as in the precedent Article is
expressed) shall be made, or shall refuse to admit such person or persons, to
whom any of the said Copyhold, or Customary, or reputed Copyhold, or
Customary Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments shall descend, according to the
custom of the said Manors, and true meaning of these Scedules: then the
person so not admitted, paying or tendering to the Lord or his Reeve, Fine or
Fines for the same (according to the true meaning of these Scedules) shall and
may into such Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, so surrendered or descended,
respectively enter; and the same quietly have, hold, and enjoy as freely, and
in such sort, as if he or they had been thereunto lawfully admitted, and not
otherwise.

Surrender to make the Wife a Ioynture.
ITem, if any man make a Surrender, only to the intent to make his wife a
Jointure, or to assure it to his wife for term of her life, or during her
widow-hood, not alterning the estate of the inheritance; then for the fine of
the same, or any admittance thereupon; there shall be paid but half a fine
for the same things so surrendered: That is to say, half so much as one person
should pay upon admittance, according to the true meaning of these Scedules.
And the like is to be used, where the Husband, and Wife make a Surrender of the
Lands of the Wife; to the end only, to make an estate thereof to the Husband
jointly with his Wife, or to the Husband for term of his life in possession or
remainder. And likewise (by the said custom) for every Tenant that shall not
be admitted in Reversion or Remainder expectant, Concerning Tenants not
admitted, etc.
upon the estate of any particular Tenant for life, in tail or for years,
granted by the Copy; the same is but half so much as it is upon other
admittances, upon alienations, surrenders, or dying seized as aforesaid.

Duties to the Homage and Tenants for Bills and Surrenders.
ITem, every person that exhibiteth or delivers any Surrender, or Bill to the
Homage, ought to give and pay to the same Homage, for every such surrender or
Bill, four pence, and every of the said six Tenants, and also the
Headborought or Reeve (which shall be at the taking of any Surrenders as
aforesaid) ought to have four pence apiece of the parties that make the
Surrender, if the same Surrender be taken within the said Manors, Taking
Surrenders out of the Manors.
or in either of them. But if they go out of the said Manors, or either of
them, for the taking of the same, then to have eight pence apiece, and their
charges, if they shall go further off. And the party that procures the said
Surrender, ought to give to the said Tenants four pence, beside the said sees;
which four pence is to be delivered with the said Surrender; or else he that
brings in the said Surrender, without the said four pence shall pay it of
his own (...) to the Homage.

Though an heir be admitted, yet upon a new claim, the Homage shall enquire,
etc. for a Co-heire.
ITem, if it chance at any time, upon the death of any Copyholder, or
customary Tenant, that there is an heir or heirs found, and presented by the
Homage, and after, is or are admitted to the Lands or Tenements of the said
Copyholder, and at that time no other heirs shall be known. And after it
shall chance that one or other comes, and claims to be Co-heire with the
said Heir that is admitted; then the Homage ought thereof to enquire; and if
they find his claim true, they ought to present the same. And then he or they
so claiming, shall be likewise admitted, and pay his fine, and have his part
of the premises, notwithstanding the former admission.

Where Tenants are admitted, and after that another claims the whole: the
Homage is not bound to enquire, but he is driven to his suit.
ITem, if any man be admitted to any possession, or to any Reversion or
Remainder of any Lands or Tenements, whether they be to him descended as shall
be supposed, or to him surrendered by any other person, and after that comes
another person or persons, who pretends a title to the whole premises, or
any part thereof, and desires that the Homage may enquire thereof: In this
case the said Homage is not bound thereof to enquire: but he or they are driven
to his or their suit or plaint, whether his or their title be right or wrong:
Except in such case, where any person or persons shall claim as in the next
precedent Article. And yet if any shall require the homage, to find whether
he or they were the son or daughter, or sons or daughters of such a one or
no, and the homage knowing, or well informed of the truth, that he or they
shall be the son, or sons or daughters of him or her, that dyed seized of
the Lands then in question The Homage ought therein to present the truth: How
far the Homage are to present, and what not.
But not to present, whether he or they ought to have the premises, or any
part thereof, to the which another person is already presented. But in such
case, he or they shall be driven to his or their suit or plaint, as aforesaid;
for recovery of their said right, if any right they have. Except in such case,
where any person or persons shall claim, as in the next precedent Article.

How Lands descended are to be taken up.
ITem, after the death of every person, being a Ccustomary Tenant of the said
Manors, or of either of them; the next heir or heirs ought to come and take
up the Lands and Tenements, whereof his or their Ancestors so shall dye seized,
of what age soever he be. And if he or they be of the age of fourteen years
or upwards; At foureteen years he is to be presented and admitted in his own
person.
he is to be admitted in his own person, within a convenient time after he
or they shall be presented. Or else if he or they be under the age of
fourteen years; then to come and take it up by his Guardian, Under 14. years
by a Guardian.
until he be of the age of fourteen years, as aforesaid, and to pay for
his fine, according to the rates expressed in these Scedules; and the Guardian
to pay but three shillings and four pence at the most for his fine for the
Gardianship, Guardian three shillings four pence.
or less, as the Steward or his Deputy shall think fit. And for Lands
descended from the part of the Father; the next Cousien of the part on the
Mother, not able to inherit those Lands, ought to be Guardian. And if the Lands
came from the part of the Mother; Who shall be Guardian.
then the like Cousien of the part of the Father ought to be Guardian, if that
person will accept thereof. See Article 37.
And upon their refusal, or not praying to be admitted Guardian, at the first
or second Court after that Infant ought to be admitted; then may the Steward
admit any other of the kindred of the Infant (to whom his Lands cannot descend)
to be Guardian. The kindred refusing to be Guardian.
And if none of the kindred will accept of the Gardianship; then may another
be admitted. And every Guardian shall account to the heir of the profits, and
repair the Copyhold Tenements of him whose Guardian he is: And upon admittance
shall be bound to the Lord for the time being, And shall be bound to the L. for
performance.
with condition for performance thereof, in such sum as the Homage of the
said Court, or the greater part thereof shall like of. And of the Lands of
every Infant under fourteen years of age, that shall be a purchaser; a
Guardian shall be admitted, and shall so demean himself in such manner, as for
the Guardian of an Infant (having Lands by descent) is limited and appointed.

They to whose use Lands are surrendered, ought within three years after the
presentment take them up.
ITem, every person, to whose use any of the said Lands ot Tenements shall be
surrendered, ought to come within three years after the same be presented, and
take up the same by himself, if he be of age, and to be admitted as
aforesaid, and to pay his fine, or else by his Guardian, as is aforesaid.

The Lord may distrain for the Fines; or by default of distress, seize the
Lands.
ITem, if any of the said Heirs, Alienees or Gardians, do not pay their fines
within one month after the same fines be extracted, and the extracts
delivered to the Reeve or his Deputy for the gathering thereof, and by them or
either of them demanded; then it shall be lawful for the Lord or Lords of the
said Manor or Manors for the time being, or his or their Officers to
distraine, and avow as for rents: And for want of distress, to seize the Lands
and Tenements, for the which the said Fine or Fines are to be paid, and to
enjoy the same to his or their own use, until he or they shall be fully
satisfied, and paid the said Fine or Fines, to be paid by him or them that so
ought to pay the same.

The like he may do for non payment of the Quit-rent.
ITem, if any Customary or Copyhold Tenant of the said Manors, or of either
of them, shall not pay his Rents for his Copyhold, for which the same is due,
and demanded by the said Reeve or his Deputy, then it shall be lawful for the
Lord or Lords of the said Manor or Manors for the time being, or his or their
Officers to distraine and avow. And for want of sufficient distress, to seize
the Lands and Tenements out of the which the same ought to be paid, and to take
and enjoy the Rents, Issues, and profits of the same to his or their own use,
until he or they shall be fully satisfied and paid the same Rents by him or
them that so ought to pay the same.

Who shall be the Guardian.
ITem, that when any Tenant dies seized leaving his Heir under the age of
fourteen years, the next of the kin (to whom the said Lands and Tenements
cannot descend) shall have, if he shall require it, the custody of the Heir,
and of his Lands and Tenements, committed unto him for the use of the Heir,
until he come to the age of fourteen years, See Article 33.
as is aforesaid, and then he to choose his own Guardian, And the former
Guardian at any time after (upon reasonable request) to yield account to the
Heir, of the profits of his Lands received.

Tenants may let Leases for 31. years and four months, without any License
or Fine.
ITem, if any person or persons be disposed to let his or their customary
Lands or Tenements to any other person or persons, and to their Executors and
Assigns, for the term of one and thirty years, or less; the same person or
persons have and shall have full power and authority, to set or let to farm
his or their Copyhold Lands, or Tenements to any person or persons, their
Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, for the term of one and thirty years and
four months, See the Abstract of the Indenture.
or less, in possession from the time of the making thereof in writing,
without any License to him or them to be granted, and without paying Fine to
the Lord, or incurring any forfeiture or seizure of or for the same: So as the
same Lease do not exceed one and thirty years and four months, from the
time of the making thereof. If such Leases be not presented to the Homage
within one year after the making, they shall be void.
But such Lease is and ought to be presented to the Homage of the Manor,
whereof the Lands or Tenements so leased are held, within one year after the
making thereof: or else the same Lease so made, and not presented as aforesaid,
shall be void and of none effect.

Either Manor is upon every change of Lord, to pay five pounds for Recognition
money.
ITem, the custom of the Manor is, to give to the Lord of every of the said
Manors, upon the change of every Lord, at the next Court after the first
entry, bona fide, ten pounds of lawful money of England; that is to say, out
of each Manor five pounds, for the recognition and acknowledgeing the
services, which is to be levied and collected by the Reeve for the time being;
amongst all the said Copyholders of the said Manors, respectively, according
to the rates they shall be taxed at, by the Homage at the next Court to be
holden, after the coming of the new Lord.

How the Reeve of either Manor is to be chosen.
ITem, the homage of every of the said Manors ought yearly (at the general
Court to be holden next after Michaelmas) to elect and choose several Reeves
for every of the said Manors; that is to say, to elect and choose two Customary
Tenants, either of the said persons named parties to the said presents, their
Heirs or Assigns, or of others not named, to bear the Office of the Reeve
for each of the said Manors: namely, he that was before in election (if he be
alive) and one other: or if he be dead, two other, to the intent the Lord of
the said Manors, or of either of them, or his Steward, may appoint the one of
them so elected for one whole year; He shall serve one whole year.
that is, one to serve for each of the said Manors; so he be appointed within
that Manor of which he is a Tenant, and for which he shall be so chosen. Which
Reeve being so appointed, ought to take upon him the said Office for one whole
year then next ensuing, to execute the same by himself or his Deputy, for
whom he shall answer, and to be subject to account and answer for the same, as
in the said presents is set down.

And if a Copyholder shall be duly chosen, and appointed by the Homage, to
be the Lords Reeve, as aforesaid, and (according to his turn) presented by
the Homage, and shall refuse to serve the said Office by himself or his
Deputy: For refusing the Office, and what Fine to be paid in Hackney.
then every such person so refusing, within the said Manor of Hackney, shall
pay for a Fine, six pounds thirteen shillings and fourepence. And every such
person so refusing, The Fine for Stepney.
within the said Manor of Stebunheath or Stepney, shall pay for a Fine, ten
pounds to the Lord of the Manor, The Homage shall choose another, until one do
accept and serve.
whereof his Lands are holden. And the Homage of the same Manor shall be
charged from time to time to choose another Reeve in the place of him that shall
so refuse, until such time as (for the same Manor) one be chosen that shall
and will serve the said Office. And every Copyholder that shall be chosen and
appointed to the said Office as aforesaid, and shall refuse to serve the same
Office, shall pay the Fine aforesaid to the Lord of that Manor for his
refusal. The half of Fines paid by refusers, shall be allowed him who next
shall serve.
The one half of all which Fines or Fine, of Tenant or Tenants so refusing to
accept and execute the said Office of Reeveship, according to the true meaning
of these Scedules, the Lord or Lords of the said Manors, or either of them, of
whom such Tenant or Tenants so refusing shall hold, ought, and shall from time
to time allow unto such person or persons, as being chosen and appointed to be
Reeve as aforesaid; And shall and will, next after the refusal of any one or
more of the said Tenants so chosen, accept and serve the said Office; the moity
of the said Fine or Fines, respectively to be by him defaulked and retained in
his account. And be by him retained at his accounting.
And by the Lord of that Manor, upon the same Reeves account (whenever he
shall account for the same) to be duly and justly allowed.

In what cases the Lord may seize the Reeves Lands.
ITem, if any Copyholder, that shall accept, and execute the said Office of
Reeve, shall refuse to satisfy and pay unto the Lord, the yearly quitrents
and fines for admittances upon Alienations or Descents, wherewith such Reeve
shall or may be lawfully charged, by and according to the true meaning of
these presents; or shall refuse to account with the Lord, within two months
next yearly after Michaelmas, having had the Rentall and Estracts of Fines
upon admittances, as aforesaid, for that year, by the space of two months:
Every such Reeves Lands and Tenements, that shall so refuse to account, and pay
the said Rents and Fines which he shall or may have collected, as aforesaid,
shall be seized into the Lords hands, and the Lord shall and may take to his
own use the issues and profits of his said Lands and Tenements, until he
shall pay unto the Lord the Rents and Fines aforesaid: And until he has also
satisfied and paid for his said offense (viz.) being Reeve of Hackney, What he
is to pay for his offense in both the Manors.
six pounds thirteen shillings four pence: And being Reeve of Stepney, ten
pounds. Nevertheless, the Reeve ought not, nor shall be charged or chargeable
to answer any Quitrents, contained in any Rentall or Estracts, He is not to
answer any Quitrent, unless he know the Tenant, or where the Land lies.
unless it appear unto him by the Rentall of the former Reeve, or otherwise
be made known unto him by some of the Lords Officers, who is the Tenant, or
where the Land lies; for and in respect of which, the same Quit-rents ought to
be paid.

No Reeves within this composition, shall be charged with the Leet, or Court
Baron, otherwise then in Article 45. Nor provide for any dinners, except, etc.
ITem, no Copyholder of the said Manors, or of either of them, being named
parties to the said Indenture, nor their Heirs or Assigns, ought or shall (at
any time) be charged to collect or gather any of the Amerciaments, Fines, or
other Issues or Profits of the Courts-Leets, or Courts-Baron, holden within the
said Manors, or of either of them, otherwise then in the last precedent Article
is mentioned: nor to provide or allow for any Dinners, either on the day or
days the Court Leet shall be holden upon, or on the day or days of the two
general Courts: but are and shall be thereof for ever freed and discharged;
except that such Tenant, or his Heirs, shall hereafter purchase or have other
customary Lands then those that the said persons, named parties to the said
Indenture, or some one of them the said persons do now hold, which shall be
worth to be sold (at the least) two hundred pounds of lawful money of England,
or shall be of the clear yearly value of twenty pounds of like money.

What Tenants may be chosen Reeves.
ITem, every one of the said Customary Tenants, named parties to the said
Indenture, whose Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, holden by Copy of
Court-Roll of either of the said Manors, are worth sixteen pounds of like
money, as aforesaid, by the year to be let, or two hundred pounds to be sold,
by the estimation and presentment of the Homage of the same Manor, shall bear
the Office of Reeve, of and for such of the said Manors whereof he shall be a
Tenant by Copy of Court-Roll, and for which he shall be chosen and appointed
Reeve, as aforesaid, when his or their time and course does come.

What allowances the Reeve is to have of the Lord.
ITem, every of the said Reeves, is to be allowed of the said Lords or Lord,
for the executing of the said Office for one year, as follows, viz. The
Reeve of Stebunheath, three pounds six shillings and eight pence: and six
shillings eight pence more, for and in respect of an allowance of a Coat-cloth
to the said Reeve: And the Reeve of Hackney, fifty three shillings and four
pence: and six shillings eight pence more, for and in respect of an allowance
of a Coat-cloth to the same Reeve: And all other commodities due and incident
to the said Office, for either of them, or used heretofore to be paid to the
said Reeve, by any of the Tenants of the said Manors respectively.

The Reeve to deliver the Rentall to his Successor.
ITem, the Reeves of the said Manors, and of either of them, shall at the next
general Court, after his year of service expired, deliver the Rentall by
which he made his account, to the Reeve that shall next succeed him, To be
amerced.
upon pain to be amerced, or fined by the Homage, if he shall not so do.

What the Copyholders may freely do without forfeiture.
ITem, all the Customary Tenants of the said Manors, and of either of the^,
may break and dig their Copyhold grounds, holden of the said Manors, and of
either of them, at his or their will and pleasure; and fell, and cut down their
timber and woods growing, or that shall grow upon the same, and convert it to
their best use and profit: and may also suffer their Copyhold Tenements and
houses to decay, without incurring any seizure or forfeiture of their estates
therefore, or other pain: and may take and pull down their said Tenements,
and erect or set them up again, either where they stood before, or upon any
other Lands, holden by Copy of Court-Roll of the said Manors, or of either of
them. No houses may be pulled down, to set them upon freehold land.
But they may not, or shall not take or pull them down, to set them (or any
part of them) upon their own Free-holds, or upon the Free-holds of any other.

Copyholders may lop Trees growing upon the waste before their houses.
ITem, every of the said Copyholders, or reputed Copyholders, named parties
to the said Indenture, may lop and shred all such Trees as grow before their
houses or Tenements, upon the waste ground, and convert the same to their own
use, without any offense, so the said Trees stand for the defense of their
Houses, Yards, or Gardens: They may dig Gravel, etc. upon the waste.
And also they may dig Gravel, Sand, Clay, and Lome upon the said waste
grounds, to build or repair any of their Copyhold Tenements within the said
Manors, or in either of them without any license; so always, as every of the
said Copyholders do fill up so much as shall be dug by him or them.

Letting of Lands for more then 31. years and four months, is a forfeiture.
ITem, if any person or persons, being Tenant Customary, shall (without License
by Indenture, or other writing, or otherwise) let his said Customary Lands or
Tenements for more then one and thirty years and four months, it shall be a
forfeiture of his estate, by the custom of the said Manors, and of either of
them, being found and presented by the Homage, or else otherwise lawfully and
sufficiently proved.

For what offenses these Copyholders may forfeit their estates.
ITem, for Treason or Felony whatsoever, that shall be committed by any
Copyholder of the said Manors, or of any of them, for which he shall be
lawfully attainted, he shall forfeit his Copyhold Lands and Tenements to the
Lord of the said Manor. And for all other offense or offenses, act or acts
whatsoever, for which a Freeholder ought (by the common Laws of the Land) to
forfeit his Freehold Lands and Tenements: There a Copyholder of the said
Manors, or of either of them, shall forfeit as a Freeholder ought to forfeit
in like case his Freehold. Outlawry except for Treason or Felony, shall be no
forfeiture.
But if a Copyholder be outlawed for any cause, saving Felony or Treason, the
Lord shall not have the issues or profits of his Lands. And if a Copyholder
make a Feoffement of his Copyhold, Gift in tail, or Lease for life or lives,
by deed, or without deed, by livery and seizin thereupon: or shall suffer a
recovery at the Common Law, levy a Fine, or wilfully refuse or deny to pay, do
or perform his Rents, Fines, Suits, Customs and Services, at any time due to
the Lord or Lords of the said Manors, or of either of them for the said
Copy-holds: How a man may make a further forfeiture of his estate several
ways.
The same wilful refusal being presented to the Homage, by the oaths of
three Customary Tenants, with the Reeve or his Deputy (the said Tenants or
Reeve, nor his Deputy, being none of the Lords servants) and being found and
presented by the Homage, the same shall be holden and reputed a forfeiture of
his estate, whatsoever he shall have by Copy of Court-Roll, at the time of any
such act committed or done; in so much of his or their Copyhold Lands and
Tenements, as he shall have committed any such act: and only for so much of his
Lands and Tenements, Denying to pay Rents, Fines, etc.
out of the which the said Quitrent, and other duties is demanded, and shall be
due, and wilfully denied by the said Tenant or Tenants, as aforesaid. Or if any
Copyholder shall in the Lords Court, Disclaiming to hold of the Lord, and
claiming their Copy-holds to be free-holds.
or elsewhere in any court of Record, disclaim to hold his said Copyhold
Lands and Tenements of the Lord of the Manor, whereof his Lands and Tenements
are holden; or shall (by pleading in the Lords Court, or other Court of Record)
wilfully claim their Copy-holds to be Free-holds; Pleading wittingly in a
real action at Common Law, in chief as a Freehold.
or willingly and wittingly plead in any Real action at the Common law in
chief as a Freehold Tenant; or shall willingly and wittingly do any other
act, or things, in or concerning his now Lands and Tenements, which shall be a
disseisin or dis-inheritance of the Lord or Lords of the said Manors, or of
either of them, their heirs or assigns (other than such acts, as in these
Articles are especially mentioned, (or dispensed withal) that then he shall
forfeit his and their estate, of and in the same Lands and Tenements so
disclaimed, to be holden or claimed to be freehold; or for which he shall
plead in chief, or do any such other act or thing as is aforesaid. What other
forfeitures the Lord shall have.
Finally, the Lord of the said Manors, or of either of them, shall have all
such other Forfeitures, Issues, Profits, and Advantages of the said Copy-holds,
as shall grow due to him by any Statute Laws of this Realm, being not against
and contrary to these Articles and Customs here expressly set down.

The Act or Neglect of Tenant for lives or years, shall not prejudice those in
remainder.
ITem, if any person or persons, having any estate of any Copyhold Lands or
Tenements, holden of the said Manors, or of either of them, for term of life
or lives, or for term of years, or (in the right of their wives) of any
estate, although he, she, or they, shall do or suffer, or neglect to do any
act or acts during the time aforesaid, in or upon the said Copyhold Lands and
Tenements, which may or shall be contrary to the custom of the said manors,
or of either of them. The same act or acts so being done, shall not prejudice
or be hurtful unto the next person or persons to whom the said Customary
Lands or Tenements should or ought to remain, revert, or come, Concerning the
Wife and her heirs.
nor to the said Wife or her Heirs, not being party in Court, or consenting in
Court to the said act or forfeiture. Nor that the Lord of the said Manors, or
of either of them, shall take any longer Advantage, Issues, or Profits of the
same Copyhold Lands or Tenements, then during the time of such estates as
aforesaid, of the party committing, doing, or assenting to such act or acts. So
that after his or their decease, or estates determined, the said Lands and
Tenements shall remain, revert, or come to the next person or persons, or to
such person or persons to whom the same should have come or remained, or go or
revert immediately after such estate or estates ended or determined; as though
there had bin no such act or acts done, contrary to the tenor or true meaning
of these presents, by any such person or persons.

Private Acts of Tenants, hurt not the customs of the rest.
ITem, the particular or private act or acts of any customary Tenant or Tenants
of any of the said Manors, which shall happen to be done by, or between them,
or any of them, and the Lord or Lords of the said Manors, or either of them,
and his or their Reeve, or of either of them, contrary to the Articles and true
meaning of these presents, neither does nor shall extend to be construed to be
a breach of the ancient customs of the said Manors, or of either of them, to
the hurt or prejudice of the rest of the Customary Tenants, but of themselves
only, doing the said particular act.

Tenant for life or years, making waste, shall be fined by the Homage.
ITem, that if any Tenant for term of life, or lives only, or for term of
years of Customary Lands, shall make any waste, then he shall be fined by the
Homage; the third part of which Fine shall be to the Lord, and the other two
parts shall come to him in the reversion or remainder of the said Copyhold.

The Lord may distraine, but not seize.
ITem, the Lord, for non payment of Amerciaments, may distraine his said
Tenants, parties to these presents, and avow for the same as for Rents: But he
cannot seize any of his or their Customary Lands or Tenements, parties to these
Presents, for non payment thereof, until he be paid.

How partition is to be made between Co-heires, Ioynt-Tenants, or Tenants in
common.
ITem, upon the admission of any Coheires, Ioynt-Tenants, or Tenants in common,
if they cannot agree to occupy their Lands and Tenements, or to make partition
among themselves: then he or they that be grieved, may (by the custom of
either of the said Manors) have a Precept from the Steward, directed to seven
Customary Tenants, or more, of the said Manors within which the said Lands and
Tenements do lie, and they shall make partition thereof, and the same return
to the Steward of the said Manors again, to be enrolled in the Court Rolls
of the said Manor, whereof the said Lands and Tenements be holden. Whereupon
the said Heirs shall go to the said Steward of the said Manor, within which
the said Lands or Tenements shall lie: and then elect and choose their parts in
form following:

That is to say, The m^nner of electing and choosing their parts, either in sons
or daughters.
The youngest Son to choose first, and then he that is next to the youngest
to choose next, and so after that rate unto the eldest (how many soever) which
eldest shall choose last. And likewise the same order is to be observed amongst
daughters, if there be no sons, and amongst all other degrees of Heirs,
touching the Customary Lands and Tenements holden of the said Manors, or
either of them. And upon every such partition, Fine upon every such partition.
they shall pay for a Fine to the Lord, two shillings and six pence, or less,
at the discretion of the Steward, according to the quantity of the Lands or
Tenements so parted between Tenants in common and Ioynt-Tenants; for the like
Fine the said division to be by the said Tenants, without election of the
parties themselves, but by casting of Lots, if they cannot otherwise agree.

Copyholders shall pay but a penny for poundage.
ITem, if any Customary or Free Tenants Cattle, or the Cattle of their
Farmers, be brought to the Lords Pound, the said Tenant, or his Farmer shall
pay for all his Cattle (if they be a hundred heads, or upward or under) for
the poundage thereof, but one penny. And he that is no Tenant, shall pay for
every distress of Cattle so pounded, four pence.

Cattle impounded to be delivered by two Copyholders.
ITem, if any Cattle be impounded within the Lords Pound, by any person or
persons, being a Customary Tenant or Tenants of the said Manors, or of either
of them, for any trespass committed or done within the said Manors, or in
either of them, upon their Copy-holds: that all such Cattle being so
impounded, may by two of the said Customary Tenants, of such of the said
Manors, or of either of them, wherein the said trespass shall be committed,
which will answer for such damages and costs as shall be recovered in the said
Court, against the owners of the same Cattle for the said trespass, be
delivered out of the said Pound, unto the owner of the said Cattle, by the
custom of the same Manors, and of either of them.

No Suits for title of Copy-holds out of the Lords Court, without license.
ITem, no Customary Tenant shall sue, vex, or trouble any other Customary
Tenant, for any title of Lands or Tenements, lying and being within the said
Manors, or in either of them, being Copyhold Lands or Tenements of the said
Manors, or of either of them, out of the Lords Court, without the special
License first had and obtained of the L. of the said Manors, or of either of
them, or of his Steward for the time being; if any person do the contrary, he
shall have his Lands or Tenements seized into the Lords hands, until he pay a
Fine to the L. for the same offense, viz. such Fine as shall be ceased by the
Homage at the next general Court of the said Manor.

Cattle offending, shall be driven to the Lords Pound.
ITem, that no Customary Tenants of the said Manors, or of either of them, for
any offense to be done by any man's Cattle, within the said Manors, or in
either of them, shall drive the same Cattle to any foreign Pounds, but to the
Lords Pounds, being within the said Manors, or in either of them: if any man
do the contrary, to be amerced at the next general Court by the Homage. So
always as there be a sufficient Pound of the Lords there.

How Stakes, Marks, and Meares, between Tenant and Tenant ought to be set.
ITem, that no Tenant, or any other person shall set any Stake, Mark, or
Meare, between Tenant and Tenant, or between Tenant and any other person that
lies next to him, without the parties do thereunto agree, unless an order be
appointed by the Homage, or the greatest part of them, that it may be first
viewed by twelve Tenants of the said Manors, or of either of them, where the
Stake or Meare is to be set, and there to set the Stake or Meare
(indifferently) between both the said parties, and so to continue it, upon
pain of amercement by the Homage.

Drivers of Commons, when to be chosen.
ITem, the Homage do, and shall yearly use at the next general Court, holden
upon the Tuesday, the ninth day next after Easter day, to elect and choose out
of the Hamlets within every of the said Manors, certain customary Tenants, to
be Drivers and Viewers of the Wastes and Commons of the said Manors, and of
either of them, for one whole year. Which Tenants so elected, have authority
(by the said custom) to drive the Commons at any time when they find it
surcharged, and to impound the Cattle by them so taken: and no other to drive
the said Common, then the persons that were so chosen as aforesaid.

How surcharging the Commons is to be remedied.
ITem, If by their driving, the surcharging cannot be remedied, then they ought
to inform the Homage thereof at the next Court, that they may amerce the
offenders, whether the offenders be Tenants or no Tenants. And also to put a
(...) amerciament upon their heads, that they shall not likewise offend.

The Drivers shall account to the Homage.
ITem, if the said Drivers receive by the said poundages, any more money then
they spend in travail, the rest shall be employed to the scowring of the common
Sewers, which be upon the said waste ground and Commons, and laying of Bridges
over the said common Sewers; and shall make their account (in that behalf) to
the Homage at the general Court, when the year (for which they were chosen)
shall expire.

The Homage may make by-Lawes, which shall bind the Tenants.
ITem, the Copyhold and customary Tenants, may make by-lawes at their general
Courts, when need shall require, which custom shall be so continued. And the
said by-lawes so by them made, shall bind all the Copyhold Tenants of the
said Manors, or of either of them: so the same be not contrary to the true
meaning of these Articles.

Recoveries may be suffered to bar Entailes.
ITem, by the custom of the said Manors, and of either of them, Tenants in
tail of customary Lands and Tenements, may suffer common recoveries within the
said several Manors, with single or double vouchers; or (by agreement)
forfeit the said Lands and Tenements into the Lords hands, for the cutting off
the estate tail: which custom (by these Articles) shall have still
continuance, and such recoveries and forfeitures, are and shall be good to
bar the said Entaile.

Tenants not appearing a^ set Courts, shall not be amerced above 4. pence.
ITem, whenever there shall be any Court, or Courts Baron (or other then the
said two general Courts) kept within the said Manors, or either of them; no
Copyholder ought or shall be amerced above the sum of four pence, for any
default of his appearance at any the same Court or Courts, except the said two
general Courts: Neither shall incur any forfeiture, or seizure of his
Copyhold Lands or Tenements, or any other damage for any such default. And the
said amerciament to be taxed by the Assurers Tenants of that Court.

The Stewards Fees.
ITem, the Steward or his Deputy is to have such Fees and allowances, as
hereafter is expressed, viz. for every Surrender taken out of the Court five
shillings, and nothing for any Surrender taken in Court. For every woman
covert-Baron, that shall be examined, six shillings eight pence; for every
admittance of every person, two shillings; for entering every Surrender, and
making the Copy of Court Roll thereupon, six shillings eight pence; for every
Precept for a view of partition, and entering the same, and the return thereof
upon the Court Roll, and the Copy thereof, two shillings six pence; and if it
exceed two sheets of paper, then for every sheet over and above two sheets,
twelve pence more. For searching the Court Rols for every year, four pence.
For every purchased Court, thirteen shillings four pence. For entering a note
of a Leaf, granted of any Lands or Tenements, containing the date, quantity of
Lands or Tenements, and certainty of term, and to whom the same shall be
granted, and for a note thereof to the party, six pence. For these things
before expressed, the Steward shall have only such Fees as before is declared;
and for all other things, he shall have as formerly has anciently bin used,
and no more.

Buildings to be erected, shall pay Fines, as those already built.
ITem, all Messuages, Tenements, and Cottages, that shall hereafter be built
upon any the copyhold Lands, whereof the customs are hereby meant to be
declared; shall be held and enjoyed by the Copyhold Tenants thereof, under the
same Customs and Articles herein declared, as the Lands whereon they shall be
built are holden and enjoyed; but shall pay such Fines therefore, as is before
expressed or declared for Messuages, Tenements, and Cottages, that shall be new
built.

The Lord shall not sever from the Manor any of these Copyholders, to any
persons in Fee-simple, or other estate of Freehold.
ITem, the Lord of the said Manors, or of either of them, their Heirs or
Assigns, shall not at any time hereafter grant, or convey (severed from the
Manor whereof the same is now holden, or ought to be holden, any of the
Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, whereof any of the
said persons, named parties to the said Indenture hereunto annexed, is now
copyholder or customary Tenant, to any person or persons in Fee-simple,
Feetaile, or for term of life, or other estate of Freehold, or for any estate
or term, otherby Copy of Court Roll, according to the customs of the said
Manors, and true meaning of these presents, and the Indenture whereunto the
same are annexed; except the Freehold to be granted or severed, at the
petition and desire of such person or persons as then shall be Copyholder
thereof, according to the true meaning of these presents.

And if the Lord has granted away the Freehold of any the Copyhold Lands or
Tenements, What the Lord is disabled of doing.
whereof the Custom is hereby meant to be declared: he shall get and take the
same back again; and the same shall (notwithstanding such grant or
alienation) be annexed to the Manor whereof it was, or is held, and shall be
held and enjoyed by the Tenant, his Heirs and Assigns thereof, by Copy of
Court Roll of the same Manor, under the Rents, Services, and Customs in these
Articles expressed, and not otherwise: and also, that the Lord shall admit by
his Steward or his Deputy, all such Tenant and Tenants that ought of right to
be admitted upon the presentment of the Homage.

HERE FOLLOVVETH THE COPY OF THE CHARTER OF London, of the first grant, and of
the confirmation of diverse Kings after.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Anglie, Dominus Hibernie, Dux Normandy and Aquitanie
com. anegearchiepiscopis Episcopis, etc. Salutem. Sciatis nos concescisse and
hac presenti carta mea confirmasse Baronibut nostric de Civitate nostra London
quod eligant sibi Mayer dese ipsis singulic annis qui nobis sit fidelis
discretus and idoneus ad Regimen Civitatis. Ita quod electus fuerit nobis vel
justiciis nostris si presenter no^ faimus presentetur and nobis juret
fidelitatem. and liceat omnes ipsum in fine anni ammovere and aliqui subtinere
si voluerint vel eundem retinere. Ita tn^ quod nobis ostendatur idem vel
Justice nostris si presenter non fuerimus.

Concessimus and eisdem baronibus nostris and hac carta nostra confirmavimus
quod habeant been and in pace libere and quiet and integre omnes libertates
suas quibus hactenus ubi sunt tam in Civitate London quam extra and tam in
aequis quam in terris and omnibus aliis locis salva nobis camberlengeria
nostra. Quare volimus and firmiter recipimus quod praedicti Barons nostre
Civitatis London eligant sibi singulis annis de seipsis predeo^ mo^. Et quod
habeant omnes predictas libertates bn^ and in pace integre and plenarie cu^
omnibus ad hujus libertatis pertin^. Secundum cartam domini patris nostri
Iohannis illustris Rex Anglorum quam Inspeximus raecionabiliter testamur.
Testis dominus Episcopus London Episcop. etc. Apud Westminster. 18. die mensis
Februarii. Anno Regni nostri 11.

A Statute for the Hustings in the time of Saint Edward to be holden in London.
SIcut continetur in lege Sancti Edwardi Capitulo 46. quod debet in London quae
caput Regni est and legum and semper curia domini Regis singulis Septim. die
Lune Hastings sedere et tenere fundata enim erat olim and edi ficata ad instar
magne troie and ad modum and in memoria in se continet in quae fuit super fuit
ardua compota and ambigua p^cta corone and cor. domini regis tocius regni pred.
quia usus and consuetudines suas una semper inviolabilitate conservat ubique
ubicunque ipse Rex fuerit sive in expeditione sive alibi propter fatigaciones
gencium and populorii regni juxta veteres consuetudines bonorum prim. and
predecessorum and omnium principium and procerum and sapientum seniorum tocius
regni predict. etc.

The Charter of London grant by William Conqueror and of his Son.
WIllm^. king greit William bishop and Godfregis portere^ and eall the borough
waren bynde^ London franchisce and engliste and ichkyd eth yt Ick yill ye great
be^ ealbra yeara laga ye die ye great yer an en Edwardis dage king end ick
yill yet sulke child be his fader yrfnu^ achter his fader dage and ick nel
geyolyan that enynge man ethe doi^g yrang bid god ye be held.

Hoc est tra^scriptu^ carte regis Wille^ co^questore^ fre^ ciuibus loudo^ que
ad modum p^scriptu^ in vera lingua Saxonica in anglia^ mirabiliter co^uerta^ ad
moderna^ scripturam que totaliter nunc scribitur videl. An. dom. M. iii. C.
xiiii. and nota quod ista littera. y. i^ antiqua li tera ^onitur pro. w. and
ista littera. y. pr^^d liquid computatur i. y.

WIlliam king great William bishop and godfrey porters and all the burgeis
within London French and English. and I grant you that I will that ye be all
your law worth that ye were in Edwardis days the king And I will that ich
child be his faders eyer and I nyl suffur. that any man you any wrongys beed.
and god you keep.

Hoc est transcriptum in latinum.
WIllm. rex salutat Willm. episcopum and godfridu^ portegrinum and omnem
bovighwr. infra london francisces and anglices amicabiliter. Ego vobis facio
quod ^go volo quod vos sitis omni lege illa digni qua fuistis diebus Edwardi
regis. Et volo quod omnis puaer sit patris sui here is post diem svi patris. Et
ego nolo pati quod aliquit homo aliquam injuriam vobis inferat. Deus vos salvet.

The Ordinance for the Assise and Weight of Bread in the City of London.
The price of a quarter Wheat. iii. s.
THe ferthing simnell poise. xv. vuncis and di. qter. The q whyt loof coket
poise. xvii. vuncis di. and ob. The ob. whet loof poise. xxxv. vuncis and a
penny. The ob. whet loof poise lii. vuncis di. and penny ob. The penny whet loof
poise. Cv vuncis and di. q and ob. The ob. whet loof of al graynes poise lxx
vuncis and ii d.
The quarter Wheat at iii. s. vi. d.
The ferthing simnell poise. xix. vuncis di. qter. and quat. The q whit loof
coket poise. xvi. vuncis and half penny. The ob. whit loof poise. xxxii. vuncis
id. ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xlviii vuncis ii. d. q. The penny whet loof
poise. xcvi. vuncis and di. a q and ii d. weight. The ob. loof of all graynis
poise. lxiiii. vunics and iii. d.
The quarter whete at iiii. s.
The q simnell poise. xii vuncis q iii d. The q whit loof coket poise. xiiii.
vuncis iii. q. i. d. The ob. whit loof poise. xxix. vunces di. ii. d. The ob.
whete loof poise. xliiii. vuncis qter. di. and ob. The i. d whete loof poise.
lxxxviiii. vuncis iii. q. i. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. lix. vuncis
and a q i. d. ob.
The quarter Wheat at iiij. s. vj. d.
The q simnel poise. xj. vuncis qter and ij. d. The q whyt loof coket poise.
xiij. vuncis di. and iij. qter. The ob. white loof poise. xxvij. vuncis and
half. The ob. whete loof poise. xij. vuncis and a qter. The penny whete loof
poise. lxxxij. vuncis and half. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. lv. vuncis.
The quarter Wheat at v. s.
The q simnell poise. x. vuncis. qter. di. j. d. ob. The q whyt loof coket
poise. xij. vuncis. iij. qter. and ij. d. The ob. whyt loof poise. xxv. vuncis.
di. and half q j. d. ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xxxviij. vuncis. di. and j.
d. The penny whete loof poise. lxxvij. vuncis ij. d. di. and ob. The ob. loof of
all graynis poise. lj. vuncis. qter. di. and ob.
The quarter Wheat at v. s. vj. d.
The q simnell poise. ix. vuncis. di. di. qter. j. d. (...) vunc. The q whyt
loof coket poise. xij. vuncis. j. d. ob. The ob. whyt loof poise. xxiiij.
vuncis. di. q. and ij. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xxxvj. vuncis. di. qter.
and ob. The penny whete loof poise. lxxij. vuncis. q. di. j. d. ob. The ob. loof
of all graynis poise. xlviij. vuncis. qter. and j. d.
The quarter Wheat at vj. s.
The q simnell poise. ix. vuncis. The q whyt loof coket poise. xj. vuncis.
qter. and di. ob. The ob. whyt loof poise. xxij. vuncis. iij. qter. j. d. The
halfpeny whete loof poise. xxxiiij. vuncis. di. qter. and ob. The penny wheat
loof poise. lxviij. vuncis. qter. di. and ob. The ob. loof of all graynis
poise. lxv. vuncis. di. ij. d. weight.
The quarter Wheat at vj. s. vj. d.
The q simnell poise. viij. vuncis. qter. and di. and ob. The q white loof
coket poise. x. vuncis. iij. qter. and (...). j. d. The ob. white loof poise.
xxj. vuncis. di. and ij. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xxxij. vuncis. qter. di.
and ob. The penny whete loof poise. lxiiij. vuncis. iij. qter. and j. d. The ob.
loof of all graynis poise. xliij. vuncis. di. qter. j. d. ob.
The quarter Wheat at vij. s.
The q simnell poise. vij. vuncis. iij. qter. ij. d. q. The q whyt loof coket
poise. x. vuncis. qter. and q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xxj. vuncis. di. ob.
weight. The ob. whete loof poise. xxx. vuncis. iij. q and ob. q. The penny whete
loof poise. lxj. vuncis. and half. j. d. ob. The ob. loof of all graynis poise.
xlj. vuncis. j. d.
The quarter Wheat at vij. s. vj. d.
The q simnell poise. vij. vuncis qter di. and q. The q whyt loof coket poise.
ix. vuncis. iij. qter. ob. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xix. vuncis. and di. and
j. d. ob. The ob. where loof poise. xxix vuncis. qter. ij d. q. The penny where
loof poise. lviij. vuncis. and di. and di. qter. ij. d. The ob. loof of all
graynis. poise. xxxix. vuncis. di. qter. and ob.
The quarter Wheat at viij. s.
The q simnell poise. vj. vuncis. iij. qter. di. j. d. ob. q. The q whyt loof
coket poise. ix. vuncis qter. ij. d. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xviij. vuncis.
di. qter. ij. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xxviij. vuncis. i. d. ob. q. The
penny whete loof poise. lvj. vuncis. di. and qter. i. d. The ob. loofe poise. of
all graynis xxxvij. vuncis. qter. di. j. d. ob.
The quarter Wheat at viij. s. vj. d.
The q simnell poise. vj. vuncis. di. and j. d. ob. The q whyt loof coket
poise. viij. vuncis. iij. qter. di. ij. d. The ob. whyt loof poise. xvij.
vuncis. iij. qter. di. j. d. ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xxvj. vuncis, iij.
qter. di. j. d. The penny whete loof poise. liij. vuncis. iij. q^. ij. d. The
ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxxv. vuncis. iij. qter. di. ob.
The quarter Wheat at ix. s.
The q simnell poise. vj. vuncis. and di. qter. j. d. q. The q whyt loof cocket
poise. viij. vuncis. and di. ij. d. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xvij. vuncis.
di. qter. ij. d. The half penny whete loof poise. xxv. vuncis. iij. qter. j. d.
ob. q. The penny whete loof poise. lj. vuncis. di. and half quar. j. d. The ob.
loof of all graynis poise. xxxiiij. vuncis. qter. and j. d. ob.
The quarter Wheat at ix. s. vj. d.
The q simnel poise. v. vuncis. iii. qter.. q. The q whyt loof coket poise.
viii. vuncis qter. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xvi. vuncis,. and j. d. The ob.
whete loof poise. xxiiii. vuncis. iii. qter. ii. d. q. The penny where loof
poise. xlix. vuncis.. and di. qter. ii. d. The ob. loof of all graynis. poise.
xxxiii. vuncis. di. qter. and ob.
The quarter Wheat at x. s.
The q simnell poise. v. vuncis.. and ii. d. in weight. The q whyt loof coket
poise. viii. vuncis. The ob. whyt loof poise. xvi. vuncis. The ob. whete loof
poise. xxiiii. vuncis. The penny whete loof poise. xlviii. vuncis. The ob. loof
of all graynis poise. xxxii. vuncis. The q simnell poise. v. vuncis. q. and j.
d. ob. weight. The q whyt loof coket poise. vij. vuncis. di. and qter. ij. d.
The ob. whyt loof poise. xv. vuncis qter.. j. d. ob. The ob. whete loof poise.
xxiij. vuncis. half qter. j d. The penny whete loofe poise. xlvj. vuncis and t.
ij. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxx.vuncis iii. qter. ob.
The quarter Wheat at xj. s.
The q simnell poise. vj. vuncis. j. d. ob. weight. The q whyt loof coket
poise. vij. vuncis. qter. and ij. d. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiiij. vuncis.
iii. qter. x j. d. ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xxij vuncis. q i. d. The penny
whete loofe poise. xxij. vuncis. qter. 11. d. The ob loof of all graynis poise.
xxix. vuncis. iij. qter. ij. d.
The quarter what at xj. s. vj. d.
The q sinmnell poise. iiij. vuncis. iij. qter. and ob. The q whyt loof coket
poise. vii. vuncis. qter. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiii. vuncis.. The ob. whete
loof poise. xxj. vuncis. iiij. qter. The penny whete loof poise. xliij. vuncis..
The ob. loof of all grynis poise. xxix. vuncis.
The quarter Wheat at xij. s.
The q simnell poise. iiij. vuncis. and half qter. The q whyt loof coket poise.
vij. vuncis. and ob. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiiii. vuncis. and i. d. The ob.
whete loof poise. xxj. vuncis. j. d. ob. The penny whete loof poise. xlii.
vuncis and half q. i. d. The ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxviii. vuncis. ii.
d. weyghr.
The quarter Wheat at xij. s. vj. d.
The q simnell poise. iiij. vuncis. qter. and j. d. The q whyt loof coket
poise. vj. vuncis. iij. qter. i. d. ob. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiij. vuncis.
and di. qter. ob. The half penny whete loof poise. xx. vuncis. q. and ij. d.
The penny whete loof poise. xl. vuncis. iij. qter.. j. d. ob. The ob. loof of
all graynis poise. xxvij. vuncis. qter. j. d.
The quarter Wheat at xiij. s.
The q simnell poise. iiii. vuncis. and di qter. ij. d. q. The q whyt loof
coket poise. vi. vuncis and d. q. qter. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiii. vuncis,
qter. and ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xix. vuncis. iii. qter.. ob. The penny
whete loof poise. xxxix. vuncis. iii. qter. i d. ob. The ob. loof of all
graynis. poise. xxvi. vuncis. qter. and i. d.
The quarter Wheat at xiij. s. vj. d.
The q simnell poise. iiii. vuncis. and i. d. qter. The q whyt loof coket
poise. vj. vuncis. qter. j. d. ob. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. xij. vuncis.
iii. qter. j. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xix. vuncis. qter. q. The penny whete
loof poise. xxxvj. vuncis. iij. qter. ij. i. d. The ob. loof of all graynis.
poise. xxv. vuncis. iii. qter. ii. i. d.
The quarter Wheat at xiiij. s.
The q simnell poise. iij. vuncis. iij. qter. and ob. The q whyt loof coket
poise. vj. vuncis. qter. and j. d. The ob. whyt loof poise. xiij. vuncis. iii.
and ij. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xviij. vuncis. iii. q and ob. The penny
whete loof poise. xxxvij. vuncis. iii qter. and i. d. The ob. loof of all
graynis poise. xxv. vuncis. and di. q. j. d. ob.
The quarter Wheat at xiiij. s. vj. d.
The q simnell poise. iij. vuncis. iij. qter. The q whyt loof coket poise. vj.
vuncis. and di. qter. and ob. The ob. whyt loof poise. xii. vuncis. qter. and
i. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xviij. vuncis. qter. i. d. ob. The penny whete
loof poise. xxxvi. vuncis. iii. q. and ob. The ob. loof of all graynis poise.
xxiiii. vuncis. and ii. d.
The quarter Wheat at xv. s.
The q simnell poise. iij. vuncis. and ii. d. The q whyt loof coket poise. vi.
vuncis. in weight. The ob. whyt loof poise. xii. vuncis. The ob. whete loof
poise. xviij. vuncis. The penny whete loof poise. xxxvi. vuncis. The ob. loof of
all graynis poise. xxiiij. vuncis.
The quarter Wheat at xv. s. vj. d.
The q simnell poise. iij. vuncis. qter. and j. d. ob. qter. The q whyt loof
coket poise. v. vuncis. iij. qter. ii. d. The ob. whyt loof poise. xj. vuncis.
and di. qter. and ij. d. The half penny whete loof poise. xvij. vuncis. and j.
d. ob. q. The penny whete loof poise. xxxv. vuncis. and di. q. and j. d. The ob.
loof of all graynis poise. xxiii. vuncis. qter. and j. d. ob.
The quarter Wheat at xvj. s.
The q simnell poise. iii. vuncis. qter. and j. d. qter. The q whyt loof coket
poise. v. vun. and half and di. q. ob. iii. d. q The ob. whyt loof poise. xi.
vuncis. qter. and ii. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xvii. vuncis. and di. qter.
i. d. ob. q. The penny whete loof poise. xxxiiii. vuncis. qter. and i. d. The
ob. loof of all graynis. poise. xxii. vuncis. qter. and i. d. ob.
The quarter Wheat at xvj. s. vj. d.
The q simnel poise. iij. vuncis. and half qter. i. d. q. ob. The q whyt loof
poise. coket v. vuncis. and and ij. d. qua. The ob. white loof poise. xj.
vuncis. and half q. ij. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xvj. vuncis. iij. qter. j.
d. ob. q. The penny whete loof poise. xxxiij. vuncis. and half qter. j. d. The
ob. loof of all graynis poise. xxij. vuncis. qter. i. d. ob.
The quarter Wheat at xvij. s.
The q simnell poise. iij. vuncis. ij. d. wight. The q whyt loof coket poise.
v. vuncis. and half. The ob. whyt loof poise. xj. vuncis. The ob. whete loof
poise. xvj. vuncis. and half. The penny whete loof poise. xxiij. vuncis. The ob.
loof of all graynis poise. xxij. vuncis.
The quarter Wheat at xvij. s. vj. d.
The q simnell poise. ii. vuncis. ii^. qter. ij. d. q. The q whyt loof coket
poise. v. vuncis. qter. and q. The ob. whyt loof poise. x. vuncis. iij. qter.
and ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xvj. vuncis. and di. qter. ob. q. The penny
whete loof poise. xxxij. vuncis. qter. and j. d. ob. The ob. loof of all
graynis poise. xxj. vuncis. and half. j. d.
The quarter Wheat at xviij. s.
The q simnell poise. ij. vuncis. iij. qter. and q. The q whyt loof coket
poise. v. vuncis. and qter. ob. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. x. vuncis. and j.
d. The half penny whete loof poise. xv. vuncis. iij. qter. ij. d. q. The penny
wheat loof poise. xxxj. vuncis. and di. qter. ij. d. The ob. loof of all
graynis poise. xxj. vuncis. and di. j. d.
The quarter Wheat at xviij. s. vj. d.
The q simnell poise. ij. vuncis. iij. quar. ob. q. The q white loof coket
poise. v. vuncis. and di. quar. j. d. q. The ob. white loof poise. x. vuncis.
quar. and di. The ob. whete loof poise. xv. vuncis. di. and j. d. q. The penny
whete loof poise. xxxj. vuncis. and di. q. The ob. loof of all graynis poise.
xx. vuncis. iij. quarter.
The quarter Wheat at xix. s.
The q simnell poise. ij. vuncis. and di. quar. and j. d. q. The q whyt loof
coket poise. v. vuncis. and j. d. ob. q. The ob. whyt loof poise. x. vuncis.
and di. qter. and j. d. The ob. whete loof poise. xv. vuncis. qter. and q. The
penny whete loof poise. xxx. vuncis. and ob. The ob. loof of all graynis poise.
xx. vuncis. quar. and ij. d.
The price of a quarter Wheat at xix. s. vi. d.
The q simnell poise. ij. vuncis and ij. d. weight The q whit loof coket poise.
v. vuncis. The ob. whit loof poise. x. vuncis. The ob. whete loof poise. xv.
vuncis. The penny whet loof poise. xxx. vuncis. The ob. loof of all graynis
poise. xx. vuncis.
The quarter Wheat at xx. s.
The q simnell poise. ij vuncis. and a qter. The q whit loof coket poise. iiij.
vuncis. iii. qter. ob. qter. The ob. whit loof poise. ix. vunces. iij. qter. j.
d. ob. The ob. whete loof poise. xiiij. vuncis. and di. qter. ij. d. q. The
penny whete loof poise. xxix. vuncis. quart. ij. d. The ob. loof of all graynis
poise. xix. vuncis. and di q. ob.
Item, the half penny loof whyt of Stratford must wey ij. vuncis more than the
half penny whyt loof of London.

Item, the half penny whete loof of Stratford must wey iij. vuncis more than the
half penny whete loof of London.

Item, the penny whete loof of Stratford must weye vj. vuncis more than the penny
whete loof of London.

Item, iij. half penny whyt loofes of Stratford must weye as much as the penny
whete loof.

Item, the loof of all graynes, that is to say, the whete loof must weye as
much as the penny whete loof and the half penny whyt loof.

The Copy of the Bull for the Offerings to the Curates of the Parishes of the
City of LONDON in Latin and English, and of the composition of the same. Chap.
LXXXVI.
NIcholaus Episcopus servus servorum Dei ad perpetuam rei memoriam, etc.

The Copy of the Bull of Pope Nicholas for the same matter.
Our holy fader pope Nicolas, for perpetual memori wylleth to sequester and
avoyed all doughtis, by the which stryues dyscordes and great loffys that is
feryd to happen to Curatis and their Perysshens, lest that if it be not
remedyid, great hurt might happen both to the curatis and perysshens, as well
in things temporal as spyrituall. So it is that now of late, after that the
right honorable Thomas Archibishop of Canterbury, had showed that he had found
as he Rode in his visitation, that one Roger, byishop of London, had made a
constytucyon upon offryngis on holy days and solemp and doble festis, and
namely of the appl'es whoos vygyls ben fasted by the inhabitants of houses,
hostryes, and shops howsoever they be occupied within the cite of london: that
is to say, that all inhabitants and every of them, occupyenge the said houses,
hostryes, or shoppis, and pay for the yerly rent of them ten s. shall offer a q
And if his rent be twenty s. ob. and so upward as it has been used to be paid
by the said peryshes time out of mind of man. And that the same constytucyon
was good and laufull, it appears by that, that diverse of the predecessors of
Archbisshops of Canterbury; by their Letters patents, has it confirmed and
approuyd, and when some evyll dysposed of the perysshens would labor and study
to construe this constytucyon to other sensys than it was made for: They made
explanacions of the same, and ordained that the Mayre and Aldyrmen of the said
Cite, and all the inhabytants that would be rebel thereto, should stand a
cursyd by the same deed, and many other things than expressed, ordained our
holy fader and predecessor Innocentius vii. ratefyenge and confermynge the
letters of the said Thomas Archbysshop, addinge and amendynge defaultys if any
were, as more plainly apperyth by the lytters of the foresaid Innocent,
wherein be contained the lytters of the forsaid Thomas. And after as it has
been showed us of diverse credible persons that thought the Mayre, Sherefs,
Aldyrmen, the Citezens, and the inhabytantes aforesaid, of the more part of
them, after the old and laudable custume in their offryngys on Sondayes and
other folempne and double festys of the Appostles, namely whose euyns be fastyd
yet within four years or there about, Diverse having litell regard to the well
of their souls, and unkind to their mother the holy Church, couetinge be
litell and litell to minishe and take away the foresaid offryngys: (The which
if they were devout, they should increase and freely give) refuse to offyre
but only on Sondayes and on the solemn festys of the Appostles, whoos Euens
been fastyd.

And as for other solemn days, which be many; they said that it was not
expressed in the lytters of Roger Bishop, nor in they said constitucyon, that
they ought to offyre on them: another in the lytters of Innocent, nor Thomas
Bishop, there was no parsight sense; wherefore they thought the were but void.

And also where we understand that iii. sentensys have been given against one
Robert Wryght, that is to say, one in this parties, and in the court of Rome;
for as much as refused to offer according to the rate as aforesaid; as on
Sondayes, festis of the Appostles, whose vygyls ben fastyd: but as for these three
Natiuities, of Saint Stephen, Saint Johan, and in the Innocentis, he vrterly
refused, and as many days in Ester, and in many days in Witsontide, and the
Circumcision, Epiphanye, and Ascencion of our Lord, and Corpus Christy, and
four vygyles of our Lady, Philip and Jacob, and the translacion of Saint
Edmonde.

And for as much as it were painful to all Curatys, if they should sue for
every particular cause, if their parisshens would be froward. And for as much
as we understonde that our welbelouyd Herry King of England, would that all
stryfs and dewte touching the said offryngys should be avoided. We will, and
by our pour Appostolick conform the lytters of the foresaid Innocent
predecessor, and Thomas Archbishop, contayninge the constiucyon of the said
Robert to be observed and kept for ever.

And over that by this presentys, We will and ordain that all inhabitantys
houses, hostryes, shoppys; four years paste, and that aftyr this shall
inhabit, pay their offryngys according to the rate aforesaid in the three
Natiuites of Saint Stephen, Saint Johan, and the Innocentis, and as many days
in Ester and Witsontide, Circumcision, Epiphanye, and Ascencion of our Lord,
Corpus Christi, four of our Lady, and Philip and Jacob, and every dedicacion
day, and every Sunday, and the festys of the Appostles whoos vygyls ben fasyd,
and other double and solemn festys.

And more plainly apperyth in the lytters of Innocent and Thomas archbisshops
aforesaid, and in all days they have used to offere four years pass to the
parish Church. Within the bondys whereof the foresaid houses, hostrys or
shoppes ben set upon the pain of excommunicacion, contained in the lytters
of the said archbisshop, and of the which the shall not be asso^^d, out if he
satyfie the said offerings, or else friendly agree with his Curat, but if it be
in the point of death. So that if it happened him to live, or his eyers make dew
satisfaction. And also we give power to the Ordinarijs of the said Chyrches
where such offryngys be not paid, that the may without citacion summarily
enquere of the said offryngys; and if the find that be unpaid, to accurse the
offenders, and them to punish according to this ordinance; any manner Bulle
granted writing general or special; now known or herafter to be known;
not with standinge.

The Letters of Innocent Bishop.
Therefore for the part, the Curatys of the cite of London, a peticion was made
to us, that a constituction the which was made by one Roger Bishop of London,
for the well both of the parisshens and the Curatys, the which was used the
time out of mind, yet some used to constrew the said constitucion otherwise
than it ought to be after their forward mind, and the which constitucion the
said Thomas Archbisshop of Canterbury, and in any his predcessours has
approved and confirmed, that the same constitucion by us should be confirmed. I
inclined by their peticion, conferme all the said constitucion by the autorite
appostolik; and fulfille all defautis, if any by the tenor of the said letters
follows.

Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of England, to the Mayer, Sheriffs,
Aldermen, and Citizens of London, greetings.
ALmighty God to whom belongs thereto and all that is therein, commaundithe
that tenthis should be given him, and would be honored spiritually with
offerings; and therefore the reuernde fader, Roger Nyger, late Bishop of London,
made a constitucion, as we find in our vistacion, upon offering on Sondaies and
solemn and doubly festis, and nambly of the Appostils, whoes vigils ben
fastid, by the inhabitantis of houses, hostries, and Shoppis within the Cite of
London: that is to say, that all and every inhabitants houses, hostries or
Shoppes; for an house, hostrie, or shoppes, whoos pension is x. s. by year, a
ferthing: and so forth, if it assende to xl. s. a penny. Some yet having littell
regard to their souls, construed that if the said pension never so much
excedid xl. s. that he shall pay but one penny. We therefore willing that all
alteracion as touching that should be removed, will by the autorite of this
letters, that if the said pension excede xl. s. by x. s. that he shall pay one
penny ferthing, and for every x. s. a stending q^ter. and for as much as we
will not hereafter only forward exposicion of this confirmation to be had, we
will that all the that hereafter will not obey and follow this our exposicion,
stand acursed by the great sentence by the same deed, and for as much as no
man shall excuse himself by cause of ingnorunce, we will and ordain that all
Curatis within the said Cite iiij. times in the year in the Mass time,
publisshe and expowne: and moreover, we ordain and give power to all Persons
and Vicars of the said Cite, to cite all the offenders of the said constitucion
to apere before us or our official, that there to obbey the law as reason will,
to the which official by this presentis we give our power, in witness
whereof, etc. Let no man therefore offend this ordinance, for if he do it, he
shall run in the indignacion of God and his holy Appostolis, Peter and Powle.
Given at Rome at Saint Peter's, the xvj. kalendas of May. Master William
Freston official to the Deane of Powles, after that he had by great
deliberacion examined a cause of witholding of thentis. By me Robert Wright, of
the parisshe of Saint Edmond in Lumberstret in the solemn and double festis,
and the festis of Saint Stheuen, John, and Innocents, after Christmes,
Circumcision, Epiphanie of our Lord, iij. holy days in Estirweke, iij. holy
days in Witsoweke, Corpus Christi, ascencion of our Lord, Phelip and Jacob,
and v. sestis of our Lady, and every dedicacion day by his sentence condemned
the said Robert Wright, the which appealed to Rome, where the same sentence in
all thing was affirmed by one William of Fundera, Bishop of Olern, and
Commissary to the Pope; save that he should have said in three festis of our
Lady and not in five, and therein the sentence was reuersed, and for that cause
the said Robert was not condemned in the expensis. And after the same Robert
appellyde to the Pope himself, the which affirmed in every thing the sentence
of the said William de Fundera, and condemned the defendant in expencis in the
last apppelle.

The composition of all Offerings within the City of London, and Suburbs of the
same.
FIrst, that every person dweller and inhabitant in any houses in London, or
suburbis of the same, hired and occupied as for the full rent and pension of
x. s. yearly, shall offer to God and to the Church, in whoos parisshe such
place stands, one q every day in the festis that following, that is to say,
in every Sunday in the year, Christmas day, Circumcision, Ephiphanie,
Purificacion of our Lady, Mathei Appostle, Annunciacion of our Lady, the
Assencion of our Lord, Corpus Christi, Saint Mathewe Appostle, Simon and Jude,
Alhalowen, Andrew Appostle, Concepcion of our Lady, Thomas Appostle, John
Baptist, Peter and Powle, James Appostle, Bartilmew Appostle, Assumpcion and
Nativity of our Lady, Dedication day, which from the day forward shall be
through all London, and for the paris Chirches in London that be halowid the
iij. day of Octobre, also one day of the principal festis of the Patron of
every Chirch through London, the suburbis of the same, yearly without
contradiction, and if such inhabited houses be leten for xx. s. ob. and if for
xxx. s. ob. q. and if for xl. s. i. d. and if for l. s. i. d. q. and so every
assending and dissending by x. s. into what sum that ever it be, shall
alwaie offer ferthing after the rate of x. s. in the festis abouesaid; and if
such dwellings, occupied and inhabited houses be not leten, but perauenter that
owner that dwell therein, or freely let, or otherwise occupied as for a
dwellingis, that than the offringis shall be as it was leten before, or else
after a common value; and dowt thereof, that rent to be extemyd by the Chirch
wardeins for the time being; and if a man dwell and inhabit diverse places and
houses within the said Cite, in one or diverse parisshes, he than shall after
the rate and days aforesaid, offer every house to the Chirch in whoos paris
the stand, provided always that when ii. of the festis aforesaid fall upon one
day, than the offering shall be for one day.

Item, where any dwelled in the said Cite, inhabited or occupied a dwelling
place an house, under the price, rent, or pension of vj. s. viij. d. that than
he shall be bound to offer iiij. days in the year, in the iiij. principal
festis of the Chirch there as he is parishen, of and if such pension or rent
extend to the full sum of vj. s. viij. d. or above, and not fully to the
sum of x. s. that than them inhabitant for every s. shall pay to the Chirch
j. d. ob. onis in the year. Provided always that if the said dweller come before
his Curate, and say upon his faith and truth, that he may not pay his said
money according to the ordinance aforesaid beneth x. s. that then the said
Curate shall holden him content with such as he will give him, aught or naught,
and the dweller thereupon shall be quite. Also and the pension of rent of such
inhabitant houses, extend above the sum of x. s. and not fully to the sum
of xxx. s. and so to any sum being between x. and x. than the Inhabitant
shall pay ones a year to the Curate for every s. of the said sum being
between x. and x. j. d. ob. yearly.

Item, where as a dwelling house is hired of great, and after leten out by
parties to sundry folks, that than the hirer in great, if that he dwell in
the principal part of the same house, shall offer to God and to the Chirch in
the days aforsaid, for the rent of all the holy rent, if the said house be
inhabited and occupied, as dwelling places, and ellis after the rule that
follows: and if the said hirer in great dwell not in any part thereof, but
let it out again, that then he that dwells in the principal part shall
offer all, and the remenunt iiij. d. by year.

Item, all tho in the said Cite or suburbis, or that occupied houses not
inhabited, as Shoppis, Celars, Shaddis, Ware houses, Stables, Wharfes, Kranes,
Timbre hawes, Teinter places for Fullers, or other places, Gardens, shall ones
in the year for every pound that they be leten fore, if they be hired, or
after a common value, if they be not hired, give unto the Curate of the Chirch
there as such houses bin, vj. d. without any other offerings for the said
houses, affendingis and diffendingis after the rate of vj. d. of the pound,
and for x. s. iij. d. and so after the rate affendingis and deffendingis,
without more charge of offering for it.

Item, that all apprentices, servants, and hired men within the said Cite, not
shargede with such rent and housings, which shall be houselder at Ester or
about Ester, shall iiij. times in the year, at iiij. principal festis offer to
God and to the Chirch. Also as for personal tithes, the parisshens by this
ordinance shall neither be charged nor dissharged, saving that hereafter shall
no Curat vex, trouble, sue, ordain Sacraments or Service for no payment of the
same, but leave them to good devotion, and conscience of the parisshens.

Item, all offryngs undone before this day, or any other attempted contrary
beside, or against this present Writing, by any person or persons, shall stand
quite, and not be remembered as unto any suit or stryf, but all such things
before this day done, shall clean be remet, and forgiven on boothe perties.

BE it in mind, that this bond and arbitrament is made the xvii. day of
Decembre, the year of the incarnacion of our Lord, M. iiij. C. L. vij. by
Master Laurence Both, Master William Radclyf, Master Lucas Lancok, Master
John Aleyn, Master John Lyleford, Geffrey Felding, William Tailor, Master
Robert Kent, arbitratour, chosen upon the Premisse, as in the tenor of the
compremisse thereupon made openly made it may appear.

In this Chapter is showed the Patrones of all the Benefices in London.
ANne on the Towrehill, and Abbey of white Monks.

Anne within Aldrichgate, diocis London, Patron Deane of Saint Martyn the
graunde. The desine.

Augustine in Bradstretward, the Priour of friars August.

Anthonius in Bradstretward, a College, the King Patron.

Augustine by London wall, Priour of Crichirche in London Patron.

Augustine in Watlingstrete by Poules gate, Patron.

Antelyne in bogerowe, diocis London, Patron Deane and Chapitur of Poules. The
decins xx. s.

Albon in Woodstret, diocis London, Provost of Eaton Patron, Decins xx. s.

Alphey within Criplegate, diocis London, Patron Deane of Saint Martin the
grant. The sine.

Alborought without Bishopsgate.

Alhalwyn in Bredstrete, diocis Canterbury, Patron Bishop of Canterbury.

Alhalwin Lumberstret, diocis Canterbury, Patron Priour of Crichirch in
Canterbury. The desine.

Alhalwin by London wall, diocis London, Patron Priour of Crichirche in
London. The desine.

Alhalwin the more, diocis London, the King Patron. The decis xiii. s. iiii.
d.

Alhalwin the less, diocis London, Patron the Master of Laurence Pulteney.
The sine.

Alhalwin Brekinge Church, diocis London, Patron Abbot of Breking. The desine
x. s. viii. d.

Alhalwin Staynings, diocis London Patron the Abbot of Tourhill. The decis
xvii. s. iiii. d.

Alhalwin in Honilane London, Patron the Wardeins of Grocers. The decis xvii.
s. iiii. d.

Andrew in Cornehill, diocis London, Parone Bishop of London. The decis xvii.
s. iiii. d.

Andrew Hubert in Eastchepe, diocis London, Earl of Shrewisbury Patron. The
decis xvii. s. iiii. d.

Andrew at Baynard Castle, diocis London, Patron Bishop of London. The desine
xx. s.

Andrew in Holborne, diocis London, Patron Abbot of Bermonsey. The decis xiii.
s. iiii. d.

BOtulfe by Billings gate, diocis London, Patron Deane and Chapitur of Poules.
The decis x. s. iiii. d.

Botulfe without Algate, diocis London, Patron the Priour of Crichirche in
London. The dicis.

Botulfe without Bishoppisgate, diocis London, Patron the Bishop of London. The
decis xvii. iiii. d.

Botulfe without Aldrichgate, diocis London, Patron Deane of Saint Martins
grant. The decis.

Benet at Greshirche, diocis London, Patron Deane and Chapter of Pouls. The
decis xxiiii. s.

Benet at Poules wharf, diocis London, Deane and Chapter of Poules Patron.
The decis xvii. s. iiii. d.

Benet Sherehog, called Saint Sithes, diocis London, Patron Priour of Saint
Mary onirthere. Decis xx. s.

Benet Fynke, diocis London, Patron the Master of Saint Anthony. The decis
xvii. s. iiii. d.

Bride in Fleetstreet, diocis London, Patrons the King and the Abbot of
Westminster. Decis xx. s.

Barthilmew the little, diocis London, Patron the Abbot on the Towrehill. The
decis xvii. s. iiii. d.

Barthilmew in Smithfield Prioury, Temperalties lxxxx. li. xiiii. s. iiii. d.
Desine viii. li. xvii. s. q.

Barthilmew in Smithfield spytell, a Master and a Colege.

CLement beside Estchep, diocis London, Patron Abbot of Westminster. Decis xx.
s.

Clement without Temple bar, diocis London, Patron the Bishop of Excester.
Decis.

Clare Systers, Minores without Algate, in the suburbs of London.

Christofer by the Stokkys, diocis London, Patron the Bishop of London. The
decis xxix. s. viii. d.

Dominick Friar Pryechers of London at Ludgate

Dunstan in the Est, diocis Canterbury, Patron Prior of Crichirche in
Canterbury. The Decis.

Dunstan the West, diocis London, Patron the Abbot of Alnewik. The decis xx. s.

Deonise in Fanchirche stret, diocis Canterbury, Patron the Bishop of
Canterbury, and the Priour of Crichirche of Canterbury. Decis.

EEdmond without Newgate, called Saint Sepulcre, diocis London, Patron Priour
of Saint Barthilmewes. Decis x. s.

Edmond in Lombardys street, diocis London, Patron Priour of Chrichirche in
London. Decis xx. s.

Ethelborugh within Bisshopsgate, diocis London, Patron Priouresse of Saint
Helyne. The decis.

FAith within Powles, diocis London, Patrons Deane and Chapter of London. The
decis xx. s. Foster in Fosterlane, diocis Cant. Patron Bishop of Canterbury.
The decis.

Fraunces within Newgate Freers.

GRegory by Powles, diocis London, apropred to the pety Chanons of Poules. The
decins xx. s. Giles without Crepilgate. diocis London, Patrons Deane and
Chapter of Powles. The decins xx. s.

George in Pudding lane, diocis London, Patron Abbot of Bermonsey. The decins.

George in Southwerke, diocis Winchester, Patron Abbot of Bermonsey. The desine.

Gilis, an Hospital beyond Holborne.

HEleyne, Prioury of Nuns within Bishopsgate. The decin xvii. s. iiii. d.

Heleyne paryschyrche within Bisshopsgate, diocis London, the Prioures of Saint
Heleyn Parson.

Heleyne beside Martlane, a Prioury of crossed Freers.

John's, an Hospital beside west Smithfield of London.

John Zachary, diocis London, Patrons Deane and Chapter of Poules. The decin
xx. s.

John Evangelist in Friday stret, diocis Canterbury, Patron Priour of
Crichirche of Canterbury. The decis.

John's in Walbroke, diocis London, Patron Prioures of Saint Helene. The decis
x. s. viii. d.

James at Garlykhith, diocis London, Patron Abbot of Westminster. The decins
ix. s. iiii. d.

James an Hermitage within Crepilgate.

James an Hospitale beside Charingcrosse.

James parish Church within the Prioury of Halywell.

John's of Halywell without Bishopsgate, a Pryoures of Nonnes.

KAterine on the Towrehill, Master and Colege, the King Patron.

Katerine Chapel beside Charingcrosse, an Hermitage.

Katerine Chirch within Algate, diocis London, Patron Priour of Crichirch in
London. The decis.

Katerine Colman within Algate.

LEonard in Estchep, diocis Canterbury, Patron the Priour of Crichirche in
Canterbury. The decis.

Leonard in Fosterlane, diocis London, Patron Deane of Saint Martins grant.
The decis xvii. s. iiii. d.

Leonard in Shordich, diocis London, belonging to the Archdeken of London. The
decis.

Laurence Pultendy, diocis London, Patron Duke of Suffolk. The decis xx. s.

Laurence in the Jury, diocis London, Patron Bailey Colege of Oxford. The decis.

MAry at Bow, diocis Canterbury, Patron Bishop of Canterbury. Decis.

Mary Aldirmary Chirch in Watlingstrete, diocis Canterbury, Patron Bishop of
Canterbury. The decins.

Mary Bothhawe by the Erber, diocis Canterbury, Patron Priour of Crichirch of
Canterbury. The decins.

Mary Colchirche, diocis London, Patron Master of Saint Thomas of Acres. The
decins.

Mary Staininglane, diocis London, Patron Prioures of Clerkenwell.

Mary in Aldermanbury, diocis London, Patron Priour of Elsinge spitell. Decis
xvii. s. iiii. d.

Mary Wolnothe in Lumbardstrete, diocis London, Patron Priours of S. Heleyn.
The decis xxiiii. s.

Mary Abchirche, diocis London, Patron Master of Saint Laurence Pulteney. The
decins v. s. iiii. d.

Mary Wulchirche, diocis London, the Abbot of Saint John's Colchester Patron.
The decins xxiiii. s.

Mary Foundchirche, diocis London, Priour of Crichirche Patron in London. The
decins xvii. s. iiii. d.

Mary Somerset, diocis London, Patron Deane and Chapter of Poules. The decis.

Mary on the Hill, diocis London, Patron Page of Dortford in Kent, Gentleman.
The decins xxiiii. s.

Mary at Ax, diocis London, Patron Prioures of Saint Helyns. Dec.

Mary Mounthawe, diocis London, Patron the Bishop of Herford. The dec.

Mary Matfelow, diocis London, Patron Bishop of London. The decis.

Mary at the Stronde cross, diocis London, Patron Bishop of Wurceter. The
deocis.

Mary in Fletstrete, a priory of white Freers.

Mary Chapel by Berking church.

Mary de grace, an Abbey of Monks by the Tower of London.

Mary Priory of Elsingspitell within Crepelgate.

Mary the new Hospital without Bisshopsgate.

Mary salutacion Chartyrhous, by West Smitfelde in London.

Mary Hospital of Bedleem without Bisshopsgate.

Mary over the ree in Southwerke, a Priory of Chanons.

Mary, called S. Mary Spitell, without Bisshopsgate.

Mary Magdalenen in Milkstreete, diocis London, Patron Deane and Chapter of
Poules. The decis xx. s.

Mary Magdalenen in old Fishstrete, diocis London, Patron Deane and Chapter
of Poules. Dec. xiii. s. iiii. d.

Mary Magdalenen by Bermonsey, diocis Winchester, Patron Abbot of Bermonsey.

Mary Magdalenen by Saint Mary over the Ree, diocis Winchester, Patron the
Prior of Saint Mary over the Ree. The decis.

Mary Magdalenen at Tuthill, called Lawless.

Martin Otyrwich, diocis London, Patrons Wardens of Taylours. The decis xvii.
s. iiii. d.

Martin Pomers in Irmonger lane, diocis London, Patron Priour of Saint
Bartilmews. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d.

Martin in the Vintre, diocis London, Patron the Abbot of Glouceter. The decis
xxvi. s. viii. d.

Martyn by Ludgat, diocis London, Patron Abbot of Westminster. Decis xxvi. s.
viii. d.

Martyn Orgar in Candilwykstrete, diocis london, Patron Deane and Chapter of
Powles. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d.

Martyn in the field beside Charingcrosse.

Magnes by london bridge, diocis london, patron the Abbot of Westminster and
Bermonsey. The decis xxv. s. viii. d.

Matthew in Frydaystrete, diocis london, patron the Abbot of Westminster. The
decis xx. s.

Margret in Lothbury, diocis london, patrones Abbeys of Berkinge in Essex. The
dec.

Margret in Brydgstrete, diocis london, patron Abbot of Winchester. The dec.

Margret Moses in Friday street, diocis london, the King patron. The decis
xxvi. s. viii. d.

Margret patens, diocis london, patron Mayor and Aldermen of london. The dec.

Margret in Southwerk, diocis Winchester, patron the priour of Saint Mary over
the ree. The desine.

Margret at Westminster.

Mildredys in bredstrete, diocis london, patron the priour of Saint Mary over
the ree. The decins xvii. s. iiii. d.

Mildrede in the pultry, diocis london, patron priour of Saint Mary over the
Ree. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d.

Mihell in Cornehyll, diocis london, patron Abbot of Eyuesham. The decins
liii. s. iiii. d.

Michell in Bassingys hawe, diocis london, patron Deane and Chapytur of
powles. The decins xiii. s. iiii. d.

Mighell by Quenehyth, diocis london, patron Deane and Chapitur of powles. The
decis xx. s.

Michell Querene by powles gate, diocis london, partone Deane and Chapitur of
powles. The decis.

Michell in Woodstrete, diocis london.

Michell in Crokedlane, diocis Canter. patron bishop of Canter. Decins.

Michell pater noster Whittyngton College, diocis Canter. patrones Wardens of
Mercers. The decins.

NIcholas Cold Abbey, diocis london.

Nicholas Oluf in bredstrete, diocis london, patron Deane and Chapitur of
powles. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d.

Nicholas Acon by Lumbardstrete, diocis london, patron Abbot of Malmesbury.
The decis xx. s.

Nicholas in Fleshhamels, diocis london, patrons the King and the Abbot of
Westminster. The decis xl. s.

OLuf in Silverstrete, diocis london.

Oluf in the Old Jury, diocis london, patron priour of bottle in suffolk.
The decis. x. s.

Oluf by the crossed Friars, diocis london, patron Cely in Martlane. The decis
xx. s.

Oluf in Southwarke, diocis Winchester, patron priour of Lews in Southsex. The
decis.

Owyn within Newgate, diocis london, patron lord of Saint Jones Ierl. The
decis.

Powles the Cathedral Church of london, Deane and Residences.

Peter in Cornehill, diocis london, Patrons Mayor and Aldermen of london. The
decis xxvi. s. viii. d.

Peter in West Chepe, diocis london Patron Abbot of Saint Albons. The decis
xx. s.

Peter the Poor, diocis london.

Peter the little at Powles wharfe diocis london, Patrons Deane and Chapitur of
Powlis. The decis xvii. s. iiii. d.

Pancrasse in Nedeler lane, diocis Canter. Patron bishop of Canter. decis
Pancrasse in the field.

Peter within the Towr of london.

Peter of Westminster, Abbey of black Monkys.

STephan in Walbrok, diocis london, Master Lee of the same Parish Patron.
The decis xiii. s. iiii. d.

Stephan in Colmanstret, diocis london, Patron Priour of botle in Sulfelde. The
decis x. s.

Stephan a College and the Kings Chapel at Westmonster.

Stephan in Candilwikstrete, diocis London, Patron Priour of Cottington. The
decis xx. s.

Saluator of Bermonsey, an Abbey of black Monks.

TRinite called Crichirch, within Algate of London, a Priory.

Trinite in Knight riders street, diocis London, Patron Deane and Chapitur of
Powles. The decis xx. s.

Thomas of Acres, a College in west chepe.

Thomas Appostell, parish Chirch in the Ryall.

Thomas, a Spitall in Southwerke.

Thomas Martyr, a Chapel on London bridge.

Corpus Cristi Chapel, in the Pultry of London.

Corpus Cristi Chapel, in the College of Saint Laurence Pulteney.

Trinite Chapel upon the Charnehill, in the Chirch hawe of Saint Michell in
Crokedlane.

The Chapel upon the Charnehill in the Chirch hawe of Saint Powles in London.

The Chapel of Saint Thomas in pardon Chirch haw, London.

The Chapel upon the Charnell in the Church hawe of Saint Dunstan in the Este.

The Chapel of the Guilde hall in London, called Saint Nichans.

The Chapel upon the Charnell, at Mary Spitall without Bisshopsgate.

The litell Chapel of Bedlem without Bisshopsgate.

The litell Chapel upon the Charnell, in the Chirch hawe of Saint Thomas in
Southwerke.

The Chapel in the Church hawe at Chartirhous.

The frary Chapel beside Saint John's Jerusalem, called Vrsula.

The Chapel without Temple bare, called Saint Spirit.

The Chap. of our Lady at Rounceuale.

The Chapel within Barthelmew Spitell.

THE REMAINS OR REMNANTS OF DIVERSE WORTHY THINGS, which should have had their
due place and honor in this Work, if promising friends had kept their words.

But they failing, and part of them coming to my hands by other good means,
they are here inserted, to accompany my Perambulation four miles about London.

LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth Purslow, and are to be sold by Nicholas Bourne,
at his Shop, at the South Entrance of the ROYAL EXCHANGE. 1633.

The College of Gods-Gift, at Dulwich, in the County of Surry: founded,
raised, and builded, at the cost and charges of Master EDWARD ALLEYNE, Esquire,
in Anno Dom. 1614.
THe thirteenth day of September, How the College was confirmed and
established by the Founder himself.
being Monday, Anno 1619. the College of Gods-gift in Dulwich, consisting of
one Master, one Warden, and four Fellows; three of which are persons
Ecclesiastical, and the fourth a skillful Organist. Moreover, twelve aged
poor people, and twelve poor children; Master Edward Aileyne, publicly and
audibly, in the Chapel of the said College, did read and publish one Writing
Quadrupartite in Parchment, bearing date the day and year forementioned.
Whereby he did make, create, erect, found, and establish the said College,
according to the power and liberty given him by his Majesty's Letters Patents,
under his great Seal, bearing date at Westminster the 21. of June, in the
year abovesaid. When he had read and published the said Writing, he subscribed
it with his name, and then fixed his Scale to every part of the Quadrupartite
writing, in the presence and hearing of these witnesses:

Frances Lord Verulam, Lord Chancellor of England, and one of his Majesty's
Privy Council.

Thomas Earl of Arundell, Knight of the Garter, Earl Marshall of England, and
one of his Majesty's Privy Council.

Sir Edward Cecill, Knight, alias General Cecill, second Son to Thomas
Excester.

Sir John Howland, Knight, and high Sheriff of the Counties of Sussex and
Surry.

Sir Edmund Bowyer of Cammerwell, Knight.

Sir Tho. Grymes of Peckham, Knight.

Sir John Bodly of Stretham, Knight.

Sir John Tonstal of Cashaulten, Knight.

And diverse other persons of great and worthy respect. The disposing of the
four Writings.
The four Quadrupartite Writings forenamed, were ordered to four several
Parishes.

viz. Saint Betolphs without Bishopsgate. Saint Giles without Cripplegate.
Saint Saviors in Southwarke. And the Parish of Cammerwell.

A brief recital of the particulars.
Recital of King James his Letters Patents.

Recital of the Founders deed Quadrupartite.

Ordination of the Master, Warden, etc.

Ordination of the assistant members, etc.

The Master and Warden to be unmarried, etc.

The Master and Warden to be one and twenty years of age at the least.

Of what degrees the Fellows ought to be.

Of what condition the poor Brothers and Sisters ought to be.

Of what condition the poor Scholars ought to be.

Of what Parishes ought the Assistants to be.

Of what Parishes the poor are to be taken, and members of the College.

The form of their election.

The Warden to supply, when the Masters place is void.

The election of the Warden.

The Warden to be bound by Recognizance.

The Warden to provide a dinner at his election of his own charges.

The manner of investing the Fellows.

The manner of electing the Scholars.

Election of the poor of Cammerwell.

The Master and Wardens Oath.

The Fellows Oath.

The poor Brothers and Sisters Oath.

The Assistants Oath.

The pronunciation of admission.

The Masters Office.

The Wardens Office.

The Fellows Office.

The poor Brothers and Sisters Office

The Matron of the poor Scholars.

The Porters Office.

The Office of the thirty members.

Of Residency.

Orders for the poor, and their goods

Of obedience.

Orders for the Chapel and burial.

Orders for the School and Scholars, and placing of poor Scholars forth.

Order of Diet.

The Scholars Surplices and Coats.

Time for viewing Expenses.

Public Audit, and private sitting days.

Audit and Treasure Chamber.

Of Lodgings.

Orders for the Lands and Woods.

The Master and Warden allowed diet for one man apiece; and what Servants for
the College, and their wages.

Disposition and division of the Revenues.

Disposition of the Rent of the blue house.

The poor to be taken out of any other Parish or County, in case none be found
capable in the Parishes prescribed.

The disposition of forfeitures.

The Statutes to be read over four several times in the year.

The disposition of certain Tenements in Saint Saviors Parish, and Southwarke.

A brief Remembrance of such Noble and Charitable deeds, as have been done by
the late Right Honorable, Baptist Lord Hicks, Viscount Campden, as well in his
life as at his death: Recorded to the glory of God, his own honor, and good
example of others.
Good deeds done to the Town of Campden, in the County of Gloucester.
HE built an Almes-house or Hospital for six poor men, and six poor women,
which cost 1000. li.

Since the year of the foundation of the said Almes-house, to wit, 1612. he
has allowed the said twelve poor people weekly maintenance, to the value of
1300. li.

And at his death, he has settled 140. li. per annum, (for ever) upon the said
Almes-house, allowing to each of the said poor Pentioners three shillings
four pence weekly; and yearly, a Gown, a Hat, and a Tun of Coals.

He built a commodious Market-house in the said Town, which cost 90. li.

By his last Will, he gave to the said Town, for the setting of the poor to
work, a Stock of 500. li.

To the Church of Campden.
He gave a Bell which cost threescore and six pounds.

He caused a Pulpit to be made, and gave a Cloth and Cushion thereto, which
cost two and twenty pounds.

He built a Gallery there, which cost eight pounds.

He made a Window, which cost thirteen pounds.

He gave a brass Faulcon, which cost six and twenty pounds.

He gave two Communion Cups, which cost one and twenty pounds.

He built the Roof of the Chancell, and new leaded it, which cost 200. li.

He repaired the Chapel by the said Chauncell, supplied and new cast the
Leads, which cost 20. li.

He round walled the Churchyard, which cost 150. li.

Within the County of Middlesex.
He built a Sessions house for the Justices of Middlesex, to keep their
Sessions in, which cost 600. li.

He repaired and adorned the Chapel of Hampsted, which cost threescore and
sixteen pounds.

He caused a Window to be set up in the Chancell of Kensington, and beautified
it, which cost 30. li.

He has given by his last Will to the said Town of Kensington, to be employed
for the benefit of the poor, the sum of 200. li.

In the City of London.
He has given by his last Will to Saint Bartholmewes Hospital, 100. li.

To Christ's Church Hospital, 50. li.

To Newgate, Ludgate, and the two other prisons of the Counters, 40. li.

He erected a Window in Saint Laurence Church in the Old Iewry, and gave a
Pulpit Cloth, and a Cushion also, which cost 30. li.

Impropriations purchased, and bestowed upon the Church.
One in Pembrokeshire, to be given to the Town of Tewkesbury in
Gloucestershire; whereof one moity goes to the Preacher, and the other moity
to the poor, which cost 460. li.

Another in Northumberland; whereof one moity is to be given toward the
maintenance of an able Preacher in Hampsted, the other moity to Saint Paul's
School in London, toward the maintenance of certain Scholars in Trinity
College in Cambridge, which cost 760. li.

One in the Bishopric of Durham, to be bestowed on such Churches as shall
have most need thereof; according to the disposition of the Supervisers, which
cost 366. li.

Another in Dorsetshire, to be bestowed in the like manner, which cost 760. li.

Certain Chauntry Lands also in Lincolneshiere, which cost 240. li.

He has also given to two Ministers, to be chosen out of Jesus College in
Oxenford, to serve in their several places, 40. li. each man per annum, which
cost 80. li.

He has bequeathed Legacies to several Ministers, the sum of 140. li.

He has given to Master A. E. during his life, yearly the sum of 100. li.

He has given among his household servants the sum of 300. li.

An Epitaph made in his Memorial.
Reader, know,
who-ere thou be,
Here lies Faith, Hope,
and Charity,
Faith true, Hope firm,
Charity free,
Baptist, Lord Campden,
was these three.
Faith in God,
Charity to Brother,
Hope for himself,
what ought he other?
Faith is no more,
Charity is crowned,
It Is only Hope
is under ground.
Upon a Tomb in the Temple Church in London.
Here lies the body of Anne Littleton, Wife of Edward Littleton, of the Inner
Temple, Esquire, son and heir of Sir Edward Littleton of Henley, in the
County of Salop, Knight; daughter of John Littleton of Franckley, in the County
of Worcester, Esquire, by Meriel, the daughter of Sir Thomas Bomley, Knight,
Lord Chancellor of England. She died the vj. day of February 1623. on whom was
made this Epitaph:

Here she lies, whose spotless fame
invites a stone to learn her name.
The rigid Spartan, that denied
an Epitaph to all that died,
Unless for War or Chastity;
would here vouchsafe an Elegy.
She did a Wife, but yet her mind
(beyond Virginity refinde)
From lawless fire remained as free,
as now from heat her as^es be.
Her husband (yet without a sin)
was not a stranger, but her kin,
That her chaste Love might seem no other,
unto a husband then a brother.
Keep well this pawn, thou marble chest,
till it be called for, let it rest:
For while this Jewel here is set,
The grave is but a Cabinet.
Upon a Tomb in the Chancell in Saint Botolphs Aldersgate.
She died a Virgin on Whitsunday, Anno Domini 1622. about eighteen years of
age, and having at her death a spiritual combat with Satan about her
Salvation, wherein she prevailing most cheerfully, departed from Earth to
Heaven, to be married to Christ Jesus the Lord of both.

At the bottom.
The Monument of Mistres Iudeth Plat, the only Daughter of Sir Hugh Plat,
Knight, with the matches of her Ancestors, and near Allies on her Father and
Mothers side; as also her lineall Descent from the ancient Earls of Surry,
Huntingdon, Arundell and Chester, and her spiritual conquest at her death
against Satan.

This Tomb is in Saint Brides Church.
Here rests the body of Sir George Curzon, of Croxall, in the County of
Derby, descended from ancient Gentry, and of long continuance in that place;
who, like the Race from whence he came, was a man of upright life, religious
and hospitable; He took to Wife Mary, the daughter of Sir Richard Leveson, of
Lelleshull, in the County of Salop, Knight, by whom he had Walter, who died
young, and Mary, then his only Daughter and Heir, who was married to Edward
Sackvill, Earl of Dorset, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter; which
Lady caused this Monument to be here infixed, to the sacred memory of her dear
Father. He departed this life the 17. of November, 1622.

This Tomb stands in Saint Giles Cripplegate Church.
Memoriae Sacrum.
Here lies the body of Matthew Palmer, Esquire, who died the 18. of May, 1605.
together with Anne his Wife, who died the last day of June, 1630. by whom he
had four Sons and one Daughter, viz. Thomas Palmer, his eldest Son, deceased
the fifth of May, 1631. and here also buried: Elizabeth, Edward, Andrew, and
Ralfe, who when as it so pleases God, desire this place for the custody of
their bodies likewise, till their assured and glorious Resurrection.

This Monument stands in St. Andrews Church in Holborne.
Antiquo Stemate Nobilis, avitis suis virtutibus clarius; hic jacet Johannes
Ashburnham, nuper de Ashburnham miles, qui obijt in festo Sancti Petri, 1620.
Aetatis 49. Relictis conjuges charissimis Iohanne, Gulielmo; Elizabeth,
Francisca, Anna, and Catherina.

Domina Eliz. Ashburnham.

Vidua F. Thomae Beamount de Staughton in Com. Leicestr. Milit. Hoc amori and
officio consulens, meritissimo viri lugubris posuit, 1621.

This Tomb was made 1629. and stands in the Temple Church.
Memoriae Sacrum.
Here rests the body of Clement Coke, of Langford, in the County of Derby,
Esquire, youngest Son of Sir Edward Coke, Knight, late chief Justice of
England; and of Bridget his Wife, Daughter and Co-heire of John Paston of
Paston, in the County of Norfolk, Esquire: this Clement married Sara, Daughter
and Co-heire of Alexander Rediche of Rediche, in the County of Lancaster,
Esquire, and of Katherine his Wife, sole daughter and Heir of Humphrey Dethick
of Newal, in the County of Derby, Esquire, and had issue by the said Sara,
living at his death, Edward Robert, Bridget, and Avise: he in the Inner Temple
being a Fellow of the same, Christianly and comfortably in his flourishing age,
yielded up his soul to the Almighty, the three and twentieth of May, Anno Dom.
1629.

This Monument stands in Christ's Church, and was made 1627.
Near unto this place lies buried the body of Nicholas Beamount, of
Cole-Overton, in the County of Leicester, Esquire, and Anne his Wife, the
Daughter of William Saunders, of Welfard, in the County of Northamton, Esquire,
by whom he had issue four Sons and two Daughters, viz. Henry, Francis,
Thomas, and Hunting, Dorothy, and Katherine; the said Nicholas died the fourth
of November, 1598. His Wife died the tenth of February, 1591. In remembrance of
whom, this Monument was erected at the care and cost of Elizabeth Lady
Ashburnham, Widow, late Wife of Sir John Ashburnham, Knight, Daughter to Sir
Thomas Beamount of Staughton, in the County aforesaid; their third son, at
the appointment of her Uncle, Master Francis Beamount, Esquire, their second
Son, to whom the Erector hereof was Executrix.

This Tomb was made 1631. and stands near the South door in Westminster.
Michael Draiton, Esquire, a memorable Poet of this age, exchanged his Laurel
for a Crown of glory, Anno Dom. 1631.

Do pious Marble, let thy Readers know,
What they, and what their children owe
To Draitons name, whose sacred dust
We recommend unto thy trust:
Protect his Memory, and preserve his Story,
Remain a lasting Monument of his glory:
And when thy Ruins shall disclaim,
To be the Treasurer of his Name:
His Name that cannot fade, shall be
An everlasting Monument to thee.
The Foundation of the Armory of that remarkable Nurcery of Military
Discipline, called the Artillery Garden London, was begun to be erected the
first day of May, An. Dom. 1622. and was finished the last day of November then
next following, Colonel Hugh Hammersley being then President, Edward Pierce
Treasurer, Henry Petowe Marshall, and John Bingham Esquire, Captain, and one
of the Council of war for this Kingdom.
Upon which Monument these Lines following were composed.

Londons Honor, and her Citizens approved Love, exercising Arms in the
Artillery Garden London.
The Fabric. THis Architecture, Phoenix of our age, (All Europe cannot show
her Equipage) Is Mars his Mistress, which retains the store Of Mars his
Arms, being Mars his Paramore, This Fabric was by Mars his Soldiers framed,
And Mars his Armory's this Building named.

The Soldiers Honuor. It holds five hundred Arms to furnish those, That love
their Sovereign, and will daunt His foes, They spend their time, and do not
spare for cost, To learn the use of Arms, there is nothing lost; Both time and
coin to do their Country good, They Will spend it freely, and will lose their
blood.

The Aldermans Love. Our City London is a Royal thing, For it is called the
Chamber of our King; Whose worthy Senate we must not forget, Their Grant and
our Request together met, They cherrish us, and we do honor them; Where
Soldiers find true love, they will love again.

The Ground. The Ground whereon this building now does stand, The Teasell
ground has heretofore been named.

The Donor of the ground. And William, Pryor of the Hospital, Then of our
blessed Lady, which we call Saint Mary Spittle without Bishopsgate, Did pass
it by Indeuture, bearing date, Ianuaries third day, in Henry's time, The eighth
of that name, the Covent did conjoyne.

The Use. Unto the Guyle of all Artillery, Crosse-bowes, Hand-guns, and of
Archery,

The term of years. For full three hundred years excepting three, The time
remaining we shall never see.

The Councels confirmation. Now have the Noble Council of our King, Confirmed
the same, and under Charles his wing, We now do exercise, and of that little
Teasell ground, we enlarged Saint Mary Spittle, Trees we cut down, and Gardens
added to it, Thanks to the Lords that gave us leave to do it.

A loyal Subjects desire. Long may this work endure, and never decay, But be
supported till the latest day. All loyal Subjects to the King and State, Will
say Amen, mauger Spleen or Hate.

Mariscallus Petowe composuit.

On a Tomb in the South wall of Saint Botolphs Church without Aldersgate,
London.
Near to this place lies buried the body of Pierce Edgcombe, in the County of
Devon, Gentleman, who deceased the 8. day of July, 1628. in assured hope of a
joyful Resurrection.

Behold the end of Dust and Clay,
O thou which live with living eye,
Yet does his soul for ever reign
With Christ, which he by faith did gain:
In Learning he his time did spend,
And Virtue was the only end;
So long before his glass was run,
With World and Vanity he had done.
A. E. Frater ejus.

In Saint Botolphs Church, on a Tomb there.
Here lies the body of Christopher Tamworth, of Grayes-Inne, in Holborne, in
the County of Middlesex, Esquire, third Son of Christopher Tamworth of
Halsted, in the County of Leicester, Esquire, who died the 19 of September,
1624. being of the age of threescore and ten years.

HE having dealt kindly and liberally with his Wife, and many of his kindred
and friends, and to the poor of diverse Parishes, has also by his Will given
xx. li. of current money of England, to the Deane and Prebends of the College
of Saint Peter's of the City of Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, to be
employed by them about the reparations of the said College Church of Saint
Peter's.

And 400. marks, to the intent that with that money, there should be twenty
marks worth of Lands of inheritance of yearly rent to be purchased, whereby
there may be one in holy Orders maintained, to say Divine Service, such as the
Church of England shall allow of, every work day in the year, twice
perpetually, viz. at or about nine of the clock in the morning, and at or
about three of the clock in the afternoon, in the Parish Church of Saint
Botolphs without Aldersgate, London.

And 400. li. to the end and intent that there should be 20. li. of lands of
annual Revenew, of inheritance by the year bought with it, to allow
perpetually to six poor men, and four poor Widows past labor, dwelling
and inhabiting within the Parish of Saint Botolph aforesaid, 40. shillings a
year apeece, to be paid quarterly, with this limitation, that the said poor
people shall be bound to repair every work day in the year twice a day, to
hear Divine Service in the Parish Church aforesaid, at the hours and terms
aforesaid.

And 200. marks more to purchase Lands of inheritance of the annual value by
the year of 6. li. 3. s. 4. d. for the maintenance of one within holy Orders,
to say divine Service as aforesaid, every work day in the week twice, through
the whole year perpetually, in the Parish Church of Saint Martins in
Leicester, in the County of Leicester aforesaid, at the hourses and times before
mentioned.

All which said sums of money he willed should be actually and really
delivered into the hands and possession of the Deane and Prebends of
Westminster aforesaid, within xx. days next immediately after his death, for
the performance and use before mentioned, within the space and time of two
years at the uttermost, after his death.

And having made Audrey, one of the Daughters of Charles Allayne of the Mote,
in the County of Kent, Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Christopher Allayne,
Knight, his dear and loving Wife, his full Executrix, she faithfully performed
the same, according to the trust reposed on her by her Husbands Will: and in
remembrance of him, has at her own cost and charges erected this Monument.

The Gift of Sir Paul Pinder to Saint Paul's Church in London.
SIR Paul Pinder Knight, in the time of King James, his Majesty's Ambassador
many years, resident at Constantinople with the great Turk, has of sat, to
the glory of God, to the delight and content of all good Protestants, and for
the better expression of his love and zeal to true Religion, beautifully and
bountifully with great costs and charges, repaired the old decayed stone work
of the Westfront of the Chancell in Saint Paul's Church in London, adorning the
outside thereof with many fair polished pillars of black Marble, and with
curious carved Statues of Kings and Bishops, the first Founders and Benefactors
of the whole Fabric, and also graced the inside thereof with diverse Angels
and other ornaments; he has likewise amended and repaired all the decays and
defects of the Wainscot work of the Quier, and has further beautified the
same with a fair rail of Wainscot, and a great number of Cherubins
artificially carved: all which work he has caused to be sumptuously gilded and
painted with rich colors in Oil; he has also magnificently clothed the
whole Quier, and the upper part of the Presbytery, with fair and chargeable
Tapestry-Hangings: Whose godly and pious example, will (I hope) excite and
stir up other Religious and well-minde Gentlemen, and Citizens, to perform
some acts of piety and bounty toward the reparation of the same Church.

Of the ancient Court of the Hustings.
I Find it diversely written in Latin, Hustingum, Hustingus, Hustingia, and
sometimes (but falsely) Hustangus. It is the ancientest and the highest Court
of Justice, of the famous City of London. The name it takes from the place of
keeping that Court (as Prytaneum did at Athens) for (...) (hus) among the old
Saxons, signified an house, and (...) dhing or thing, a Cause or Plea; so that
(...) Husthing, signified the house of Causes or Pleadings: whereupon in the
Saxon tongue (...), Thingere, Thingarius, signified an Advocate or Lawyer:
which others would perchance derive rather from (...) or (...) thung, or
gedhung, which signified Honorable, for that the most honorable Magistrates of
the City, held their Court there; like as the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs, and in
absence of the Sheriffs, six of the Aldermen at this day do.

The Antiquity of this famous Court of Hustings, is much magnified by the
Compiler of King Edwards Laws, cap. 35. in these words: There ought always in
the City of London, which is the head City of the Kingdom and of the Laws, to
be held upon every This is altered unto Tuesday, because of the Sheriffs
intending of the Markets: which being kept upon Monday, would hinder their
sitting in the Hustings.
Monday weekly, a Court of our Sovereign Lord the King, at the Huststings.
This Court was founded and built of old, after the fashion and manner, yea and
in the memory of the ancient City of Troy: and even unto this day contains it
within it self the Laws, and rights, and dignities, liberties, and customs
Royal of that ancient and great Troy. There be handled the intricatest Compta
perchance the word signifies Measures rather tha^ Accounts: for Compotus ager,
is a field surveighed, whose quantities were set down in the Land mark or
Terrier: and here perchance was kept a general surveigh of all the Lands of
the Kingdom, as now in the Domes-day Book in the Exchequer. The form
whereof, the Conqueror perchance took from the Hustings.
accounts and the doubtful Pleas of the Crown, and of the Court of our Lord
the King, of the whole Kingdom aforesaid: and this Court has even to this day
preserved her own ancient Customs most inviolably. Thus far my Author, who
(by his leave) smells too rankly of that Fabler, Geffery of Munmouth.

And yet something there is in the Hustings, which might give countenance to
this comparison of old Troy, namely, that the well-knowne weight used for Gold
and Silver, called Troy-weight, was in time of the Saxons called, The Hustings
weight of London, and kept there in the Hustings. So an ancient Record in the
book of Ramsey, Sect. 32 and 127. I Aethelgina Countess, etc. bequeath two
silver Cups of twelve marks of the Hustings weight of London.

The former Law of the said King Edward the Confessor, commands the Hustings
Court to be held every Monday, though at this day it be held upon the Tuesday:
which that it may not be perceived by the Monuments and Rolls of the Court, to
have differed too much from the first Institution, is yet said and written, to
be holden upon the Monday. It is as it were distinguished into two Courts: for
one week the Judges sit upon Pleas merely real, and the next week upon
Actions mixed, or of any other nature whatsoever.

Out of the same Book of Ramsey Abbey, Sect. 268. will I here set down the
ancient form of purchasing and giving of possession used in the Hustings:
which is far different from the fashion used at this day. Be it known unto
all the sons of holy Church, that Wlfnoth of Walebroc, London, have sold unto
Reynold, Abbot of Ramsey, a certain piece of land which he had Super Walbroc.
in Walebroc, whence he was called Wlfnoth of Walbroc. As also a certain house
of stone, and a Shop which he had built upon that land, with doors of iron,
and windows above and beneath, etc. Which said Wlfnoth has sold that Land
unto the Abbot of Ramsey, and has given him seisin of it, by delivery of a
certain staff, and has Et clamavit solam and quietam, and absque omni
calumpnia.
quite claimed unto it to all encumbrance: quiet, and void of all encumbrance:
both he, and Mahald his Wife and his first wives Daughter: and Mahald his
second Wife, and Henry his son by his second wife, and Christine her
daughter, before the whole Husting of London, in the house of Alfwine, son of
Leofstan: to be held from this day forth for ever by the Church of Ramsey, in
consideration of ten pounds of pence, which he gave unto him in presence of
the whole Court of Hustings; of which ten pounds, he the said Wolfnoth gave
forty shillings unto Maud his daughter for her Propter concessum suum. For
giving up her right in it, perchance.
good will, because he had the Land by her Mother. And the Abbot for his part
gave her half a mark of silver; and unto Wlfnoths Wife, and other two
children, for their good wills, he gave five shillings. Of this bargain and
sale, be on the part of the Hustings these witnesses, William of Einesford,
Sheriff of London, and John his Vnder-Sheriffe, and Gervase his Clarke; Andrew
Bucuint, and Ralfe his son, and Ralfe his cousin; Gilbert Proudfoot, William
Bukerell, and many others.

This deed has no date mentioned, but I find this Reinold to have been made
Abbot of Ramsey, by King Henry the first as his Charter shows, Sect. 214. The
Successor to this Reinold was one Walter but what year he was made Abbot in, I
find not; but I find that he flourished Anno, 1149. that is, the fourteenth
year of King Stephen. By this may you judge of the antiquity of the deed,
though the precise day be not dated.

By this passage it clearly appears, that London was honored with her
Sheriffs Office, even in the age of King Henry the Which was above 500. years
since.
first, although our Chroniclers affirm the Sheriffs to be made first by King
Richard Which was almost 100. years after.
the first, at his coming to the Crown: from whose time our said Chroniclers
begin to reckon the first Mayor and Sheriffs, that is, from the year of our
Lord 1189. But that the Sheriffs were granted unto the City, together with the
County of Middlesex, plainly appears by the said Kings Charter concerning the
liberties of London, given in the beginning of his Reign: nor do the Mayor
and Sheriffs much differ from those former Magistrates of the City, the
Portreve, and Provost, as might be proved.

Moreover, the Cities, of York, Winchester, Lincoln, the I Will of Shepey, with
other Buroughs and Cities, are also said to have had their Hustings. See
Fleta. Lib. 2. cap. 55.

A brief Collection how the Court of Request, commonly called the Court of
Conscience, in London, has been established and continued for many years
past, for the relief of poor Debtors in London, and the Liberties thereof,
viz.
FIrst, Anno 9. H. 8.
I find that primo February, Anno 9. H. 8. an Act of Common Council was made,
The first beginning of the said Court.
that the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the same City for the time being, should
monthly assign and appoint two Aldermen, and four discreet Commoners to be
Commissioners to sit in the same Court twice a week, viz. Wednesday, and
Saturday, there to hear and determine all matters brought before them between
party and party, (being Citizens and Freemen of London) in all cases where the
due debt or damage did not exceed forty shillings.

This Act was to continue but for two years then next ensuing: But being found
charitable and profitable for the relief of such poor Debtors as were not
able to make present payment of their debts; The reasons why the said Court
has had continuation.
and to restrain malicious persons, from proceeding in their wilful Suits:
and also to be a great ease and help to such poor persons as had small debts
owing to them, and were not able to prosecute Suits in Law for the same
elsewhere: Other Acts made since to the same purpose.
The same Act has sithence bin continued by diverse other Acts of Common
Council: and hereby (besides the said two Aldermen monthly assigned) the
number of Commissioners were increased, from four to twelve. And so by that
Authority, the same Court continued till the end of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, etc.

And then diverse people, being Citizens and Freemen of London (contrary to
their Oaths formerly taken) repining at the authority of the same court, and
not regarding the expense of any charges how great soever, so they might have
their desires upon their poor Debtors, The malicious proceeding of cruel
Creditors against poor men that claimed the benefit of the Court.
and being often animated thereunto by diverse Attorneys and Solicitors (for
their own particular gain) did daily commence Suits, for such petty debts and
causes against poor men (Citizens and Freemen of London) in the high Courts at
Westminster, or elsewhere out of the said Court of Requests, to avoid the
jurisdiction of the same Court, and to bar the said Commissioners from
staying such Suits, and examining the said causes, and thereby caused the said
poor men many times to pay six times as much charges as their principal
debts or damage did amount unto, to the undoing of such poor men, their wives
and children, and also to the filling of the Prisons with the poor so sued:
where otherwise they might have got their Debts in the said Court of Requests,
for very small charge and little trouble.

For remedy whereof, and for the strengthening and establishing the said Court,
an Act of Parliament was then made in Anno primo Iacobi Regis, An. 1. Ian. An
Act of Parliament for confirming the power of the Court.
that every Citizen and Freeman of London, that had, or should have any Debts
owing to him, not amounting to forty shillings, by any Debtors (Citizens and
Free men of London) inhabiting in London or the liberties thereof, should or
might cause such Debtors to be warned to appear before the Commissioners of
the said Court; and that the said Commissioner, or the greater number of them,
should from time to time set down such orders between such parties, Plantiffe
and Defendant, Creditor and Debtor, touching such debts not exceeding forty
shillings, as they should find to stand with equity and good conscience.

But sithence the making of that Act, diverse persons (intending to subvert the
good and charitable intent of the same) have taken hold of some doubtful and
ambiguous words therein, and have wrested the same for their own lucre and
gain, to the avoiding the jurisdiction of the same Court, contrary to the
godly meaning of the said Act.

For remedy whereof, and to the intent that some more full and ample provision
might be made for the further establishing and strengthening of the said
Court, and for the better relief of such poor Debtors; another Act of
Parliament was made, An. 3. l^^.
Anno 3. Ias. whereby the authority of the said Commissioners were much
enlarged, viz. that every Citizen and Freeman of London, An other Act of
Parliament concerning all debts under the sum of forty shillings.
[and every other person and persons inhabiting, or that shall inhabit within
the City of London, or the liberties thereof, being a Tradesman, Victualer, or
Laboring man,] which have or shall have any debts owing to him or them, not
amounting to forty shillings, by any Citizen or Freeman [or by any other person
or persons (being a Victualer, Tradesman, or Laboring man) inhabiting within
the said City, or the Liberties thereof] should or might cause such Debtors to
be warned to appear before the said Commissioners of the said Court of
Requests. And the said Commissioners, or any three, or more of them, shall have
power to set down such Orders between Plaintiff and Defendant, Creditor and
Debtor, touching such debts not amounting to forty shillings, as they shall
find to stand with equity and good conscience. Power of administering an Oath.
Also the said Commissioners, or any three, or more of them, have power (by the
said Act) to minister an Oath to the Creditor or Debtor, and to such Witnesses
as shall be produced on each part: And also to commit to prison in one of the
Counters, such Creditor or Debtor, as shall not appear upon lawful Summons,
or not perform such order as the said Commissioners, or any three, or more of
them shall set down. And by this last Act, the said Court of Requests is
established and continued to this day; and God grant it may so long continue to
the relief of the poor, etc.

Collected by Thomas Griffins, sometimes a Clarke of the same Court, etc.

This Tomb stands in St. Giles Cripplegate Church.
P. M. S.
Virtute, Prudentia, Generis Nobilitate Inclytus, Clarus, Illustris, Hic Iacet.

HENRICUS STAPLETONVS E. Dioecesi Eboracensi,

Acri Wighilnencis Olim Dominus, Aetatis Suae An. 56. ab Incarnato Verbo. 1630.

Decimo Sexto die menfis Feb. V^tam morte mortem Immortali gloria Commutavit,
atque Stipante Amicorum Syrmate collacrymantis, Patriae Cerentium vices, in hac
aede elatus D. Andreae Terrae mandatus est.

MARIA,
Iohannis Fosteri Equitis Aurati, mediorum Angliae finium borialium Custodis,
Filia,

Moestissima hoc Junere vidua, tanti conjugij memor, Artemisianae pietatis
aemula non magnificentia, hoc perpetuum tam meritorum ejus, quam Superstitis
amoris sui, Monumentum Erigit, Consecrat, Dicat.

By his Honourer and Kinsman, Robert Stapleton.

There are thirteen Scutchions of Arms.

Upon a Tomb in Grace Church, being at the corner as you go into Fen-Church
street, with this Inscription.
To the memory of James Bun^e, Esquire, sometime Burgess of the Parliament for
this City, married Mary, daughter of George Holmeden of Kent, Gentleman, by
whom he had seven children, whereof living at the time of his decease, James
his eldest son, who married Sarah, daughter of Thomas Gipps, Esquire, Matthew,
and Mary, wife of Master John Langham, of this City Merchant; he departed this
life the 26. of January, Anno 1631. aged 68.

When death cuts off a branch
from earths worn stem,
Faith, hope, transports the soul
to heavens Di^dem.
On a Gravestone there.
Here lies James Bun^e, Esquire, that departed this life the 26. of January,
Anno 1631. and Mary his wife, that died the second of October, 1612.

Upon a Gravestone in St. Fosters Church in Faringdon Ward within, with this
Inscription on it.
Here lies the bodies of Lawrence Hawes, Citizen and Fishmonger of London,
about 63. years of age, and of Vrs^la his Wife, the daughter of John Hericke,
of Leicester Esquire, 82. years of age; they had issue together five Sons
and two Daughters, Edward, George, Humfrey, John, Dorothy, and Thomasin; he
deceased the ^inth of April, 1588. and she died the 24. of November, 1614.

This Monument stands in Saint Margarets Church in Westminster, and has this
Inscription.
Annae, vxori suae a mantissimae and optimae, Filiae Willielmi Barlowi,
Episcopi Cicestrensis, and Agathae Welsborne, generosae conjugis ejus, diem
suum quinto idus Decembris, Anno Domini 1597. obeunti Westmonasterij, quo virum
ad Parliamentum comitabatur; Harbartus Westfalingus, Episcopus Herefordiensis,
susceptis ex ipsa quinque liberis; Harbarto, qui duxit Franciscam Rudhall
generosam; Anna quae Gulielmo Ieffereys Ar. Margareta, quae Richardo Eedes
wigorniae Decano; Elizabetha, quae Roberto Walweyne generso; and Francisca,
quae Francisco Ienkes generoso nupta est.

In memoriam virtutis, and amoris ipsius posuit.

In the same Church is a new Monument lately erected, in the North I Will, and
this Inscription on it.
In expectation of a joyful Resurrection, near this place rests the body of
Robert Golding, Gentleman, borne in this City of Westminster, and sometime
chief Burgess thereof: His Honesty, and Charitable life, gained good esteem;
his Age, due and deserved respect of all. And in the house where he took
beginning in his infancy, he most peaceably and piously ended his days on the
22. of November, 1629. Being always careful of his ways, charitable to the
poor, and very judicious and ready in discharging of all Offices incident to
the civil Government of this City, wherein he fully proceeded long before his
death. He lived to see the change of four Kings and Queens, and yet in
assured hope of never changing bliss, by the meritorious passion of his only
Mediator, Christ Jesus: He never altered or changed from the now truly
professed Religion, wherein he most constantly died in the 78. of his age*
leaving behind him two sons and three daughters.

To whose pious memory William Golding, his eldest son, and sole Executor,
has at his own charge erected this Monument, June 1631.

This Monument stands in Westminster Abbey, and has this Inscription.
Here ^es expecting the second coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, the body of
Edmond Spencer, the Prince of Poets in his time, whose divine Spirit needs no
other witness, then the works which he left behind him: He was borne in
London, in the year and died in the year 1596.

This Monument stands in Westminster Abbey with this Inscription. Deo Optim.
Maxim.
Hic in Domino requiescit Richardus Cox de Porters, eques Aurat: Filius
Tertius Thomae Cox, de Beymonds Commit. Harford. Armigeri,
In hospitio Regio per multos annos Oeconomicus, Fidelitate, Diligentia,
Et Prudentia probatus,
Reginae Eliz. a Dietis, Item and R^gi Iacobo, cui tandem factus est
Magister Hospitij Digniss.
Vir Religionis Cultu, Morum Comitate, Corporis Castitate Affectuum temperantia,
Imprimiss spectatus
Erga Bene-meritos Amore, suos Beneficentia, Pauperes Caritate, omnes
Aequitate, Clarus.
Anno Aetatis 69. Coelebs, postquam se vitae Meliori, multa vigilantia, and
Devotione
praepar asset, Deo placide Animam r^ddidit, 13. December. 1623.
Ioannes Cox de Beymonds Armiger, Frater secundus Fratri e Testamento
Haeres, Amoris hoc Monumentum posuit.
Deus non est Mortuorum sed viventium.
This Monument of Master Camden is in Westminster Abbey, where he holds a
Book with Britannia on it. There follows this Inscription.
Qui fide Antiqua, and opera assidita,
Britanicam Antiquitatem
Indagavit,
Simplicitatem Innatam Honest^s
Studijs excoluit,
Animi Solertiam Cando^e illustravit,
Guliemus Camdenus, ab Elizabetha
R^ad Regis Armorum
(CLrentij Titulo) Dignitatem evucatus,
Hic spe certa Resurgendi in Christo. S. E. Q.
Obijt Anno Domini 1623. 9. Novembris.
Aetatis suae, 74.
JOHN KING Bishop of London, descended from the Ancient KINGS of Devonshire by
his Father, and from the CONQVESTS of Haughton Conqnest, in Bedfordshire, by
his Mother, lies buried in the South I Will of Saint Paul's, behind the Bishops
Seat, having only a plain Marble over him, and RESVRGAM written on it for his
Epitaph; as himself directed in his Will.
These Verses hang by in a Table.

IOANNIS KING Episcopi Londinensis, quicquid mortale est in hoc pulvere
componitur.
HICIACET, nisi quis calumnietur,
Mendax Transliberinus Ambulator,
Transferri Cineres, Fidemque Romam.
Et migrasse semel, simulque utrumque;
Praesul Catholicus, sed Orthodoxus.
Non partis studiosus, evagari
per divortia multa opinionum,
Aut Sectas didicit novas creare:
Quod si qui fuerint notae prioris,
Quos vulgus facit and colit Magistros,
His tanta levitate non adhaesit,
Vt persona fide magis placeret:
Magna nomina, sed minora semper
Isthaec omnia, Veritate duxit.
Tantum-non fuit Ille de Locustis,
Aut rasis Monachis, pijs que nequam,
Vrbem qui gravidare Septicollem:
Qui circum Capitolium strepentes
Romanum, velut Anseres sonori,
Cygnaeas temerare cantilenas
Audent, per modulamen inficetum:
Et pro vocibus ultimis Oloris,
Commendare suas, and Anserinas.
Sed, quod nec Calami, nec Ora centum:
Nec Perjuria mill de Duaco;
Nec Satan Decumanus ille mendax;
Nec tandem Legio Diabolorum,
Extorquere suis strophis valebunt:
Vnus si Deus est, Fides and vna*
Huic vni immoriens, and Anglicanae.
Quod si quis Logodaedalus profanus,
Aut Famae Plagiarius Scelestus,
Quicquam Sacrilego reponat ore:
Si Vafer Fidei (...),
Qui vult de simila Deum creare,
Et Christum jubet innatare vino:
Et sic Hereticos and Orthodoxos
Confundit, facit utque symbolizent
Plus quam Pythagorae (...),
Seductum crepat hunc Apostatasse:
Tam ventosa Fides videtur illis;
Tam ventosus and Ille Christianus;
Vt post tot, docilis Senex, aristas,
Accessisse putetur imparatus,
Infansque, ad Documenta Lessian^.
Non plures libet, Arbitros citare,
Quam Conscire suum: quod apprecares
Testem, Carnificamque, Iudicemque,
Illi, quisquis erat Sacer Poeta;
An plus crediderit suae Legendae,
Quam vulgi pius ille fascinator,
Author plumbeus Aureae Legendae.
Quin si jurat idem sat impudenter,
Lingua peierat; at quid inde? Mentem
Injuratus habet; Scioque habebit.
It Is si credideris secus VIATOR,
Nugis, Impliciti necessitate
Assensus, bibulam fidem recludens,
Si quis Ser aphicus propinet Author;
Veternum excutias: and absque tandem
Susceptore, tuum pares Adultus
Examen, tibi teque cognitorem
Ponas, and sapias monente Amico.
Sin sis Credulitatis obstinatae,
Conclamatus es: ILICET. Deinceps
Te Stultum jubeo libenter esse.
In Diem Obitus.
Quem (...) Domini fecerat Sacriu^ Diem,
Et Mors coronis integri Certaminis:
Hunc aeque Amicum Numen indulsit diem.
Desider ando, quod prope hic, Capiti, lacet,
Quo solveretur Vita vitalis parum.
Dolorum utrumque dixeris recte Virum;
Hic Saxeam, Ille Ligneam sensit Crucem,
Hic intus, Ille bajulans Extra suam:
Dolorum, utrique Lux posuit una and modii.
Quin ipsa Lux haec masculum robur dedi^,
Vt nil tremendum Mortis, incuteret metus;
Sed Pascha verum, Transitus potius foret,
Aeternitati Prodromus. Marmor loquax
Spirat RESVRGAM, Mysticis cand^es Notis:
Nec ipse Sadducaeus apparet Lapis.
Conditque tantum, non Premit Corpus: grave
Spes ista superat pondus, and Summum petit;
Nec detine bit mole Depositum sua;
Sed sponte ruptus Exitum tandem dabit.
Cum Triduanum dormierit. Ipsus tulit
Hanc, Christus Olim, Tertiae Lucis moram.
(Nec mill Saecla Triduum excedunt Dei.)
Sic tota demum, juncta Primitijs, Seges
Egerminabit. Haec Via ad Patriam, Mori.
Cal^ata Mors est; Surget ad Patriam vigil.
Hanc spe^ fovebat Ille: quod sculptii hic legis,
Sed Cord fixum fuerat, and Coeloratum.
Anagram: Nominis, and Chronogr: Aetatis 62. currentis.
IOANNES KINGVS PRAELATVS.
EN APERTVS JONAS ANGLIKVS.
Chronogramma Anni Domini 1621.
^CCE CV^IO DISSOLVI, AC
CHRISTO ADGLVTINA^L
Philip. 1. 23. Pauli hoc dissolvi, repeti non desiit, ante Quam, quae
protulerat, Lingua soluta fuit.

EPITAPHIVM.
Non hic Pyramides; non sculpta Panegyris ambit
Hos Cineres; lapidum nec pretiosa strues.
Quod fr^gale magis, Tibi Te co^mittimus unu^:
Si jaceas aliter, vilior Vmbra fores.
Nam Tibi qui similis vivit, moriturque, Sepulcru^
Ille sibi vivax, and sibi Marmor erit.
SE QVENTVR QVI NNONDVM PRAECESSERE.

Valentine Carry, sometimes Deane of Saint Paul's Church, and after Bishop of
Excester, lies buried on the South side of the Quire, under a plain Stone,
with this Inscription about it.
Hic jacet Valentinus Carey, Sacrae Theologiae Doctor, olim Decaenus hujus
Ecclesiae, qui obijt Episcopus Exon: Cujus Monumentum, ibidem, erectum patet.
1626.

In the South side of the Quire of Saint Paul's Church stands a white Marble
Statue on an Vrne, with this Inscription over it.
Ioannes Done
Sac. Theol. profess.
Post varia studia, Quibus
ab Annis Tenerrimis Fideliter,
nec infaeliciter incubuit,
Instinctu, and Impulsu Spir. Sancti,
Monitu, and Hortatu Regis Iacobi.
Anno sui Jesus, 1614. and suae Aetat. 42.
Decanatu hujus Eccles. indutus
27. November. 1621.
Exutus morte ultimo die
Martii. An. 1631.
Hic licet in Occiduo Cinere,
Aspicit eum
Cujus Nomen, est Oriens.
Upon a fair Monument standing in the South I Will of Saint Paul's Church this is
written.
W. S.
Gulielmus Cokaynus, Eques Auratus, Civis and Senator Londinenfis: Septemque
abhine Annis, vrbis praefectus, Antiqua Cokaynorum Derbiensium Familia
oriundus, Quia Bono publico vixit, and damno publico decessit, and Gaudio
publico, Regem Iacobum, ad decorum hujus domus Dei, senescentis jam, and
Corrugatae Restitudinem, solemniter, huc venientem, Consulatu suo, Magnifice
excepit, id circo, in Templo publico, ad Aeternam Rei Memoriam,

Hic situs est.
At vero, and Famae Celebritas, Quae viget in ore Hominum, and Gloria
Beatitudinis, Quam Migrando adeptus est, and splendour Sobolis, quam Numerosam
Genuit, atque Nobilem Reliquit, Iunctim Efficient omnia, ne dicatur,

Hic situs est.
Vna cum illo, tot Homines mortui, quot in illo defunctae sunt virtutes; simul
que and acies Ingenij, and popularis eloquij suada, and Morum gravitas, and
probitas vitae, and Candor Mentis, and Animi Constantia, and prudentia
singularis, and very senatoris Insignia,

Hic sepulta sunt.
Iam tuum est, Lector, Felicitatis ad Culmen Anhelare, per ista vestigia
laudis, and venerandi imitatione Exempli, curare, ne unquam virtutis sic semina
intereant, vt dicatur,

Hic sepulta sunt.
Obijt 20. October Anno Dom. 1626. Et Aetatis suae 66.

Upon another fair Monument standing by it is this Inscription. Memoriae S.
Gulielmo Hewyr Armigero,
Roberti Hewyt
A. Killamarch in Agro Derbiensi,
Filio secundo Genito,
Qui, mortuo Fratre Natu Maiore,
Paternam crevit Haereditatem,
Posterisque Transmisit.
Nobilem Mercaturam exercuit.
Vita integerrima fuit, and Moribus
suavissimis.
Bonarum literarum studia promovit,
Egenorum proventus Largiter Auxit,
Liberalitate,
Charitate,
Insignis,
Nec minor pietate.
Religionem, cum Ministris sacris, and
Coluit, and Fovit,
Ita, per omnia, se ubique gessit, ut
Probitatis,
Comitatis,
Candoris,
Vivum Exemplar,
Christum Redemptorem Cogitans
Vitam ante Mortem Consummaverit.
Filios Genuit Quatuor,
Ioannem, Salomonem,
Thomam, Gulielmum,
Et Filias duas,
Mariam, Elizabetham.
Annum, Lxxvij. Agens,
xij. Iunij. M.D.XCIX. ad patriam Coelestem evocatus,
Magnum sui desiderium Reliquit
Posteris,
Qui Hoc pie ac Maeren.
P. P.
The Monument upon which this Inscription is set, stands in our Ladies Chapel,
in S. Paul's Church: at the four corners of this fair Monument stand four Iet
Pillars, upon each the figure of an Angel, on the one side of it is the
representation of Sir John Wolley and his Lady; on the other, of their son
Sir Francis, at the head and foot of it, all in black (as Mourners) the
curious and artfull shadows of his two Executors, Sir Arthur Mannering, and
Master John Minterne.

The Inscription.
WOllei clarum nomen,
natusque paterque,
Ambo Equites, Natus
Franciscus patre Ioanne,
Clarus vt Haeredem virtutis,
amoris, Honoris
Praestaret, Monumenta sibi haec,
and utrique Parenti
Constituit, Generis
qui nominis unicus Haeres,
Tam cito, tam Claros,
est defecisse dolendum.
Ille Pator, Lumen,
literarum Nobile sydus,
Oxoniae ex Meritis,
Reginae accitus Elizae,
Vt qui a secret is cum
scriberet illa Latin,
Atque a consiliis cum
consultaret in Aula,
Atque Periscelidis,
qui Cancellarius esset,
Tantum ille ingenio valuit,
tantum instar in illo.
Non minus omnimoda
virtute illa inclyta Matter,
Nobilibus Patre and Fratre
illustrissima moris,
Clara domi per se:
sed Elisam ascivit Elisa,
Clarior ut fieret,
Wollei ornata Marite.
Quo viduata, vire
quo non praeclarior alter
Nubat Egertono, Repetat
sed mortua primum.
Franciscus tandem, at
nimium cito utrumque sequutus,
Hic jacet ante pedes
eques illustrissimus, illis
Haecponi jussit, seque
and tria nomina Poni:
Sic voluit, placuit,
superis pia grata voluntas.
Discite mortales,
Memores sic esse Parentum,
Dicite qui legitis,
sic sic petit Aethera virtus.
The Stone bearing this Inscription, is in the middle I Will of this Church, not
far from the steps to the Chancell.
Spe Resurgendi
Hic jacet
Thomas Raymond
Sacrae Theologiae
Professor,
Sancti Albani
Archidiaconus,
Hujusque Ecclesiae
Canonicus.
Obijt 4. die Novembris.

Anno Aetatis 47. Salutis 1631.

Not far from this, a Stone with these words about it.
Hic jacet Gulielmus Bonham, nuper Civis, and Vinitarius London, Filius Thomae
Bonham de Stanway in Comitatu Essex Arm. Qui obijt duodecimo Februarij. Anno
Dom. 1628.

Not far from the other.
Over against the little North door, in the same I Will, under a fair marble
stone, without any Inscription upon it, lies buried the body of Doctor houson,
late Bishop of Durham.

This Monument is in Saint Giles Cripplegate Church, on the South side the
Chancell, and has this Inscription.
Piae Memoriae Charissimorum Parentum.
Iohannis Speed, Civis Londinensis, Mercatorum Scissorum Fratris, servi
fidelissimi Regiarum Majestatum Eliz. Iacobi, and Caroli nunc superstitis.

Terrarum nostrarum Geographi acurati, and fidi antiquitatis Britannicae
Historiographi, Genealogiae sacrae Elegantissimi delineatoris. Qui postquam
Annos 77. superaverat, non tam morbo confectus, quam mortalitatis taedio
lassatus, Corpore se levavit, Iulij 28. 1629. and jucundissimo Redemptoris sui
desiderio sursu^ elatus, carnem hic in custodia^ posuit, denuo cum Christus
venerit, Recepturus.

On the other side of him.
Susannae suae suavissimae, quae postquam duodecim illi Filios, and sex Filias
peperat, quinquaginta septem junctis utriusque solatijs cum illo vixerat,
LIberos, gravi and frequenti Hortamine, ad Dei cultum sollicitaverat, pietatis,
and Charitatis opere quotidiano praeluxerat, emori demum erudiit suo exemplo.
Quae septuagenaria placide in Christo obdormivit, and Fidei suae mercedem
habuit, Martij vigessimo octavo, Anno domini Millessimo sexcentessimo vigessimo
octavo.

Another Monument on the North side the Quire, with this Inscription.
Memoriae Sacrum.
Hic jacet Robertus Cage Armiger, omnium literarum Homo, Vita integer, morte
Christianus, nec dum mortuus, nam in memoria aeterna erit justus.

Solus Christus,
Mihi sola salus.
Anno Domini 1625.

Another Monument near to this last, with this Inscription on it.
Here lies the body of Matthew Palmer, Esquire, who died the 18. of May 1605.
together with Anne his wife, who died the last day of June, 1630. by whom he
had four sons and one daughter, viz. Thomas Palmer, his eldest son, deceased
the 5. of May, 1631. and is also buried. Elizabeth, Edward, Andrew, and Ralphe,
who when it so pleases God, desire this place for the custody of their bodies
likewise, till their assured and glorious Resutrection.

Another Monument on the South side of the Quire, with this Inscription.
To the Memory
Of Constance Whitney, eldest daughter to Sir Robert Whitney, of Whitney, the
proper possession of him and his Ancestors, in Herefordshire, for above 500.
years past. Her Mother was the fourth daughter of Sir Thomas Lucy. of
Charlecoite in Warwickshire, by Constance Kingsmell, daughter and Heir of
Richard Kingsmell, Surveyor of the Court of Wards. This Lady Lucy, her
Grandmother, so bred her since she was eight years old,

Thus far written upon the figure or resemblance of a Coffin.
As she excelled in all noble qualities, becoming a Virgin of so sweet
propertion of beauty and harmony of parts, she had all sweetness of manners
answerable:

A delightful sharpness of wit;

An offencelesse modesty of conversation;

A singular respect and piety to her Parents; but Religious even to example.

She departed this life most Christianly, at seventeene; dying, the grief of
all; but to her Grandmother an unrecoverable loss, save in her expectation,
she shall not stay long after her, and the comfort of knowing whose she is,
and where in the Resurrection to meet her.

This Table is on the South side of the Quire in Saint Sepulchers, with this
Inscription.
To the living Memory of his deceased Friend, Captain JOHN SMITH, who departed
this mortal life on the 21. day of June, 1631. with his Arms, and this Motto,

Accordamus, vincere est vivere.
HEre lies one conquered
that has conquered Kings,
Subdued large Territories,
and done things
Which to the World
impossible would see me,
But that the truth
is held in more esteem.
Shall I report
his former service done
In honor of his God
and Christendom:
How that he did
divide from Pagans three,
Their Heads and Lives,
Types of his Chivalry:
For which great service
in that Climate done,
Brave Sigismundus
(King of Hungarion)
Did give him as a Coat
of Arms to wear,
Those conquered heads
got by his Sword and Spear?
Or shall I tell
of his adventures since,
Done in Virginia,
that large Continence:
How that he subdued
Kings unto his yoke,
And made those Heathen fly,
as wind does smoke;
And made their Land,
being of so large a Station,
A habitation
for our Christian Nation:
Where God is glorified,
their wants supplied,
Which else for necessaries
might have di'd?
But what availes his Conquest,
now he lies
Interred in earth,
a prey for Worms and Flies?
O may his soul
in sweet Elysium sleep,
Until the Keeper
that all souls does keep,
Return to Judgment,
and that after thence,
With Angels he may have
his recompense.
Captain John Smith, sometime Governor of Virginia, and Admiral of New
England.

Coya Shawsware.


THis Monument, or that of which this is a shadow, with their Characters
engraven about it, stands in Petty France, at the West end of the lower
Churchyard of Saint Botolphes Bishopsgate (not within, but without the walls,
the bounds of our consecrated ground) and was erected to the memory of one Coya
Shawsware, a Persian Merchant, and a principal servant and Secretary to the
Persian Ambassador, with whom he and his son came over. He was aged 44. and
buried the tenth of August, 1626. The Ambassador himself, young Shawsware his
son, and many other Persians, (with many expressions of their infinite love
and sorrow) following him to the ground between eight and nine of the clock
in the morning. The rites and ceremonies that (with them) are due to the dead,
were chiefly performed by his son, who sitting crosselegged at the North end
of the grave, (for his Tomb stands North and South) did one while Read,
another while Sing; his Reading and Singing intermixed with sighing and weeping.
And this, with other things that were done in the Grave in private (to prevent
with the sight the relation) continued about half an hour.

But this was but this days business: for, as this had not been enough to
perform to their friend departed, to this place and to this end (that is,
Prayer, and other funeral devotions) some of them came every morning and
evening at six and six, for the space of a month together. And had come (as
it was then imagined) the whole time of their abode here in England, had not
the rudeness of our people disturbed and prevented their purpose.

Camera Dianae.
Upon Paul's wharfe Hill, within a great gate, and belonging to that gate next
to the Doctors Commons, are many fair Tenements, which in their Lea^es made
from the Deane and Chapter, go by the name or title of Camera Dianae; so
denominated from aspacious and specious building, that in the time of Henry the
second, stood where they now are standing.

In this Camera, or arched and vaulted Structure (full of intricate ways and
windings) this H. the second (as sometime he did at Woodstocke) did keep, or
was supposed to have kept, that Jewel of his heart, fair Rosamond; she whom
there he called Rosa Mundi; and here, by the name of Diana; and from hence had
this house that title.

To this day are remains, and some evident testifications of tedious turnings
and windings; as also of a passage under ground, from this house to
Caste-Baynard, which was no doubt the Kings way from thence to his Camera
Dianae, or the Chamber of his brightest Diana.

Of the three Brethen appointed to preach at Saint Maires Spittle at Easter
1632.
HAving renewed the memory of this, from a time so long before us, let us
remember and endeavor to maintain to posterity, among many memorable things of
our own time, that of those three worthy Brethren, Doctor Samuel Wincope,
Master Thomas Wincope, and Master John Wincope, learned and reverend Divines,
that upon Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, in Easter week, 1632. preached at
Saint Mary's Spittle. Three Brothers, such a thing (as but in these) is not
known to any man living, nor recorded to any man's reading. Yet to this let me
add this more, being called to this place to prech, from places divided by
many miles one from another other, they met not so happily here to preach, as
in the matter upon which they did preach: for though their Texts were several,
their subject was one and the same, this is worthy our observation; yet to make
it worth admiration, and a perpetual memory, we are to take notice, how upon
that one and the same subject, they did precede and succeed one the other like
the linkes in a golden chain, the second beginning where the first ended, and
the third where the second ended; the last absolutely concluding what the two
former had so absolutely induced to, with their admirable ends and uses.

A brief relation of the six children drowned at the Ducking pond, January 19.
1633.
Upon Saturday the 19. of January, 1633. six pretty young Lads, going to sport
themselves upon the frozen Ducking-pond, near to Clearken well, the Ice too
weak to support them, fell into the water, concluding their pastime with the
lamentable loss of their lives: to the great grief of many that saw them
dying, many more that afterward saw them dead, with the in-expressible grief
of their Parents.

A brief Relation of that lamentable Fire, that happened on London Bridge, the
13. of February 1633.
FRom this let us turn, our eyes upon that lamentable Fire upon London bridge,
that upon Monday the 13. of February, 1633. between eleven and twelve toward
midnight gave us ashes in stead of Beauty: the ashes, into which the third part
of the Bridge was consumed, for the beautiful Frames so consumed.

The number of the houses then burnt on both sides the Bridge, from the Church
called Saint Magnus, to the first open place, were two and forty; all which
(with a great part of their wares, the goods, and rich furniture in them) were
devoured to the ground (though many hands, much labor, with a great deal of
fear and danger, were carefully employed to prevent it) before eight of the
clock the next morning. Thus suddenly they were burnt to the ground, all above
ground quenched and extinguished, but beneath in their Vaults and Cellars, the
fire remained glowing and burning for the space of a whole week after.

The house in which it began was the house of one Master Brigs (at the hither
end of the Bridge) a Needle-maker: but now it began, because divesly spoken
by many, I would not set down from any.

The loss was great and sudden, presenting (as a glass) the length of a lease
or of life, when such a sad chance shall betide us. Though getting a long lease
of our lands, we presume of a lease of our lives, of a long and secure
possession; like those in the 4. of James, that say, To day or to morrow we
will go into such a City, and continue there for a year, and buy, and sell,
and get money. They will go, they will stay, they will get, such losses as
these never thought on; though the same Prophet (in the same place) tell them,
They know not what the morrow may bring with it.

A PERAMBVLATION OR, CIRCVIT-VVALKE four miles about LONDON: And what
Memorable matters and Monuments we have found and met withal in our Journey.
In the Church at Fulham are these ensuing Monuments.
This Monument is at the upper end of the Chancell, and has this Inscription.
HIc situs est Gulielmus Biliesby, Fulham.
Eques Auratus, Fisci Regij ostiarius, cum Anna vxore, e Familia Brogravia,
quae illi peperit duas Filias, Franciscam, and Margaretam, totidemque Eilios,
qui infantes objerunt.

Obijt ille 25. Martij 1607.
Illa 27. Maij 1608.
Francisca Filia primogenita, primum n^^pta Ioanni Madocks Armigero, postea
Thomae Walker Armigero, Fisci Regij ostiario. Obijt die 6. Novembris 1607. and
hic parentibus tumulatur. Margar. altera Flia enupta Hugoni Parlor, de Plumsted
Armigero. Obijt and in Ecclesia Sanct. Margaretae Westmonasterij Requiescit.

Another Monument on the South side the Quire, with this Inscription.
D. O. M.
Thomae Smitho Equiti Aurato, Regij Majestati, a supplicum libellis, and ab
Epistolis Latinis, viro doctrina, prudentiaque singulari, Francisca Guil.
Baronis Chandos filia, optimo Marito Conjux Moestiss. plorans posuit. Obijt 28.
die November. 1609.

Another Monument on the South side the Quire, with this Inscription.
Epitaphium D. Gulielmi Brutij Equitis Aurati, and Medici Regis Henrici octavi,
qui obiis An. Dom. 1545. Novem. 17.
Quid Medicina valet?
quid Honos? quid Gratia Regum?
Quid popularis Amor,
Mors ubi saeva venit?
Sola valet pietas,
quae structa est, Auspice Christo
Sola in morte valet,
caetera cuncta fluunt.
Ergo mihi in vita
fuerit quando omnia Christus,
Mors mihi nunc lucrum,
vitaque Christus erit.
Epitaphium hoc primitus inscriptum pariete, and situ jam pene exesum, sic
demum restituit Leonardus Butts Armiger Norfolciensis. Oct. 30. 1627. Amoris
ergo.

Another Monument near to this last, with this Inscription on it.
At Earth in Cornwall
was my first beginning,
From Bonds and Corringtons,
as it may appear:
Now to Earth in Fulham,
God disposed my ending,
In March the thousand
and six hundred year
Of Christ, in whom
my body here does rest,
Till both in body and soul
I shall be fully blessed.
Thomas Bond. Obijt Anno Aetatis suae 68.

In the Church at Putney are these ensuing Monuments.
This Monument is in the Chancell on the North side, and has this Inscription.
Memoriae Sacrum.
HEre lies the body of Richard Lusher of Putney, Putney.
in the County of Surrey Esquire: who married Mary, the second Daughter of
George Scot of Staplefoord Taune, in the County of Essex, Esquire. He departed
this life the 27. of September, Anno 1615. Aetatis sua 30.

What tongue can speak
the virtues of this creature,
Whose Body fair,
whose Soul of rarer feature?
He lived a Saint,
he di'd a holy Wight,
In Heaven, on earth,
a joyful heavy sight.
Body Soul united,
agreed in one,
Like strings well tuned
in an Vni-sone.
No discord harsh
this Navell could untie,
'Twas Heaven, the Earth,
this Music did envy.
Wherefore may well be said.
He lived well;
And being dead,
the world his virtues tell.
Though Richard Lusher
sleeps in the dust,
He sleeps in hope,
and hopes to live again:
His soul in Heaven
is waking with the just,
And wakes in joy,
being freed from sense of pain,
Bones take your rest,
your soul in Heaven attends,
The blessed reunion
of two loving friends.
Marito dilectissimo, Maria Lusher conjux Moestissima, in perpetuum Amoris
Testimonium, hoc Monumentum plorans posuit.

Mary, by her first match, Lusher, daughter of George Scot, Esquire, descended
from John Scot, Lord chief Justice of England, in the reign of King Edward
the third, and after wife to Thomas Knivet, descended from John Knivet Knight,
Lord chief Justice in the same Kings reign, and Lord Chancellor of England.

To Thomas Knivet.
That you have laid
my body here,
By that first side
I loved so dear,
I thank you Husband:
That the poor
Are still your care,
I thank you more.
These last I charged
you with alive,
Being done, I rest,
while you survive.
But yet I have
another Boon,
When Fate shall come
(as come full soon
It will, and will
not be denied)
That you would close
my other side.
You Have thought it worthy
to be read
You once were second
to my bed;
Why may you not
like title have,
To this my second bed,
the Grave?
This Stone will cover
us all three,
And under it
we shall be free
From Love, or Hate,
or least distrust
Of Jealousy
to vex our dust:
For here our bodies
do but wait
The summons for
their glorious state.
On the same Monument is this Inscription. Quam Diu Domine. Siste Siste Hospes:
Quod Reliqui est Lectissimae Foeminae
Te Rogitat,
Etiam ego, superstes Maritus,
superstes ipse Funeri meo.
Nam in Conjuge, Conjunx vixi,
et cum illa Elatus sum.
Maria, mea Maria,
Dulcissima Maria
Hic sita est.

Cor Gratiarum, flos venustatis Merus,
Seeds amorum, Castitatis exemplar
Tanti erga me affectus
Talisque.
Morum ac vitae perpetuae Sanctimoniae,
ut vivens, Moriensque,
Singulari Praeluxerit Face
omoibus
Vel ordinis sui, vel sexus.

Heu qualem amisi
Ex puerperio Raptam?
Et cum ea, spem Posteritatis.
Sic me relinquis? Sic Terras deseris?
O Christianae perfectionis Imago,
Injuriarum contemptrix Facilis,
Doloribus Ferendis Fortis:
Omnes in te certabant virtutes
sed vicit Pie^as.

Fulges etiam in ipsa mortis umbra,
Divini amoris d^m vixisti Flamma
Et Postquam vixisti Astrum.
Vale, Vale Maria:
Nullum de te dolorem
Nisi ex Acerbissima tua morte
Accepi.

At (Cara Conjunx) non ego te desinam
Lugere, donec vi doloris obrutus
Meis and ipse liquero luctum parem.
M. S.

Mariae
Pientissimae Mariae
Cui lucis ortum Staplefordia dedit,
Genusque Scottorum Familia vetus,
Georgiae Filiae and Cohaeredi:
Primis Nuptijs Richardo Lushero junctae,
Nicholai Equitis Aurati Filio;
Proximis mihi Thomae Knivetto,
Maritorum Moestissimo.
Obijt xxvij. Aug. CIO. IOC. xxiij.
Aetatis 35.
In the Church at Chelsey, are these ensuing Monuments.
In the South side of the North I Will is this inscription.
In obitum illustrissimi viri, Chelsey.
Domini Arthuri Gorges, Equitis Aurati, Epicedium.

Transtulit Lucanum Te deflent Nati, Natae, Celeberima Conjux; Te dolet
argutae, magna Caterva scholae; At Lucanus ait, se vivo, non Moriturum Arthurum
Gorges, Transtulit ipse decus, Aethereas Cupiens Arthurus adire per Auras, Et
nonus ex ejus Nomine Natus adest. Domin? Arth. Gorg. Equ. Aurat. Filius eius
Natu Maximus.


In the same I Will on the South side is this inscription.
Here ^ieth the right Noble and Excellent Princess, Lady Jane Guilford, late
Duchess of Northumber land; Daughter and sole Heir unto the right
Honorable, Sir Edward Guilford, Knight, Lord Warden of the five Ports. The
which Sir Edward, was son to the right Honorable, Sir Richard Guilford,
sometimes Knight, and Companion of the most Noble Order of the Garter. And the
said Duchess was wife to the right High and Mighty Prince, John Dudley, late
Duke of Northumberland; by whom she had issue 13. children, that is to wit,
eight sons and five daughters: and after she had lived 46. years, she
departed this transitory world at her Manor of Chelsey, the 22. day of
January, in the second year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady, Q. Mary the
first, An. 1555. on whose soul Jesus have mercy.

Another on the South side, thus inscribed.
In obitum Nobilissimorum Conjugum Gregorij D. Dacres, and Annae uxoris.
Quos ardens copulavit Amor,
Iuvenilibus annis,
Abstulit atra dies,
mors inopina rapit;
Ille prior Fatis, Dacrorum
Nobile Germen
Occidit, In Morbum,
at incidit illa prius.
Quae languescendo, Miserae
praetedia vitae
Sensit, tam dulci conjuga
Cassa su^.
Vt teneri cordis concordia
junxerat ambos,
Sic idem Amborum contegit
ossa locus.
Quos jungit tumulus,
conjungunt coelica Tecta,
Vt teneant Coelum,
qui tenuere fidem.
Nobilis iste Vir obijt, Septem. 25. 1594.

Nobilis ista Mulilier obijt, Maij 14. 1595.

Nobilis Anna Iaces,
prudens Sackvillia proles
Viva tui defles
funera Moesta viri.
Nil mortale placet,
Coelum tua pectora spirant,
Postquam Parca viri,
conscidit Atra, diem
Foeminei lux Clara chori,
pia, casta, pudica,
Aegris subsidium,
Pauperibusque decus.
Fida deo, perchara tuis,
constansque diserta,
Vt patiens M^rbi,
sic pietatis amans.
O quoties manibus passis,
ad culmina Coeli,
Hanc Animam dixti,
suscipe quaeso Deus
Menspia, Coelestis patriae
pervenit ad Arcem,
Hic tumulus corpus,
mentis inane tenet.
Another Monument on the North side the Chancell, and has this inscribed.
O Lord, in thee have I trusted,
Let me never be confounded.
Here lies the body of Thomas Hungerford of Chilsey in the County of Middlesex
Esquire; the second son of Robert Hungerford the elder, of Cadname in the
County of Wilth Esquire; who has served King Henry the 8. in the roomth of a
Gentleman Pentioner, and was with his Majesty at the winning of Boloine; and
King Edward the sixth at Mussleborough field; besides Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth, in their affairs, being of the age of 70. years, who had to Wife
Vrsula Matdenhead, the Daughter of the Lady Sands. Anno Domini 1581.

Another on the North side with this inscription.
The years wherein I lived
were fifty four,
October twenty eight
did end my life:
Children five of eleven
God left in store,
Sole comfort to their mother,
and my wife.
The world can say
what I have been before,
What I am now,
examples still are rife:
Thus Thomas Laurence
speaks to times ensuing,
That Death is sure,
and Time is past renewing.
Obijt. 1593.
On the South side
a Monument of Sir Thomas Moore, dated Anno Domini. 1532.


Another Monument in the same Church, with this inscription.
Sacrum Memoriae Gulielmi Plumbe Armigeri and Elizabethae Vxoris ejusdem.

Guilielmus Plumbe, Filius and Haeres Ioannis Plumbe, de Eltham Armigeri. Duas
Vxores duxit; priorem Magaretam, Filiam, and unicam Haeredem Thomae Nevill
Equitis, quam Robertus Southwell Eques viduam Reliquerat, Ex qua nullam prolem
Genuit. Alteram Elizabetham, ex qua unicus filius n^tus est, Franciscus Plumbe.
Elizabetha, unica Filia and Haeres Edvardi Dormer de Fulham Armigeri, Filij
natu minimi Galfridi Dormer de Them Armigeri. Priorem conjugem habuit Iohannem
Gresham, de Mayfield, in Comitatu Sussexiae Armigerum, and secundum filium
Iohannis Gresham Equitis (quondam Majoris London) cui tres peperit filios,
Thomam, Guilielmum, and Edvardum Gresham, eo defuncto Guilielmum Plumbe
praedictum conjugem accepit. Guilielmus Plumbe, obijt 9. die Febr. Anno 1593.
Aetatis suae 60.

In the Church at Stepney are these ensuing Monuments.
On a Monument in the Chancell is this Inscription.
ONe ancient Monument of Sir Henry Collet, Stepney.
Knight, twice Lord Mayor of London, and free of the Mercers, and Father to
Doctor John Collet sometimes Deane of Saint Paul's, refreshed by the Company of
Mercers in the year 1605. on the North side.

In the upper end of the Chancell.
In the upper end is a fair Monument of Elizabeth Startute, erected by
Captain Michael Miriall, and Clare his Wife, sometime Daughter to the said
Elizabeth Startute.

On the North side of the Chancell, as follows.
Here rests the body of Robert Clarke Esquire, son of Roger Clarke Esquire,
late Alderman of the City of London, a man humble in prosperity, and a liberal
distributer to the poor, courteous and affable to all, an upright and a just
dealer in this world, and a most religious seeker of the world to come. He had
to wife Margaretta, daughter to John Langton Esquire, sometimes Governor of
the English Company in Sprucia, under the King of Polonia, who lived together
in great love and integrity almost six years, he had by her one only
Daughter, named Frances, who lived one year three quarters, and here lies
interred with her most dear and loving Father.

In whose memory the said Margaretta, to express her true love and affection,
has caused this Monument to be erected; he died the xxx. day of May, Anno Dom.
1610. having lived xxxvj. years.

A little Monument on the South side in the Chancell, and has this Inscription.
Genero suo Guilielmo Dawtrey, quondam Lincolniensis Hospitij socio, Willielmi
Dawtrey Sussexiae Armigeri, Filio and Haeredi, viro ingenij acumine, mentis
acie, and non vulgari Municipalium Angliae legum scientia praecellenti,
Richardus Stonley Armiger, hoc Amoris, and pietatis simbolum posuit. Obijt 16.
Octobris 1589.

This Monument is at the upper end of the Chancell, and has this Inscription.
Sacrae Memoriae.
Ianae Nevillae Dominae Dethicke Matronae Religiosissimae, Modestissimae,
omnibus qua corporis, qua Animi (dum vixit) dotibus ornatissimae: Jesus Christi
servae devotissimae; conjugi suae fidelissimae, amantissimae. Quae cum viginti
fere duos Annos felicissime transegerat. Alexander Nevillus Armiger, hoc
nunquam intermorituri amoris sui Monumentum fieri Testamento curavit. Postquam
Annos fere sexaginta novem vixerat vicessimo nono Novembris 1606. placidissime
in Domino obdormivit.

Tobiah Worthington, Alexandro Nevillo, ex Testamento solus Executor, ipsius
mandato, hoc Monumentum posuit.

On a little brass Monument in the South side of the Chancell is thus written.
Here under lies buried Nicholas Gibson, Citizen and Grocer of London, and
Avis his wife, who were Founders of the Free-Schoole at Ratcliffe; and after
she married with Sir Anthony Knevit, Knight, which lies here buried also.
Which Nicholas died the xxiij. of September, Anno 1510. And the said Lady Avis
died the third day of October, 1554. whose souls Jesu pardon.

In that Chancell likewise this is written.
D. O. M.
Here under was laid up the body of Sir Thomas Spert, Knight, sometime
Controuler of the Navy to King Henry the eighth, and both the first Founder and
Master of the worthy Society or Corporation of the Trinity-house. He lived
enobled by his own worth, and died the eighth of September, in the year 1541.
To whose pious memory the said Corporation has gratefully erected this
Memorial.

Not that he needed
Monument of stone,
For his well gotten fame
to rest upon,
But this was reared,
to testify that he
Lives in their loves,
that yet surviving be.
For unto virtue,
who first raised his name,
He left the preservation
of the same:
And to postery
remain it shall,
When Brass and Marble
Monuments do fall.
Learn for to die
while thou have breath,
So shall thou live
after thy death.
Anno Domini 1622. by the Company of the Trinity-house, this Monument was
erected 81. years after the decease of their Founder.

Another Monument in the same Chancell.
Here lies also in the same Chancell, under the Communion Table, the body of
Henry Steward, Lord Darley, of the age of three quarters of a year, Son and
Heir of Matthew Steward Earl of Lenox, and Lady Margaret his Wife, which
Henry, deceased the 28. day of November, in the year 1545. whose soul Jesus
pardon.

In Stratford-Bow, and Bromley, are these ensuing Monuments.
This Monument is in the South side of the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Abrahamus Jacob Armiger, Maria Conjux Superst, maestis. Obijt 6. Maij. A. D.
1629. Aetatis suae 56.

Hic tumulus
Parents optimi cum prole numerosa, Stratford-Bow and Bromley.
non vestrae virtutis, sed Doloris mei Monumentum esto. Quam uterque erga Deum
Pius, quam Regi suo obsequens, and commodus; quam amicis Fidus, quam Patriae
utilis, quam pauperibus benignus, aliorum esto effari, meum imitari, pij
Lectoris supplere, quod Filialis modestia Retinuit.

Valete Posteri.
Sic in Christo and vivite, and morimini. Ioh. Jacob. F. Parentibus maerens
merentibus P.

As Nurses strive
their Babes in bed to hie,
When they too liberally
the wantons play:
So to prevent
his future grievous crimes,
Nature his Nurse
got him to bed betimes.
On another Monument in the same Church is thus written.
Here lies the body of William Ferrars, the only Son and Heir of William
Ferrars Esquire, late Citizen and Mercer of London, who took to wife Jane, one
of the Daughters of Sir Peter Van-lore of London, Knight, by whom he had one
Child, his Wife and Child died both before him, and he departed this life a
month before his Father. He was a Gentleman of a religious soul toward God,
and a sweet behavior toward men, and his death was by his Kindred, and
generally by all much lamented. He died the 25. of August, 1625. and left his
Uncle Thomas Ferrars his Executor, who to the memory of him has erected this
small Monument.

In this most pure and blessed shade,
(Such by the sacred ashes made,
That here inhabit must) does lie
The man, whose virtues cannot dye.
His Alms, his Prayers, his Piety,
Have sent his soul above the sky.
Nature full well had taught his Wife,
To sum her hourses in plous life;
To God, to Friend, to poor, to all,
She was as good as we dare call
Frail flesh; good passenger give praise
To them who lived such happy days.
Anno Domini 1625.
In the same Church this is written.
This Bread is given to the poor for the honor of God, and to the memory of
William Ferrars the younger, by Thomas Ferrars his Executor.

In the Church at Lambeth are these ensuing Monuments.
On the North side on a Marble Tomb as follows.
HEre under this Tomb lies buried the body of Thomas Clear Esquire, Lambeth.
son of Robert Clerc in the County of Norfolk, Knight, which Thomas deceased
the 14. day of April, Anno Domini 1545. on whose soul, and all Christian
souls, Jesus have mercy.

In the Chancell on the North side is an old Tomb of Marble, thus written on.
Sub pedibus ubi statis, jacet corpus Magistri Hugonis Peyntwin, Legum
Doctoris, nuper Archi. Cant. Reveredissimorum Patrum Do^. Ioannis Morton
Cardinalis, Henrici Dene, and William Warham Cant. Archiepiscop. Audien.
Causar. Auditoris. Qui obijt vj. die Augusti, Anno Dom. M. D. iiij. cujus
Animae Propicietur Deus. Amen.

On a flat Stone there is thus written.
Volente Deo.

Hic jacet Richardus Bancroft, S. Theologiae Professor, Episcopus Londinensis
Primo, deinde Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, and Regi Iacobo a Secretioribus
Consiliis. Obiit secundo Novembris, Anno Dom. 1610. aetatis suae 67.

Volente Deo.

On another flat Stone thus is written.
Here Lies the Lady Elizabeth Howard, sometimes Countess of Wiltshire.

On the South side
Lies the body of Sir Nowell Caroone, Ledger Ambassador for the States of
Holland, with his Arms and Hatchments, as namely his Crest, Helmet, Arms,
Sword, Gantlet, and Spurs.

In the South Chapel is a fair Monument of Marble, engraven as follows.
Here lies Sir John Legh Knight of the Bath, son of Ralph Legh Esquire, Lord
of the Manors of Stockwell and Levehurst, and Dame Isabel his wife, Daughter
of Otwell Worsley, which Sir John deceased the 17. day of August, Anno Dom. M.
D. xxiij. and the same dame Isabel deceased the 18. day of April.

On the upper end on the wall, a Monument as follows.
Here lies the body of John Arundell of Gwarnicke, in the County of Cornwall,
Esquire, Son and Heir of Roger Arundell, of the said County, Esquire, of an
Ancient, Honorable, and fair descended Family, who died the 25. of May, 1613.
without issue, and in the 56. year of his age.

Sape and praevale.

On the North side of the Quire is this Inscription.
Near to this place, lies interred, the body of Robert Scot Esquire,
descended of the ancient Barons of Bawery in Scotland. He bent himself to
travel, and study much, etc. And amongst many other things, he einvented the
Leather Ordinance, and carried to the King of Sweden 200. men; who after two
years service, for his worth and valor, was preferred to the office of
Quarter Master general of his Majesty's Army; which he possessed three years.
From thence, with his favor, he went into Denmark (where he was advanced to
be General of that Kings Artillery.) There being advised to render his service
to his own Prince, which he doing, his Majesty willingly accepted and
preferred him to be one of the Gentlemen of his most Honorable Privy Chamber,
and rewarded him with a Pension of 600. li. per annum.

This deserving Spirit, adorned with all Indowments befiting a Gentleman; in
the prime of his flourishing age, surrendered his soul to his Redeemer, 1631.

Of his great worth to knew
who seeks more,
Must mount to Heaven,
where he is gone before.
In France he took to wife Anne Scot, for whose remembrance she lovingly
erected this Memorial.

This Monument is near unto the other, and has this Inscription.
Epitaphium Thomae Clarear, qui fato functus est, 1545. Auctore Henrico Howard,
Comite Surrey, in cujus foelicis ingenij specimen, and singularis Facundiae
argumentum, appensa fuit haec Tabula per W. Howard Filium Tho. nuper Ducis
Norff. Filij ejusdem Henrici Comitis.

Norfolk sprung thee,
Lambeth holds thee dead:
Clear, of the Count
of Cleremont thou hight:
Within the womb
of Ormonds race thou bred,
And saw thy Cousin
crowned in thy sight.
Shelton for love,
Surrey for Lord thou chase;
Aye me, while life did last,
that league was tender,
Tracing whose steps,
thou saw Kelsall blase,
Laundersey burnt,
and battered Bulleyn's render,
At Muttrell gates,
hopeless of all recure,
Thine Earl half dead,
gave in thy hand his will,
Which cause did thee
this pining death procure,
Ere Summers four times seven
thou could fulfill.
Aye Clear, if love had booted,
care or cost,
Heaven had not won.
nor Earth so timely lost.
Over against the other in the same I Will, lies the body of Elizabeth Bailey,
late wife of John Bailey. Obijt 24. of June, Aetatis suae 25.
Reader tread soft,
under thy foot does lie,
A mother buried
with her progeny:
Two Females and a Male,
the last a son,
Who with his life,
his Mothers thread has spun;
His breath her death procured
(unhappy sin,
That thus our joy
with sorrow vshers in.)
Yet he being loath to leave
so kind a Mother,
Changes this life
to meet her in another.
The daughters first
were robbed of vital breath,
The Mother next
in strength of years met death,
The Fathers only joy,
a hopeful Son,
Did lose his life
when life was scarce begun.
If harmless Innocence,
if loyal truth,
Found in a constant wife
combined with youth,
If a kind Husbands prayers,
or Fathers tears
Could have prevailed,
they had lived many years.
But these all failing,
here raked up in dust,
They wait the resurrection
of the just.
A Husbands love,
a Fathers piety,
Dedicates this
unto their memory:
And when he has his debt
to Nature pai'd,
In the same Grave
himself will ^hen be laid,
That altogether,
when the Trumpe shall sound,
Husband, Wife, Children,
may in Christ be found.
Another Monument on the South side the Quire, with this Inscription.
Here lies four foot distant from this wall, the body of William Suthes,
Gent. a man adorned with the gifts of Grace, Art, and Nature: by Grace he was
Religious and Charitable; by Art he was in Masonry exquisite; and by Nature he
was humane and affable. He, by Gods appointment, changed his mortal life of
misery for glorious immortality on the fifth of October 1625. His sorrowful
and grateful Wife, Mistress Anne Suthes, as a loyal Testimony of her love to
her deceased Husband, caused this Monument to be erected for an exemplary of
his worthiness, and her affection. He was Master Mason of Windsor Castle; he
was a Citizen and Goldsmith of London, and an Assistant of the said Worshipful
Company. He left three sons towardly and hopeful, to be each of them the
imitators of their Fathers virtues, John, James, and Matthew. And herein the
Reader may see expressed the goodness of the deceased Husband, and the
thankfulness of a surviving Wife.

He now sings praise
amongst the heavenly Host,
To God the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost.
In the Church at Newington, on the North side, is this Monument.
Deo viventium. Pietati sacrum.
SIr Hugh Brawne, Newington.
Knight, the Founder and Adorner of this I Will, and for the space of 22. years,
the whole ornament of this Parish; Religious toward God, and respectfull of
the poor, determining to provide for the day of his death, desires here to
repose his body, in a happy hope of a glorious Resurrection.

Reader it pleased
The Almighty to infuse,
Sense of his goodness
in my blessed heart,
Faith quickened Love,
and did this Churchworke choose,
Both jointly here
do show themselves in part:
His be the glory, Peace,
(soul saving) mine,
Prayer, Thanksgiving use,
example thine.
1614. Vivens posui. Anno Aetatis 77.

In Saint Georges Church in Southwarke, on the North side are these Monuments
thus written on.
Lo, S. Georges.
Master William Evans,
he whose body lies here,
Bequeathed has by his last will,
for ever by the year
Ten pound eight shillings to the poor,
which is a blessed stay,
And must be given them in bread,
on every Sabbath day:
One half to Creekens poor,
his native soil so dear,
The other moity to the poor
of this our Parish here.
See now all ye that love the poor,
how God did guide his ways;
Tenscore and eight are served with bread,
in two and fifty days,
More then money would have done,
to yielded any share:
Praise God, ye poor, who gave to him
so provident a care.
He was of the Right Worshipful Company of the Merchant-Taylors, and deceased
the 29. of July, Anno 1590. in the 32. year of the most prosperous reign of
our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth. Aetatis suae 67.

Another Monument on the North side, having this Inscription.
Behold, James Savage, graciously
Has done a godly deed;
To the poor of this Parish,
For to releeve their need,
Five pounds a year for evermore,
By will he has bequeathed,
Which must out of the Angel rents
Quarterly be received,
By the Churchwardens of this Church
Whom he has put in trust,
As Fathers in the poores behalf,
To be upright and just.
Which men, I doubt not, but our God
Who sees all things shall find,
True in dispensing of the same
According to his mind.
Ye poor, thank Christ for Savage still,
Extol Gods Name with praise,
That he, to follow his good Act,
In time may many raise.
Anno 1588.

In the Church at Wansworth, are these ensuing Monuments.
In the North side of the Chancell is thus written.
Under a Stone, Wansworth.
within this place,
does lie John Powel, who for the space
Of thirty years before Her death,
did serve the Queen Elizabeth:
And to King James of worthy fame,
for nine years more he did the same:
And when the years of seventy four,
were now come to an end,
Into the hands of God above,
his soul he did commend.
Obijt 26. die Iunij.

Anno Dom. 1611.

At the upper end of that Chancell, is thus written.
Here lies the body of Henry Smith, Esquire, sometime Citizen and Alderman of
London, who departed this life the 30. day of January, An. Dom. 1627. being
then near the age of 79. years, who while he lived, gave unto these several
Towns in Surry following, one thousand pounds a piece, to buy Lands for
perpetuity for the relief and setting the poor people on work in the said
Towns, viz. To the town of Croydon, one thousand pounds; To the town of
Kingstone, one thousand pounds; To the town of Guilford, one thousand pounds;
To the town of Darkin, one thousand pounds; To the town of Farneham, one
thousand pounds. And by his last Will and Testament did further give and
devise, to buy lands for perpetuity for the relief and setting their poor on
work, unto the town of Rigate one thousand pounds. And unto this town of
Wandsworth, wherein he was borne, the sum of 500. pounds, for the same uses
as before. And did further will and bequeath one thousand pounds to buy land
for perpetuity, to redeem poor Captives and Prisoners from the Turkish
tyranny. And not here stinting his charity and bounty, did also give and
bequeath the most part of his estate, being to a great value, for the
purchasing lands of inheritance for ever for the relief of the poor, and
setting them on work.

A pattern worthy the imitation of those whom God has blessed with the
abundance of the goods of this life to follow him herein.

Another Monument on the South side the Quire, with this Inscription.
Here lies the body of Edward Snow of Chicksands, in the County of Bedford,
Esquire: in memory of whom, Em his Wife, daughter to William Byne, in the
County of Sussex, Esquire, erected this Monument; he had issue Elizabeth,
Alice, and Sarah. He deceased at the Manor of Alfarthing, Anno Dom. 1587.

At the upper end of this Chancell is this Inscription.
Susanna Powell, late of Wandsworth Widow, Daughter of Thomas Hayward of
Wandsworth, Yeoman of the Guard unto King Henry the 8. King Edward the 6. to
Queen Mary, and to Queen Elizabeth (of ever precious memory) and wife unto
John Powell of Wandsworth, Gentleman, who was servant to Queen Elizabeth. This
Susanna Powell was a gracious Benefactor unto this Town of Wandsworth. She
lived a Window the space (almost) of twenty years, deceased the 19. day of
February, 1630. and at her death bequeathed by her Will unto 24. poor Widows
of this Town of Wandsworth for ever, four pence in bread and four pence in
money, to be distributed every Lords day, 12. on one Sabbath, and 12. another
for ever, at the North door of the Church at Wandsworth.

She also bequeathed 40. shillings every year for ever, to put forth a poor
man child an Apprentice, with diverse other loving Remembrances unto her good
friends and neighbors. These foresaid Donations are to issue out of the
benefits and profits of the Rectory of Wandsworth.

This was desired to be recorded, that God might be glorified, the memorial of
the Just might be blessed, and the living stirred up to such like good works
of Piety and Compassion.

More,

To this Church, for the Communion Table, two Flagon pots of Silver, price xx.
li. and upwards.

To release poor Prisoners out of prison, on the day of her burial, xx. li.

To the poor of the parish of Putney, long before she deceased, 50. li.

To the poor Householders of Wandsworth, for many years before her death,
toward payment of their Rent, per annum, 5. li.

In the Church at Battersey, are these ensuing Monuments.
On the North side of the Quire is this Inscription.
Deo Trino and Vni Sacrum. Ba^^ersey.

OLivero, Nicolai Sanct. John de Lydeard, Filio secundo, Equiti Aurato,
Antiquissimis, and illustribus de Belle Campo, de Blestoe Grandisonis, and
Tregoziae Familiis oriundo. Terra Marique, Domi Forisque, Belli pacisque,
Artibus egregio, Diu Elizabethae e Nobilissima Pensionariorum cohorte, suis
inde meritis, and singulari Divi lacobi gratia, in Hibernia instrumentis
Bellicis praefecto, Conaciae propraeside questori summo, and Regis Vicario,
procomiti de Grandisonis, and Trigoziae de Hyworth in Anglia Baroni, Eidem divo
Iacobo, and Filio ejus pijssimo a secretioribus and Sanctioribus Consiliis,
Postquam is Annos Honoribus Aequaverat, and Tranquillissime senuerat somnienti
similiter extincto, Johannes de Sanct. John, Eques and Baronettus, ex Fratre
Nepos and Haeres Auunculo Moerentissime. Moestissimus P. in Ecclesia de
Battersey. Vixit Annos 70. Mor. 29. Decembris 1630.

This Monument is in the South side of the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Memoriae Sacrum.
Elizabethae, Filiae Christophori Toldervey Armigeri, quae vivens moriensque
fuit conjux dilecta Danielis Caldwall, Filij Laurentij Caldwall Armigeri, per
quatuor annos, Filiorum par Enixa ac vnicam Filiolam, ipsa Matter, virgo prius
Casta, Vxor dein fida, Morum suavitate vitae integritate, Religionis
Conscientia insignis, fideliter obijt, and in domino foeliciter obdormivit die
Iunij 20. Aetatis suae Anno 23. 1620.

Moerens ejus Maritus, hoc Qualecunque Monumentum, Epitaphium, Amoris vere
conjugalis ergo, posuit, composuit.

D. G.
This stone does tell, the Children
and the Mother,
That lived and died
all in one year together:
The children first
Death did deprive of life,
Yet stayed not there,
but took away the Wife.
Insatiate Death,
not with the Fruit content*
But thy last malice
on the Tree have spent.
Her virtuous life
it needless were to praise,
That Is still the gloss
to cover vicious ways:
I Will say but this,
that all who knew her well,
For life, for death,
will say she did excel.
Another Monument in the same Chancell with this Inscription.
To Henry Hussy Esquire, his loving Wife Iudeth Paget has erected this
Monument: He was borne at Slinkfold in Sussex, he was Clarke of the Spicery to
Queen Elizabeth and King James, and lived in the Court 35. years. He
delivered his soul to God the 23. of May 1611. in the 64. year of his age,
his body lies buried here, waiting for a joyful esurrection.

In the Church at Hackney are these ensuing Monuments.
A Monument made for Sir Henry Row, with this Inscription.
HEre under sime
of Adams first defection, Hackney.

Rests in the hope
of happy Resurrection,
Sir Henry Row
(Son of Sir Thomas Row)
And of Dame Mary
his dear yoke fellow)
Knight, and right worthy
(as his Father late)
Lord Mayor of London
with his virtuous Mate.
Dame Susan his
(twice fifteen years and seven)
Their issue five
(surviving of eleven)
Four named here
in these four names forepast,
The fifth is found,
if Echo sound the last:
Sad Orphans all, but most
their Heir (most debtor)
Who built them this,
but in (...) a better.
Quam pie obijt, (...) ^lutis 1612. die November. (...) ^atis 68.

This Monument is near unto the other, and has this Inscription.
Memoriae Sacrum.
What needs an Epitaph
to found our praise,
Our wealth, our greatness forth,
or length of days;
When briefly on this Marble
we may read,
The glory of the living
and the dead.
A modest, chaste,
religious loving Wife
Lies here at rest,
patient in death and life;
Even all the graces
which amongst many were
Divided, sweetly flowed
and met in her.
And though death did his worst,
thinking in rage,
To leave no pattern
for succeeding age,
Yet lives her virtues,
and this memory
Tells what she was,
and what her Sex should be.
Erected by John Bennet, in memory of Elizabeth his beloved wife, who departed
this life the 18. of November, 1625.

An ancient plain Monument in the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Christopher Vrswyke, Rector.

Misericordiam.

Another Monument there also, with this Inscription.
Here under lies the body of Henry Thoresby, of Thoresby, in the County of
York, Esquire, late Councellor in the Law, Bencher and Reader of Lincolnes
Inn, Justice of Peace, and of the Quorum, one of the Masters of the most
Honorable Court of Chancery, and one of the sixteen Governors of King James
Hospital, elected at the first foundation thereof by John Sutton Esquire the
only Founder: which Henry Thoresby passed his pilgrimage in this life, in all
godliness and Christian piety, and so constantly did continue unto his last
breath, which he yielded up to the Almighty in this Town of Hackney, on the
eleventh day of May, 1615.

Here under lies the body of Jane, late wife to the said Henry Thoresby
Esquire, Daughter to John Palmer of Clarkenwell, in the County of Midalesex,
Esquire, and Paulina his wife, daughter to Anthony Sands of Throwly in the
County of Kent, Esquire, which Jane lived with the said Henry in wedlock 30.
years and more, and had issue by him two Daughters, viz. Jane, who died in her
infancy about six years of age, and Elinor Lady Hardresse, the now wife of Sir
Thomas Hardresse, of great Hardresse, in the County of Kent, Knight, by whom
she had issue four Sons and one Daughter. Which said Jane overlived her said
husband, Henry Thoresby, and died in all Christian piety on the 18. day of
August, 1616.

An Epitaph upon the death of the virtuous and worthy Gentleman, Edward
Saunders Esquire, Obijt vltimo die Novembris Anno 1599.
His name, his place,
the gentry of his birth,
And credit held
unto his dying days,
Were things that gave him
favor here on earth,
But gave him not
the greatest of his praise.
His greatest glory
was his godly life,
The bounty of his house
and open door,
His Countries love,
his kindness to his wife,
Faith to his friend,
and pity to the poor.
His virtue, valor,
and all good desires,
His zeal and life
agreeing to the same,
And last the death
that such a life requires,
These be the true records
of lasting fame.
These wright him blessed
in the Heavens above,
And leave him in the world
good will and love.
On the North side of the Chancell, as follows.
A memory of the right Honorable, the Lady Lucy Latimer.
Such as she is,
such surely shall ye be,
Such as she was,
such if ye be, be glad;
Fair in her youth,
though fat in age she grew,
Virtuous in both,
whose gloss did never fade,
Though long alone
she lead a widows life,
Yet never Lady
lived a truer wife.
From Wales she sprang,
a branch of Worsers race,
Graft in a stock of Brownes
her mother side;
In Court she held
a maid of Honors place,
Whilst youth in her,
and she in Court did bide:
To John Lord Latimer
then became she wife,
Four Daughters had they
breathing yet in life.
Earl of Northumberland
took the first to wife,
The next the heir
of Baron Burleigh chose,
Cornwallis hap
the third for term of life;
And Sir John Davers
plucked the youngest Rose.
Their Fathers heirs,
mothers all she saw,
Pray or praise her,
make your list the Law.
Made by Sir Will. Cornewallis, Knight, this Ladies son in law.

A Monument of Sir Thomas Row, who lies buried in this Church, and has this
Inscription.
Anno Domini 1570. September 2. day.
Sir Thomas Row lies buried here,
Of London Knight and Alderman
Who late was Mayor, and rule did bear,
To right the cause of every man:
A Merchant venturer was he,
Of Merchant-Taylors Company:
A Citizen by birth also,
And eke his Wife dame Mary Row.
In wedlock one and thirty year,
They did continue man and wife,
Eleven children she did bear,
But five of them have left this life,
And six alive do yet remain,
Four of them sons, and daughters twain,
His soul with God we hope is blessed,
And does remain in Abraham's breast.
In the Church at Islington, are these ensuing Monuments.
In the South side of the Chancell is this inscription. Under the hope of the
Resurrection.
HEre lies the body of Alice Owen Widow, Islington.
the Daughter of Thomas Wilkes, she was first married to Henry Robinson, by
whom she had six sons, John, William, Henry, John, Thomas, and Henry, which
said Henry the younger, was married unto Mary, the daughter of Sir William
Glover, Knight, Alderman of London; and five Daughters, Margaret married to Sir
John Bret of Edmonton, in the County of Middlesex Knight, Susan, Anne, and Anne
the younger married Sir Robert Rich, of Horndon on the Hill, in the County of
Essex Esquire; and Alice married to John Washborne of Withingfoord in the
County of Worcester, Esquire. The second Husband was William Elkin Esquire,
Alderman of the City of London, by whom she had issue, only Vrsula Elkin,
married to Sir Roger Owen of Condover, in the County of Salop, Knight. The
third Husband was Thomas Owen, one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas
to Queen Elizabeth.

On a fair Stone in the Chancell is this Inscription.
Hinc Sperat Resurrectionem (Filius Harbottelli Grimeston, Militis and
Baronetti Natu Tertius.)
Henricus Grimeston. Anagramma. En Christi Regno sum.
Qui moritur, vivit, Christo, huic,
Mors semita, Ductor
Angelus, ad vitam Ianua
Christus erit.
Hac itur ad superos, calcane
vestigia Lethi,
Intrabam Christi Regia,
Templa Dei.
12. die Mensis Iulij. An. Dom. 1627.

In the North side of the Chancell is thus written.
Here lies buried the body of Sir Nicholas Kempe, Knight, one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, and an Honorable Member of the high Commission Court,
etc. who had to his first wife Cicely, with whom he lived in blessed amity
near forty years, together with Sarah his second wife six years: and having
past, with much Prosperity, Love, and Credit, the reverend years of 72. he
changed this terrestrial condition for that everlasting state of blessedness,
the third of September 1624.

Wife, Loving Liberal,
Religious, lust;
Those graces filled the soul
of him, whose dust
Lies here in Tomb;
all that praise can bring forth,
There are not words enough
to express his worth:
For his good works,
this stone cannot comprise
Half the particulars
of his Pieties:
What goodness ever was,
is, and to come,
In mortal man,
that makes up his just sum.
Another Monument on the North side the Chancell, and has this inscribed.
Vivit post funera virtus.
Here lies the body of William Riethorne, late of Canonbury Esquire, which
William married with Anne, the Daughter of John Quarles of London, Merchant,
and died without issue, the 18. day of November. In the year of our Lord God
1582. and in the 54. year of his age.

A Monument in the South I Will, with this inscription.
To the sacred Memory of

Anne late wife of Henry Chitting, Esquire, Chester Herald at Arms, eldest
Daughter of William Bennet, Gentleman, by Ioice, widow of Richard Ioselin, of
Newhall Ioselins in Essex, Esquire, and Daughter of Robert Atkinson of Stowell,
in the County of Gloucester, Esquire, she had four children, whereof three are
living, Thomas, Joyce, and Henry, of which last she died in Childbed, the 8.
of May 1632. in the 27. of her age, and 4. year of her marriage.

Mors mihi vita.
Life is Deaths road,
and Death Heavens gate must be,
Heaven is Christ's Throne,
and Christ is life to me.
The Angels of the Lord protect
All those that are his own Elect.
Vivit post funera virtus.

In the Church at Kenzington, is this ensuing Monumeat.
An Epitaph in memory of Sir William Blake, Knight, who deceased the 30. day of
Oct. An. Dom. 1630.
STay Reader, Kenzington.
gaze, admire,
and pass not slightly ore,
The Casket of his corpse
imbalmed in this flore:
Let his industrious hand,
pattern of patterns be,
And blazon forth his worth
to all posterity.
Let his ost footsteps
unto this sacred place,
Be pious. Clues to guide
thee to like holy trace.
Let him in peace
rest here in peace,
Till God of Peace
return,
And give him peace
that loved peace,
And call him from
his Vrne.
Unto the worldly wise,
Death does Apologize.
Suspend thy by-thoughts,
his thoughts did ever aim at good,
Had I forborne, they had
at full been better understood.
The figure of Death lying under these lines.

In Saint Giles Church in the Fields, are these ensuing Monuments.
On the North side of the Quire is this Inscription.
M. S.
CHarissimae Matris Alliciae, Saint Giles*
vxoris venerabilis olim viri Alexandri Sheppard, Legum Doctoris, Nec non
suavissimae nuper conjugis Annae, ex Antiqua Daunteseyorum Familia in Agro
Wilton oriundae,

Pietatis, and Amoris ergo posuit, Thomas Sheppard hic loci, juxta quem (si Deo
videbitur) mortales suas exuvias Humandas designavit, providus. Anno Dom. 1631.

Another Monument on the North side, having this Inscription.
Here before lies buried the body of William Styddulfe, third Son of John
Styddulfe, of Mickleham in the County of Surrey, Esquire; he had issue by his
wife Elizabeth, Daughter of John Fox, of Saint John's in London, Gentleman,
William, Jane, Mary, Thomas, and Elizabeth. He departed this life at the age
of 55. being the last of December, Anno Domini 1600. Here also before rests
the body of the above named Elizabeth, who departed this life at the age of 60.
years. 10. of February 1623.

In Saint Martins Church in the Fields, are these ensuing Monuments.
On the South side is a fair Monument, with this Inscription.
Arthur Gregory married Christian.
HEre lies buried William Downs, S. Martins.
whom God has taken to his mercy, who believed that he should rise at the last
day, and see the glorious Majesty of God, and receive life everlasting. Who
while he lived here had two Wives, Margaret Ward and Elizabeth Rolfe; who had
by his first wife one Son and one Daughter, and by his second wife two Sons and
four Daughters, who died the 26. of September 1589.

Otho Maudit married Elizabeth.

John Thorpe married Margaret.

William Bret married Mary.

Another Monument there also, with this Inscription.
Here lies the body of Thomas Fouler, Esquire, borne in Wicam, in the County
of Lancaster, who was Controuler and Play Master of the works to Queen Mary,
and to our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, by the space of ten years. He
was very charitable to the poor in his life time, and at his death he gave by
Will out of his dwelling house, a perpetual annuity of 40. s. by the year, to
be given to 20. poor hous-holders of this Parish at Christmas for ever. He had
in marriage three wives, Ellen, Margaret, and Elizabeth, which also lies here
intombed. He surviving them, having no child at his death, made three of his
old servants, namely Henry Bludder, Matthew Switzer, and William Humphrey, his
Executors, who in remembrance of him, have caused this Monument to be made.

Another on the South side, thus inscribed.
Expectans Gloriam.
Iuxta hoc requiescit John Bembow, Arm. deputatus clerici Coronae in curia
Cancellaria D. Regis. In quo officio, per spacium 40. An. Industriam
praestitit, -- expiravit die Veneris 7. October. An. 1625. Termino sexaginta
Anno. Aetatis suae finito. Tres habuit vxores, Dorotheam Proud, and Katherinam
Sparks, eodem tumulo sepultas, Per quas genuit liberos etiam perfunctos, Et
Elizabetham Hodges modo extantem, quae sibi duos peperit filios, Gulielmum
Bembowe, Aetatis 4. and 6. men's: and Iohannem Bembowe posthumum, Tres tantum
Hebdomadas viventem, cum patre humatum.

This Monument is near unto the other, and has this Inscription.
Here lies the Corpse of John Worsley, Gentleman, who was Messenger to Queen
Elizabeth, by 20. years space. He died the 25. of March, 1595. in the 37.
year of her reign, being aged 40. years. He gave to be paid yearly upon
each Christmas day, during the space of 21. years, as well 15. shillings to
the poor of Saint Martins Parish in the Fields, where he was a Parishoner, as
also 10. shillings to the poor of the Parish of Whichurch, in Salop.

In the same I Will on the South side is this inscription.
To the memory of Sir Carew Keynell, Knight, late Gentleman Pentioner to Queen
Elizabeth, and Gentleman Usher of the Privy-Chamber to King James. He died the
7. of December 1624. in the 61. year of his age.

Another Monument on the same side, with this Inscription.
Hic jacet Thomas Heron Armiger, Filius Thomae Heronis de Edgecombe, in
proviciae Surrey Armigeri scaccarij Mareschallus. Vxorem cepit olivam, Thomae
Britton generosi de Felmingham Norfolciae filiam. Cum qua viginti novem annos
vixit; atque ex ea unico dotatus Filio Edoardo. Diem obijt martij 1590. Marito
plurimum dilecto, praedicta conjux Amantissima, Moerore, and lachrimis perfusa,
Monumentum hoc Amoris and Fidei Conjugalis ergo, Posuit and sacravit.

On the same side is another Monument, with this Inscription.
Hic jacet Maria, vxor Thomae Clopton Armig. filia Domini Willi. Waldgrave
Militis, vtrisque tam Mariti, quam patris illustrata Familiis. Obijt 19.
December. 1599. de qua sunt superstites 4. Liberi, Willielmus, Gualterus,
Elizabetha and Maria.

Cloptoni jacet hic Conjux, Waldgravia proles,
Vxor digna viro, Filia digna Patre:
Alter in alterius splendet virtutibus, vt lux
Sitque viro, and Patri, virque paterque sibi.
This Monument is in the South side of the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Hic sita est Eliza. Dutton filia primogenita Thomae Egerton, equitis aurati
filij primogeniti Tho. Egerton, Equit. Aurat. Dom. magnis sigilli Angliae
custodis, qui nunc honorem summi Angliae Cancellarij and Baronis de Elesmere
gerit. Nupta fuit Johan. Dutton ex antiquissima familia Duttonorum in Comitatu
Cestriae, sed vxorem viduam and Virginem ab avo pie educatam, venustate pietate
and modestia prestantissima^ praematura mors ad loca excelsa and beatissima
(quo omnes tendimus) non (...) meltorum lacrimis praemisit. Obijt die secundo
Octobris 1611 vixit annos 16. M. iiij D. XXI.

Idem nobilissimus baro de Elesmere, Angliae Concellarius avus indulgentissimus
moestissimusque nepoti charissimae amoris ergo posuit.

Another Monument in the same Church, with this inscription.
To the worthy, learned, and godly Gentleman, William Cook, Esquire, her dear
Husband, Son to the Right Worshipful, Sir Anth. Cook, Knight, Frances his
most loving wife, Daughter to that most noble Gentleman, the Lord John Gray,
brother to the sometime high and mighty Prince, Henry Gray, the last Duke of
Suffolk, has dedicated this Monument in memory of his virtue and her love,
died the 14. day of May, and in the year of his age 56.

This Tomb for her dear Spouse,
has noble Frances placed,
Lamenting much, with greater gifts
this Tomb should not be graced,
And grives as much companion-like,
this Tomb should not contain
Their wills in earth, since both on earth
one will they did retain.
On the North side of the Chancell is this Inscription.
Honoratissimo patri Dauncio Pouleto equiti aurato, insulae Ierseae praefecto,
apud Christianissimum regem quondam legato, nobilissimi ordinis Garterij
Cancelario and serenissimae principis Elizabethae Consiliario, Antonius
Pouletus filius, hoc pietatis Monumentum Moerens posuit.

Gardez la foy.
Quod verbo servare fidem
(Poulete) solebas,
Quam been convenient
haec tria verba tibi:
Quod gladio servare fidem
Poulete solebas,
Quam been convenient
haec tria signa tibi.
Patria te sensit,
sensit Regina fidelem,
Sic fidus Civis,
sicque senator eras.
Te fidum Christus,
te fidum Ecclesia sensit,
Sic servat inter
multa pericla fidem,
Ergo quod servo princeps,
Ecclesia nato,
Patria quod fide
cive sit orba dolet,
Interea Christus defuncti
facta coronat,
A quo servatam
viderat esse fidem.
Margareta Poulet hoc Epitaphium moetoris simul and amoris sui perpetuum testem
amicio conjugi suo charissimo clarissimoque dicavit.

Conjugis est (testante Deo)
pars altera conjunx,
Vir caput est, vnum
corpus uterque refert,
Vna caro, men's una,
thoro sociata jugali,
Solamen vitae
praesidiumque suae:
Ergo meo luctus quis
par queat esse dolori
Cui vitae pars est altera
dempta meae.
Sed quid flere juvat,
non sic revocabere conjux,
Namque tibi pietas
stravit ad astra viam:
Haec spes sola juvat:
qui nos conjunxit in vnum,
Hunc sibi postremo
jungere velle die.
Another Monument in the same Church, with this Inscription.
Hic jacet Maria Da. Cheake, filia R. Hill Armig. foemina pia and prudens, and
quae fuit vsque ad obitum una dominarum in privata Camera Reginae Elizabethae
(quae fuit tunc dignitas in praecipuo honor) nupta fuit primo Iohanni Cheake,
Magist. principali Secretario Regis Edwardi 6. viro-optimo and eruditissimo,
cui peperit Henricum haeredem paternae virtutis, and Regiae Majestatis a
Secretis in Consilio Eboracensi, Johan. Cheake virum egregium and magnanimum,
Edwardum Cheake.

Vixit circa 84. Anno obijt November. 30. 1616.
Secundo nupta Henrico Mackwillims Arm. viro ex Nobilis. Familia Hibernorum cui
peperit Henricum qui sine prole obijt, and Margaretam seniorem filiam nuptam
viro honor. Iohanni Domino Stanhop, Baroni de Harrington, Vicecamerario Reginae
Eliza. and R. Iacobi thesaurario camerae and Magistro cursarum Rigio^. Susannam
nuptam Edwardo Sandeys Arm. deinde Gothardo Pemberton Mil. and vltimo Thomae
Ireland Mil. Ambrosiam nuptam Willielmo Kingswell Mil. Cassandra Georgio Cotton
Mil. and Ceciliam nuptam Thomae Dom. Ridgway, Dom. thesaurario Regio in
Hibernia.

On a flat Stone in the Chancell, is this written.
Hem viator, Infans te paucis vult
Carolus Blown^, Honoratis. Dom. Mountjoy, Comitis de Newport, and lectiss.

Dom. Annae e nobili Bottelorum in agro Herfordiensi familia oriundae.

Filius natu secundus bimulus hic praematurae posuit mortalitatis exuvias:
tantum est.

Vivus nil poteram fari,
quin mortuus infans,
Ecce loquar mortis
sis memor atque vale.
In the Church at Greenewich, are these ensuing Monuments.
In the Chancell, on the South side, this is written.
Dilectissimae Conjugi sacrae Hettonae Franciscus Hettonus viduus Moestus, non
sine Lachrimis, posuit

OMea sacra oculis multo
mihi Charior ipsis, Greenewich*

Deseris (Heu) viduum
cur ita sacra virum?
Tu secura manes,
portu requiescis Amoeno
Non tibifraus, Moribus
nec mala obesse valent.
Tu pace Aeterna frueris,
tu vivis ovasque,
Quippe tibi est Terris,
gratior Aula Dei,
Conjux ipse tuus mance
vivoque superfles,
Moestificis plenus
solicitudinibus,
Spero tamen tempusque brevi,
(mea sacra) futurum est
Cum te visurus sim,
vel in Arce poli.
Cuncta tibi scio salva manent,
vereque Beata es,
Cui mors vita fuit,
vitaque morte viret.
Eheu quam nostrae est
evanida gloria vitae,
Certa dies nobis nulla,
nec hora datur:
Stare decet vigiles ergo,
semper que paratos,
Ne mors incautos
nos inopina premat.
Ecce rei testis, sacra
hic Blomera, jugali
Francisco Hettono
Consociate Thoro.
Annos octodecim, placuitque
Marita Marito,
Nulla magis potuit,
nec placuisse magis.
Filiolos illi peperit,
ter quinque utriusque
Pignora: and ex illis,
octo fuere Mares.
Quadraginta Hyemes,
binos si dempseris annos
Vixit, and octodecim,
suasilis vxor erat.
Obijt 13. Iul. Anno Dom. 1600.

Another Monument on the South side the Quire, with this Inscription.
D. O. M. Et salvatori. I. C. S. In Memoriam.
Gulielmi Hattecliffe, ex Antiqua Hatteclifforum, de Hattecliffe, in Agro
Lincolniensi Familia oriundi. Qui cum summa in Deum Pietate, In pauperes
Benignitate, in amicos humanitate, in omnes bonitate, Annos plus minus
quinquaginta septem Coelebs in terris vitam egisset tranquillam, Tandem 17.
nempe die Maij, Anno 1620. Deo Animam Reddidit Grenovici, and hic situs in pace
quiescit.

On a Monument on the North side of the Chancell is this Inscription.
In piam Memoriam Dilectissimae suae conjugis.
Dorotheae Lok Filiae Iacobi Brampton, de Brampto, in Comitatu Norfolciae
Generosi, and Mariae vxoris ejus, Filiae Claclarissimi viri Edwardi Bulein
militis, and Annae Tempestiae vxoris ejus, etc. Quae post Annos triginta sex,
in hac peregrinatione terrena peractos (Annosque pene Trinos, in fideli,
Castissimoque Matrimonio perimpletos) in vera Fidei Christianae confessione,
and Ardentissima Dei omnipotentis invocatione, pie ex hac vita decessit 24. die
Februarij 1596.

Cujus corpus juxta inhumatur, in medio hujus Chori, Adjacente a sinistra
corpore Henrici Lok filii sui. Zacharias Lok Amoris and officii ergo Monumentum
hoc poni fecit 24. die Octobris 1597.

In an I Will on the North side is this Inscription.
Egregio viro, Roberto Adams, operum Regiarum Supervisori, Architecturae
peritissimo; Religione, and moribus Integerrimo. Qui pie obiit Anno suae
Aetatis 1595.

Simon Basil operationum Regiarum Controtultor hoc posuit Monumentum 1601.

Next to the other is this Inscription.
Spiritus in Caelis,
fax hic Clementis Adami,
Cui ex tredecim,
septem pignora viva Manent,
Regius ille diu vixit,
Moriturque scholarca,
Tumque ubi bis septem
lustra peregit, obit
Anno Dom. 1586. Ian. 9.
Et lateri conjuncta jacet
suavissima conjux,
Quindenis Annis
qua fuit ille minor.
Anno Dom. 1588. Maij 11.

Next to the other is this Inscription.
Near to this place lies interred, the body of Mistress Mary Ward, late wife
of Richard Ward, Esquire, Sergeant at Arms unto King James, and King Charles,
Father and Mother of Captain Caesar Ward, who died in the service of his King
and Country in October 1627. She died in February following, in the foresaid
year.

Which three months time with sighs
Her grieved life did spend,
Her Sons untimely death
Hastened her end.
In the Church at Detford, or West Greenwich, are these ensuing Monuments.
This Monument is at the upper end of the Chancell, and has this Inscription.
M. S.
H. S. E. Rogerus Boil, De^ford.
Richardi Comitis Corcagiensis Filius Primogentius, qui in Hibernia natus, in
Cantio solo Patris Natali denatus, Dum hic ingenij cultum capessit. Puer
eximiae indolis, praecocitatem ingenij funere luit immaturo. Sic luculenti, sed
terreni Patrimonij factus exhaeres, coelestem crevit Haereditatem. Decessit A.
D. 1615. iv. eid. viii. Bris.

Death.
Richardus, praenobilis Comes Corcagiensis Vxoris suae Patruo. B. M. P.
Memoriae perenni Edwardi Fenton, Reginae Elizabethae, olim pro corpore
Armigeri, Iano O-Neal, ac post eum, Comite Desmoniae, in Hibernia Turbantibus,
Fortissimi Taxiarchi, qui post lustratum improbo ausu, septentrionalis Plagae
Apochryphum Mare, and excussas variis Peregrinationibus inertis Naturae
la^^bras, Anno 1588. in celebri contrae Hispanos Naumachia, meruit Navis
Praetoriae Navarchus.

Obijt Anno Domini 1603.

Cognatos Cineres, and
Amicam Manibus umbram,
O Fentone, tuis,
excipias Tumulo.
Vsuram Tumuli victure
Marmore Pensat,
Et reddit gratus,
pro Tumulo Titulum.
At the upper end of that Chancell, on the North side, is thus written.
Sacrae perpetuaeque Memoriae Gulielmi Haukyns, de Plymouth Armigeri.
Qui verae Religionis verus cultor, Pauperibus praecipue Navicularijs
Munificus, Rerum Nauticarum studiossissimus, longinquas instituit saepe
Navigationes; Arbiter in causis difficilimis Aequissimus, Fide, Probitate and
Prudentia singulari. Duas duxit Vxores, e quarum una 4. ex altera 7. suscepit
liberos.

Johannes Haukyns Eques Auratus, Classis Regiae Quaestor, Frater Moestissimus
posuit.

Obijt specerta Resurgendi 7. die mensis Octobris, An. Dom. 1589.

In the upper end of the Chancell.
There lies buried near this place the body of Jane Edisbury, Widow, Mother
of Kenrick Edisbury, Gentleman, Play Master of the Kings Majesty's Navy, under
Sir William Russell, Knight, Treasurer. She died on the 16. day of March, 1618.

On the North side of this Quire, a worthy Memorial of Sir Sackevile Crow, for
Seeling and beautifying of that North I Will.

In the Church at Roderith, are these ensuing Monuments.
In the South I Will, on the wall, is this written.
Post tenebras, spero Lucem.
NExt without this Wall, Roderith.
are buried Brian, Richard, and Mark, Alize, and Elizabeth, the three Sons and
two Daughters of Nicholas Reynolds, Citizen and Goldsmith of London, and of
Elizabeth his wife. The forenamed Elizabeth, their younger Daughter, was
married to Robert Wheatley, Salter, the 20. day of August, 1593. and died the
18. of September, in the same year.

These Blossoms young and tender, lo,
Blown down by deadly wind,
May urge the riper sort to know,
Like blast shall them out find.
For Flesh, as grass, away does wither,
No age can it eschew,
The young and old decay together,
When death shall them pursue.
No Parents, Friends, or Advocate,
Can him entreat to spare,
The Fair, the Fine, or Delicate,
For threats he does not care.
Let that most certain Statute made,
By God our heavenly King,
All men assure, and eke persuade,
Death shall them equal bring.
Post Mortem, Vitam Aeternam.

In the middle I Will of this Church is thus written.
Trinitas in vnitate.
Here lies buried the body of Richard Hills, Mariner, one of the eldest
Brothers and Assistants of the Company of the Trinity, and his two wives; who
while he lived in this place, gave liberally to the poor, and spent
bountifully in his house: and after many great troubles, being of the age of
80. years and upward, departed this life without issue, upon the 16. of
February, 1614.

This was made at the charge of Robert Bell.
Though Hills be dead,
Hills Will and Act survives,
His Free-Schoole, and
his Pension for the poor;
Thought on by him,
performed by his Heir,
For eight poor Sea-mens
children, and no more.
1627.
On the outside of the North Wall is a Monument, bearing the figure of a Ship
at Sea; under it the portraiture of him for whom it was erected, with his Wife,
six Sons, and four Daughters; the living and the dead distinguished by
Deaths-heads, which the buried seem to bear in their hands, and under them
this Inscription.

Here beneath lies interred, the body of Captain Anthony Wood, who departed
this life the 24. of August, 1625. being the 40. year of his age, and had
issue by his wife Martha Wood, six Sons and four Daughters.

In Saint Margarets Church at Westminster, are these ensuing Monuments.
On a very ancient Monument in Brass, at the upper end of the North I Will, is
thus written.
Sacrum doloris.
SHall tears, S. Margarets at Westminster.
the silent
Messengers of death,
Dissolve their streams
into a Sea of moan?
No, no, in vain
you sacrifice relief,
Over his Tomb, with eyes,
with voice, with groan,
For Cole assigned by God,
the poor to pity,
The widows comfort,
and eke the Orphans Sire,
Who tuned each string of hate
to loves sweet ditty,
Is dead: aye me, will death
the best desire?
Remorselesse death,
thy wrath in him is ended,
Maugre thy darts,
his praises cannot dye,
Thou have his body,
but his soul ascended
Into the place
of joys eternity,
And though his corpse interred
lie dead in grave,
Yet still his virtues
life and being have.
An. Dom. 1597.

In Parliament, a Burgess,
Cole was placed,
In Westminster
the like for many years,
But now with Saints above
his soul is graced,
And lives a Burgess
with Heavens royal Peers.
Oblessed change, from earth,
where Death is King,
To be united there
where Angels sing.
Ejusdem in eundem.
Terra tegit Corpus, men's scandit
ad Aethera Coeli,
Fama virens floret,
Caetera mors rapuit.
Thus in English.
The Grave my body,
Heaven my soul does keep,
The World my fame,
the rest in death does sleep.
Margaretta Cole posuit. In another column of the same Table.
This Monument unites
two constant Lovers,
He that is dead,
and her that lives in death:
His Body she, his Spouse,
in honor covers,
Wishing her days
were shortened with his death.
But she must live,
yet living shall be mated,
With him in death,
while death her life has dated.
Full twenty years and odd
their league was firm,
Witness the world,
their children, and their love,
Nothing but death, by death
should give the term
Of farewell to their faith,
by false remove.
Of breach of concord
no tongue can accuse them,
Unless base envy
by her Saints abuse them.
O envy not the dead,
but die to sin,
Expect the harvest
of this dead man's bliss,
Desire the Crown
which envy cannot win,
Amend in you, not others,
what is amiss.
Sad death shall be
your Herald to procure
Rest to your souls
with Christ for to endure.
Marget in woe, distill
those tears to comfort,
And in thy childrens love
address thy anguish:
Three live with thee,
then love their living consort,
No longer in thy Husbands
sorrow languish.
But imitate thy Cole
in Virtues laws,
That thou may live where
Virtue pleads his cause.
This Monument is in the North I Will, and has this Inscription.
Here lies the Lady Dorothy Stafford, Wife and Widow to Sir William Stafford,
Knight, Daughter to Henry Lord Stafford, the only Son of Edward, the last
Duke of Buckingham: her Mother was Vrsula, Daughter to the Countess of
Salisbury, the only Daughter to George Duke of Clarence, Brother to King
Edward the fourth. She continued a true Widow, from the age of 27. till her
death. She served Queen Elizabeth 40. years, lying in the Bedchamber,
esteemed of her, loved of all, doing good all she could to every body, never
hurted any; a continual remembrancer of the suites of the poor. As she lived
a religious life, in great reputation of honor and virtue in the world, so she
ended in continual fervent meditation and hearty prayer to God. At which
instant (as all her life) so after her death she gave liberally to the poor,
and died aged 78. the 22. of September 1604. In whose remembrance, Sir Edward
Stafford her Son has caused this memorial of her to be, in the same form
and place as she her self long since required him.

On a Monument on the North side of the Chancell is this Inscription.
To the memory of Rob. Peeter, Esquire, Auditor of the Receipt, her first
Husband, who gave to the use of the poor of this Parish one hundred pound: and
of Edward English, her second Husband, a Gentleman, kind, courteous, and of
great Hospitality, who gave twelve pounds in Annuity for ever to the same use.

Margaret their loving wife, Daughter of Sir John Tyrill of Gipping, Knight,
who likewike has bequeathed one hundred pounds for the purchasing of one
yearly Annuity of twenty nobles for ever to the foresaid poor, Lamenting
their death, and for testification of her dutiful love has erected this
Monument.

Another Monument in the same I Will, with this Inscription.
Here lies the body of Thomas Arneway, buried the 8. of September, Anno Dom.
1603. And Margaret Arneway his Wife, who was buried the 9. of August, Anno Dom.
1596.

Near unto the other, in a fair Plate, is this following Epitaph.
A memorial on the death of John Varnam Gardener, who deceased the xj. of
December, 1586. Aetatis suae 46.

O mortal man that lives on earth,
consider well thy end,
Remember that thou must depart,
when God for thee does send.
This life is but a pilgrimage,
so soon it does decay,
And all the riches of this world
shall fade and pass away:
As by example daily showed,
before our eyes we see,
That rich and poor to earth are brought
for their iniquity.
Let us that live on earth behind,
to God for mercy call,
With woeful heart and wringing hands,
and he will bless us all.
And now to speak of this good man,
John Varnam called by name,
Who in his life he lived well,
by labor, travail, and pain,
In helping of the fatherless,
and widows very poor,
And setting ever them on work
which went from door to door.
A Gardener by Art he was,
great skill he had therein,
And prosper'd well in all his life,
with every living thing
That he at all times took in hand:
To God be given all praise,
That did increase this honest man
with riches many ways.
The poor they had great work of him,
by weeding of his ground,
And he to them was well content,
to leave assurance ^ound,
Of land and living to releeve
the fatherless in need,
So he confirmed this his mind,
by will it was decreed.
Agnes Varnam left behind,
his loving wife most sure,
By her he had four sons, likewise
four daughters, Virgins pure:
Who all being dead, and none alive,
but Elizabeth by name,
And in remembrance of his life,
they have set up this same.
He willingly did yield himself,
in God was all his trust,
And in the last hour of his death,
he showed his faith most just,
To leave this world most cheerfully,
desirous to depart,
Asking forgiveness of the world,
and forgiving with his heart
To those which he at any time
in deed or word offended:
Most joyfully his soul was then
unto the Lord commended.
And thus he left his life,
in brief to tell you plain,
Hoping in Heaven to be received,
for ever to remain.
In the same I Will, in the body of the Church, is this Inscription.
Cornelius Vandun lies here, borne at Breda in R^abant, Soldier with King
Henry at Turney, Yeoman of the Guard, and Usher to King Henry, King Edward,
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth: of honest and virtuous life, a careful man
for poor folk, who in the end of this town did build for poor widows
twenty houses of his own cost.

Round about his figure wrought as in his Guards Coa^, these words.

Obijt Anno Dom. 1577. buried the 4. of September. Aetatis suae 94.

At the upper end of the South I Will in the Chancell, as follows.
Frances Haughton, in token of her love to her Husband, caused this Monument to
be erected.
Here rests in assured hope to rise in Christ, the body of Hugh Haughton, the
fourth son of Thomas Haughton of Haughton, in the County of Chester,
Gentleman, who married Frances, Daughter of William Coothe of Sherbourne, in
the County of Dorset, Gentleman, and by her had issue two Daughters, Elizabeth
and Frances: He departed this life the 17. day of October, 1616. aged 50.
years, and Elizabeth departed this life the 28. of August, 1615. aged seven
years, and lies here also interred.

On an ancient brass Monument close by the other, is thus written.
Give thanks to God for Edward Courtney Esquire, Son and Heir to Sir Peter
Courtney of Devonshire, Knight, who living a life agreeable to his estate and
stock, ended the same like a fithfull Christian, the 27. day of November 1566.
and is buried before this stone.

On another near to that is thus written.
Here lies the body of Alexander Tomkins, the fifth son to Richard Tomkins
of Momington upon Wye, in the County of Hereford, Esquire, who was buried in
August, in the year of our Lord God 1615.

On another near to that is thus written.
Underneath lies the body of James Tomkins, second son to James Tomkins, of
Momington upon Wye, in the County of Hereford, Esquire, buried in December, in
the year of our Lord God 1613.

Close to this a very fair Monument in the South wall of the Chancell, thus
written on.
Here under is intombed Blanch Parry, Daughter to Henry Parry of NewCourt,
within the County of Hereford, Esquire, chief Gentlewoman of Queen Elizabeth's
most honorable privy Chamber, and Keeper of her Majesty's Jewels, whom she
faithfully served from her Highness birth; beneficial to her Kinsfolk and
Countrymen, charitable to the poor, insomuch that she gave to the poor of
Bacton and Newton in Herefordshire, sevenscore bushels of Wheat and Rye yearly
for ever, with diverse sums of money to Westminster and other places for good
uses. She died a Maid in the 82. year of her age, the 12. of February 1589.

Another fair Monument in the fame I Will, in the Chancell, thus written on.
Here under rests in expectation of a glorious Resurrection, the body of
Thomas Bond Gentleman, sometimes a Burgess of this City of Westminster; and
also the bodies of Ellin his wife, of Thomas Bond their Son, and of Ellen
their Daughter.

To the memory of whose Christian virtues, their dutiful Son, and loving
Brother John Bond, has erected this Monument.

A Father, Mother, Son,
and Daughter dear,
Covered with earth,
their corpse be buried here;
Two aged died, and two
in prime of strength;
To teach that death will
conquer all at length:
A virtuous life they lived,
made Christian ends,
And now a Crown of glory
them attends.
At the four corners of this Monument are these inscriptions.
Thomas Bond the Father died the 7. of April 1616.

Ellin Bond the Mother died the 31. of May 1628.

Thomas Bond the Son died the 26. of May 1627.

Ellin Butts the Daughter died the 12. of August 1625.

On a fair Stone in the middle of the Chancell is this written.
Here rests in God the body of Anna Ebbis, borne in Denmark, who served our
gracious Queen Anna, in her Bedchamber, was married to Master Thomas Seringe,
her Majesty's Chaplain, the 28. of April, in the year of our Lord God, 1598.
and died at Westminster the 26. of February 1608. unto whom God Almighty give a
joyful Resurrection.

Moerentis musa Mariti.
Astra tuam foveant Animam,
bona fama sepultae
Restet in his terris,
capiat tandem omnia Coelum.
Johannes Seringius,
Thuringius.
A fair Monument at the lower end of the North I Will in the wall, thus written
on.
Here lies interred the body of Edward Reynolds, Esquire, late Clearke of his
Majesty's privy Seal, and Register of the Court of Requests, who departed this
life the 18. day of December Anno Dom. 1623. by him also lies the body of his
Brother, Master Owen Reynolds, who deceased the 16. of April 1610. To whose
memories Edward and Launcelet Reynolds, Gentlemen, have here placed these
ensuing Verses, made by the said Edward Reynolds in his life time.

Gloria, Vita, Decor, Thesaurus, Fanta, Voluptas Vana, brevis, fragilis,
fluxus, temeraria, mollis, Fumus, Bulla, Iris, Fax Viatus, Dulce venenu^,
Vanescit, perit, arescit, ^quefit, fugit, angit.

Orb nihil toto stabile est,
cito corruet orbis,
Et vasti in nihilum
vanescet fabrica Mundi.
Sola fides firmam parit,
aesern amque Coronam,
So^^ fides Christi meritis,
sunt ^etera Nugae.
Haec vixi, hac morior side, mihi Christus in vitae, and morte lucrum.

In the middle of the same I Will, in the wall, is a fair Monument, thus written
on.
M. S.
Hic sepultus jacet Johannes Corbettus de Sprowslon, in Com. Norf. Baroncttus,
qui vxorem duxit piissimam Annam, filiam Arthuri Capel de Ha^ham, in Com.
Hareford Militis, ex qua suscepit Filios ties, totiden que Filiae, Vitam vixit
integerrimam, Rei assertor publicae, Christianae columen, Mecaenas literariae,
hinc migrans, Anno Dom. Millesimo, sexcentesimo vigesimo septimo (Aetatis
trigesimo septimo) die decimo nono Ianuarij. Abunde illud supplevit, in quo
Marmor deficit, famam and memoriam indeptus terris diutius, at Caele in
aeternum victuram.

Johannes Corbettus miles.
Sanctusue is homo and liber?
Et sanctus isle homo liber.
Sir John Corbett Baronet.

Another in the same wall, thus inscribed.
D. M. M. S.
Ioannes Makeulio
de Merton D N.
Scoto-Britannus,
Magni Hetruriae ducis
Archiater quondam,
Nec non
In sapientia illustris, Pisis
Cathedrae Doctor,
Dein
Magnae Britanniae Regis
Medicus, Medicorum sui seculi
Aesculapius, Therapeutices;
promus-condus, conditumque prodigium,
Mortales, huic Cippo, in spem
Resurrectionis, vitaeque melioris
Reliquit exuvias
Reparatae salutis 1622.
Aetatis suae 46. Mense.
Nascentes morimur, finisque
ab origin pendet.
On the same Wall, in a Table, is this Epitaph.
In memory of the late deceased Virgin, Mistress Elizabeth Hereicke.

Sweet Virgin,
that I do not set
Thy Grave-verse up
in mournfinll Jet
Or dapl'd Marble,
let thy shade
Not wrathful seem,
or fright the maid,
Who hither at her
weeping hours,
Shall come to strew
thy earth with flowers:
No, know blessed soul,
when there is not one
Remainder left
of brass or stone,
Thy living Epitaph
shall be
Though lost in them
yet found in me:
Dear, in thy bed
of Roses then,
Till this world shall
dissolve (as men)
Sleep, while we hide thee
from the light,
Drawing thy Curtains round --
Good night.
On a Table hanging at the upper end of the South I Will is this written.
In memory of the right virtuous and beautiful Gentlewoman, Mistress Margaret
Radcliffe, Daughter to Sir John Radcliffe Knight, one of the Maids of Honor to
Queen Elizabeth, who deceased at Richmond the 10. of November, and was here
buried with solemnity the 22. of the same, Anno Dom. 1599. An. Reg. Eliz. 41.

Tell thou my wailing verse,
and mourning show,
What beauteous frame
lies here interred below.
Here underneath entombed
a Dazie lies,
The pride of nature,
with perfection filled;
O woe, whom Zephyres blasts
can never make rise,
Being by Deaths black storms
untimely killed.
Ratcliffe's thy name,
the glory of the Court,
Virtue and Beauty strove
t'adorne thee most,
Though here enclosed,
yet fame shall still report
Thy Virtues praise,
thy graces time shall boast,
Thou di'dst a Virgin pure,
and spotless liver,
Grief caused thy death,
death makes thee live for ever.
If any ask, who sighed
this sad complaint,
Say one that lived, that loved,
that ioyed, now faint.
Another fair Monument at the upper end of the Chancell, thus inscribed.
Epitaphium Religiosissimi, spectatissimique viri, Francisci Egioke, de Egioke
in Comitatu Vigorniae Equitis Aurati, vitae Famaeque integerrimae, Musarum,
Militum, Pauperumque Fautoris Meritissimi, Qui a Londino, Vigorniam versia
proficiscens, in Vxbrigia vita defunctus est 21. die November. 1622. Hic vero
repositus habet Cineres.

Dilectissima, Moessissimaque vxor ejus Elinor, Filia Fra. Ding^ey Armigeri, in
eodem Vigor^iae Co^itatus, Lugubre Hoc, Pij Amoris and obsequii, Monumentum
posuit.

Ad Tumulum niflere libet,
discedito Lector,
Qui legis haec, Fletu,
prodigus esto pio.
Cum Musis omnes flerent,
in^pumque Catervis,
Illis Patronus,
His Benefactor erat.
Arma virumque canit,
Mors imperiosa, triumphans,
Quod miles strenuus
sic spoliatus obit.
Vana quid insultas?
te jam tua praedafefellit;
Arts, arma, preces,
hunc periisse vetant.
Hunc (Mors) insequeris frustra,
cui militat ether,
Nec tibi, sed superis,
praeda beata jacet.
Quid quoditer carpens Cecidit?
Moriturque viator?
Quae supra terram est noverat;
hic Patriam.
Quo tendens, proprios Lares,
Terrasque relinquit,
Et Coelum media
possidet ille via.
This Monument is near unto the other, having this Inscription.
Here lies entombed Mary Lady Dudley, Daughter of William Lord Howard of
Effingham, in his time Lord high Admiral of ENGLAND, Lord Chamberlain, and
Lord Privy Seal. She was Grandchild to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, the second
of that Surname, and Sister to Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham, Lord High
Admiral of England, by whose prosperous direction, through the goodness of
God, in defending his Handmaid, Queen Elizabeth, the whole Fleet of Spain was
defeated and discomfited.

She was first married to Edward Sutton, Lord Dudley, and after to Richard
Mountpesson Esquire, who in the Memory of her Virtues, and l^st Testimony of
his love, erected this Monument. She slept in Christ Jesus, in the year of
our Lord 1600. the 21. of August, attending the joyful day of her Resurrection.

A fair Monument at the upper end of the North I Will, with this inscription.
Here in peace rests the body of Thomas Seymour, second son to the Right
Honorable, Edward Earl of Hartford, and Isabel his Wife, eldest Daughter to
Edward Meley of Katesby, in the County of Northampton, Esquire, which said
Thomas departed this life the 3. day of August, 1600. And the said Isabel the
20. day of August 1619. in the true faith of Jesus Christ, and in the blessed
hope of a joyful Resurrection.

On a fair Marble in the Chancell is thus written.
Depositum
Mariae Filiae unicae Thomae Egerton Militis Ba^onis de ^llesinere Ca^cella^ij
A^glis. Francisci Leigh Militis fidelissimae, optime meritae, ac unice ^llectae
conjugis, quae tertio die Aprilis, An. Dom. M. DCXII. Aetatis suae 36. post
partum Filliorum 4. Filiarum 5. inpuerperio Filiae 6. Spiritum Deo, Corpus
sepulchro liquit, in Christo obdormiens, Cui fide, spe and Charitate,
Constantissime vixit. Pudicitiae, Pietatis, and Venustatis Rarissimum decus.

Non obijt sed abijt.

In Westminster Abbey are these ensuing Monuments.
In Obitum Serenissimae
Principis and omnium virtutum genere Cumulatissimae Annae Dei gratia Magnae
Britaniae, Franciae and Hiberniae Reginae, Dominaeque suae long
gratiosissimae, carmen funebre.

Ad Potentissimum Serenissimae Annae Maritum Iacobum, Dei gratia, Magnae
Britanniae Regem fidei defensorem etc.

Annus and Anna in se redit, Westminster Abbey.
hic novus, illa perennis:
Cujus vir pa^er and frater Rex, Regia proles,
In Coelo Aeternos Regina est Anna per Annos.
Floreat illa suis in prole aeterna Britannis,
Inque suo vigeat feliciter Anna Iacobo.
Inclite Rex Britonum, veniam da vera loquenti.
Iacobus caret Anna, and non caret Anna Iacobo:
Maxim Rex Regum, Regem solare Iacobum.
Ad Invictissimum Christianum Quartum Dei Gratia Daniae, Norwegiae, Gothorum,
Vandolorumque Regem, etc.

Pondere pressa, suo sub pondere, Palma Resurgit:
Marmore pressa soror tua, Fertur ad Aethera victrix.
Sanguinolenta olim, inter Danos atque Britannos,
Pugna, nihil potuit, nostro conjuncta Iacobo,
Absque cruore, omnes vicit Dana Anna Britannos,
Aeterneque suis conjunxit Foedere Danis.
Orbis, Danorum Pacis, Britonumque sit idem
Terminus, and Reges Rex protegat orbis utrosque.
Ad Foelicissimam Iacobi and Annae prolem Carolum Walliae Principem,
Elizabetham, Frederici Electoris Comitis Palatini Vxorem, Regalemque eorum
Progeniem quae nunc est, vel Dei gratia erit in Posterum.

Indiae Phoenix, volucris per annos
Vna sexcentos deciesque senos,
Dicitur foelix superesse, dirae
Nescia Mortis.
Quod tibi Parcae dederant sorores
Fila correptae breviora vitae,
Anna, dicaris Mulier, sed esto
Caetera Phoenix.
Igne solari, moriens Crematur
Mortuo-Vivos Cineres in albos,
Sic, ut ex illis rediviva surgat
Altera Phoenix.
Anna, eui nunqua^ similem videbit
Phoebus, expiras? moriare sic, ut
In tua semper vigennt Beati
Prole Britanni.


Hinc, illinc, ubicunque, cadem est, and ubique Beata.

Obijt in Domino Anno Domini 1618. quarto Nonarum Martij, Annos nata 44. Menses
4. and dies 18.

Ad sereuissimae Reginae familiam Moerore obrutam.

Vos canite, O socij, funebria Carmina mecum;
Nos relevet Dominus, perdidimus Dominam.
Responsio Familiae.
Non sunt canendo, talibus pressi malis,
Sed nec loquendo, quos habet talis dolor:
Nostris adhaerent fiucibus linguae graves.
Loquantur alij, dum luctus nostri stupent.
Edidit Serenissimae Reginae Moestissimus Capellanus, Guliclmus Swadonus,
Collegij Wickamici Alumnus, Sacrae Theologiae Doctor, and Archidiaconus
Wigorniae.

Upon a very rich and stately Monument in the same Church is thus written.
Depositum Illustrissimi and Excellentissimi Principis Ludovici Stuarti Esmei
Leviniae Ducis Filij Ioannis Propatrui Seren: Regis, acobi Nepotis, Richmondiae
and Leviniae Dacis, Novi Castelli ad Tinam and Darnliae Comitis, etc. Magni
Scotiae Camerarij and Thalassiarchae Hereditarie. Sacri Palatij Iacobi Regis
Seneschalli, Cubiculariorumque principalium primi, Regi a Sanctitribus
Consilijs. San-Georgiani ordinis Eq. Scoticorumque per Gallias Cataphractorum
praefecti.

Viri excelsi ad omnia Magna and bona nati, ad meliora defuncti, vixit Annos
49. Menses 4. Dies 17.

2 Samuel 3. 38. Chronog:
AN IGNORATIS, QVIA PRINCEPS ET VIR MAGNUS OBIIT HODIE.

16. Febr. primo generalium Regni Comitiorum designato.

On the other side of the same Monument is thus written.
Illustrissima and Excellentissima Princeps, Francisca Richmondiae and Leviniae
Ducissa, Domini Thomae Howardi Dindoniae Filia, Thomae Howardi Norfolciae
Ducis, ex Elizabetha Edovardi Ducis Buckinghamiae Filia Neptis, Lodovici
Stuarti Richmondiae and Leviniae Ducis Vxor,

Chariss^^vi conjugij nunquam non memor, conjugi optime merito sibique posuit
hoc Monumentum.

Obijt Die mensis An. Dom.

On a Table in the same Quire, is this following Inscription.
P. M. S.
Vanae multitudinis Improperium hic jacet cuius tamen

Hispania Prudentiam. Gallia Fortitudinem. Belgia Industriam.
Toto Europa Mirata est Magnanimitatem.

Quem
Daniae and Reges Integerrimum. Sweciae Germaniae Transilvaniae and Princip.
Ingenuum. Nassauviae Veneta Respublica Philobasilia. Subaudiae and Lotharingiae
Duces Politicum. Palatinus Comes Fidelem. Imperator Pacificum. Turca
Christianum. Papa Protestantem. Experti sunt.
Quem
Anglia Archithalassum Cantabrigia Cancellarium Buckinghamia Ducem habuit.

Verum siste viator, and quid ipsa Invidia sugillare nequit audi.

Hic est Ille
Calamitosae virtutis
Buckinghamius.
Maritus redamatus, Pater amans,
Filius obsequens.
Frater amicissimus, Affinis Beneficus,
Amicus perpetuus,
Dominus Beniguus and
Optimus omnium servus.
Quem
Reges adamarunt, optimates honorarunt,
Ecclesia deflevit,
Vulgus oderunt.
Quem
Iacobus and Carolus
Regum perspicacissimi, intimum habuerunt.
A quibus
Honoribus auctus, and Negotijs onustus,
Fato succubuit
Antequam par animo periculum Invenit.
Quid jam Peregrine?
Aenigma mundi moritur;
Omnia fuit, nec quidquam habuit,
Patriae Parens and Hostis audiit.
Deliciae idem and querela Parlamenti.
Qui dum Papistis Bellum infert, insimulatur Papista,
Dum Protestantium partibus consulit,
occiditur a Protestante.
Tesseram specta Rerum Humanarum,
At non est quod serio triumphet malitia,
Interimere potuit, laedere non potuit.
Scilicet has Preces fundens expiravit.
Tuo ego sanguine Potiar (mi Jesus) dum
mali pascuntur meo.
This Monument is in a Chapel on the North side of the high Altar.
Georgio Holles
Eq. Anglo-Brit. Clariss. Penatib. oriundo, rerum Militar. sic a pueritia
dedito ut Castror. Alumnus nasci videretur, Qui postquam cuncta quae decerent
Nobilem, stipendia in Belg^a Fecerat ordin. Ductor suae gentis, supremus vulgo
Sergiant Major Generalis,

Declaratus est.
Augustaeq. Trinobantum Pacifice excessurus hic propter Franc. Verum Imper.
suum and Consanguin. Cui tamen Periculis quam sanguine Conjunctior, Ambitu
Honestiss. Componi voluit.

Ioannes FN. Comes de Clare FR. Merentissimo Moerentissimus P. vixit A. L. M.
iij. D. iiij. ob xiiii. Kal. Iun. Anno Dom. M. DC. XXVI.

This Monument is in a Chapel on the South side of the high Altar.
What so thou have
of Nature or of Arts,
Youth, Beauty, Strength,
or what excelling parts
Of Mind and Body,
Letters, Arms, and worth,
His eighteen years, beyond
his years, brought forth,
Then stand and read
thy self within this glass,
How soon these perish,
and thy self may pass.
Man's life is measured
by the work, not days,
No aged sloth, but
active youth has praise.
Francisco Holles juveni fortissimo qui ab exercitu e Belgia aeger regress
(...) obiit Pride. Id. (...) Anno Dominicae Aetatis M. DC. XXII. suae XVIII.
Johannes Comes de Clare, Filio natis 3. and merentissimo moerentissimus pater
posuit.

This Monument is in another Chapel on the South side the high Altar.
Bonae Memoriae
Georgio Villerio Equiti Aurato Marito B. M. Iuxta se P. Clarissima conjux
Maria Cometissa Buckingamiae.

S. P. I. T.

D. O. M. OSSA
Mariae de Bello Monte Cometissae (...) kingamiae E quinque Potentissimor^^
totius Europiae Regnorum regibus, (...) que per totidem Immediatos

Descensus oriunde
Vix Ann. Lxij. M. xj. D. xix. Ho^ Mon. V. I. C.

On a Pillar on the North side of the high Altar is this Inscription.
Iuliana Crem
Virgo Pientissima Charissima and vnica filia Ranulphi de Creme, Equitis
Aurati, Regii Tribunalis capitalis Iusticiarij, ex Iuliana de Cleppesby
conjuge, vetustae familiae de Cleppesby in agro Norfolciensi Cohaerede suscepta,

Redemptoris adventum hic expectat, vernante Aetate, in patriam abijt xxij.
April. M. DC. XXI.

In the Abbey, in the North I Will, about the middle of the I Will, is thus written.
Mors mihi Solus Christus
Lucrum mihi sola salus.
Spe Resurgendi*
Hic jacet Iana Stotevill, Filia Thomae Stotevill de Brinckley, in Comitatu
Cantabrig. Armigeri, uxor primo Edvardi Ellis de Chesterton, in Comitatu
Cantabrig. Armigeri, Cui peperit 6. Filios, and 3. Filias, vxor deinde
Othewelli Hill Doctoris in Iare Civil, and Cancellarij Dioces. Lincoln. Cujus
Relicta obijt 27. die Aprilis Anno Dom. 1631. Aetatis suae 78.

Vivit post funera virtus.

In another Chapel on the South side the high Altar, is this Inscription.
Hic jacet Anna Garrard Filia (and Cohaeres cum Fransisca) Georgio Garrard, and
Margaretae Dacris, Parentibus, Nobilium, and antiquorum stemmatum, Vxor Dudleio
Baroni Carleton de Imbercourt. Cui cum Filium vnicum pepererit in infantia
expirantem, eique legationibus ad Remp. Venetam, Subaudiam, and unitas Belgiae
Provincias per Sedecem annorum spatium indivisa comes adhaeserit, dum iter
illuc demo meditatur, rapta est morbo Apoplectico e molestis hujus Aevi
laboribus in requiem aeternam 18. Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1627. Aetatis suae 42. a
conjugio 20.

Memoriam Posteritati faciens probae, and Religiosae Foeminae, Vxoris
conjunctissimae, oculatae Matrisfam: cui hoc Monumentum sacravit Gemibundus
conjux, Testimonium Amoris integri, ob eamque amissam intimi cruciatus, dum
visum fuerit Deo Op. Ma. and illum etiam deducere in hoc idem Dormitorium, cui
ipse vivens se mortuum designavit.

A RETVRNE TO LONDON:
In which most of the Parish Churches have of late years been Rebuilded,
Repaired, or at least Beautified.

A Catalogue whereof here follows, wherein not only the year in which, but
the means likewise by which, each Work was perfected are set down, as also
all the Monuments of Queen Elizabeth, as they are in every Church.

S. Albanes Woodstreet.
I Am sorry, that, but now beginning to speak of Building, repairing, and
Beautifying of all the Parish Churches in this famous City of London, I must in
the very Front of the Alphabet (for that is the rule I go by) speak of the
pulling down, Demolishment, and Ruins of a Church, and one of the most
ancient among them; Saint Albanes in Woodstreet.

This Church, being wonderfully decayed and perished, was by these Gentlemen,
Sir Henry Spiller, Enigo Jones, Esquire, Captain Leake, and Captain Williams
surveyed, to see what repair might help it. But by these Gentlemen, and
Workmen appointed with them, it was found to be too far gone for Repair;
neither would any Workman put himself into hazard upon it: affirming it to be
in every part of it, so spent, decayed, and enfeebled, that they must suddenly
pluck it down, or it would suddenly prevent that labor, and fall to the
ground of it self: which the Fallings every day increasing (and more and more
growing and appearing) did most evidently seem to threaten.

For this cause, many of the Parishoners refused to go to it, many that went,
went unwillingly, but all with much fear, where they sat with more; their
danger all the time much troubling and disturbing their Devotion.

This great necessity enforcing, it was the last year 1632. betwixt Easter and
Midsummer pulled down, and yet July, 1633. (a sad object) so lies in its
pitiful ruins.

Many of the ablest sort of this Parish, to show they would do what they could
toward the recovery of this great loss, have joined certain moneys (their
free and voluntary gifts) together, which they have again disbursed in Stone,
and some other Materials.

But this many, being but few, to the number of those that in this kind, can
do little or nothing, and their good wills falling extremely short of that
great sum that must begin and finish so great a Work as this, they were
constrained to petition his Highness for his Letters Patents, for the help of
a collection for it.

Their Petition graciously received, his Majesty was pleased (as a cause of all
other his Piety especially favors) to send his Letter to the Lord Bishop of
London, for the forwarding and effecting their desires.

Yet notwithstanding this fair degree to their wish, they are for a time put
off, by reason (as I am informed) of the great Collection for the repair of
the famous Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, but they hope it will not be long.

In which hope they have many Partners, as also in their Prayers, for all the
good means that may be, to the speedy rebuilding of it; till which time, the
Church appointed unto them for the Sabbath. Exercises, Marriage, Burying,
Churching, and the Sacraments, is the Parish Church of Saint Alphage near
Cripplegate. And thus much of this Church, Saint Albanes.

Alhallowes Barking.
THis Church was repaired and beautified in the year of our Lord God, 1613.
and within some few years before and after (in their several times) other
wants were supplied and furnished, viz.

A very fair new Pulpit set up, many fair Pewes, a fair Communion table,
with other graceful Ornaments to it. This Table was the gift of one Master
John Burnell, all the rest the charge of the Parish: Also in the South I Will,
over the entry into the Church, in the year of our Lord 1627. there was a very
handsome Gallery erected, at the cost and charge of the Parish.

Thomas Covell John Shaw Churchwardens.

In the South wall is a Monument with this Inscription.
In the I Will against this place, lies the body of Francis Covell, Citizen and
Skinner of London, he lived in this Parish 52. years, was married to his wife
Margery 42. years, had Issue by her Thomas his only son. He had borne
Office in his Company, and this Ward, with good reputation, was in his life
Religious, Peaceable, and Charitable, and at his death gave Clothing to the
poor of this Parish yearly for ever. He lived 69. years, and rendered his
soul in peace to God, September 7. 1625.

Alhallowes Bredstreet.
THis Church, in the many decayed places of it, was repaired, and in every part
of it richly and very worthily beautified, at the proper cost and charges of
the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God 1625.

Samuel Tucker William Hunt Churchwardens.

On the South side of the Chancell, in a little part of this Church, called The
Saltars Chapel, is a very fair Window, with the Portraiture or Figure of him
that gave it, very curiously wrought upon it, with this Inscription:

Thomas Beamont Salter, the Founder of this Chapel, and a worthy Benefactor to
the Company of the Salters. 1629. This Window being then erected.

In the midst of this little Chapel, in a fair Marble Tomb, this man with
his two wives lies interred. The words round about this Tomb, with the Verses,
you may read in page 391.

To the sacred Memory*
Of that worthy and faithful Minister of Christ, Master Richard Stock, who
after 32. years spent in the Ministry, wherein by his learned Labors, joined
with Wisdom, and a most holy life, Gods glory was much advanced, his Church
edified, Piety increased, and the true honor of a Pastors place maintained,
deceased April, 20. 1626. Some of his loving Parishoners have consecrated this
Monument of their never-dying love, Ian. 28. 1628.

His situs exanimis Stocki
sub pulvere Truncus,
Quem quondam agnovit
Pastorem Ecclesia Fidum:
Istae suum nunc Sancta tenent
Habitacula Sanctum,
Quo Magn Us Pan DV Cit oVes
oVi Vmque magIstros.
Thy livelesse Trunk
(O Reverend Stock)
Like Aarons Rod
sprouts out again,
And after two
full Winters past,
Yields Blossoms
and ripe fruit amain.
For why, this work of Piety,
Performed by some of thy Flock,
To thy dead Corpse and sacred Vrne,
Is but the fruit of this old Stock.
A fair new Monument in the South I Will, on the wall, almost at the upper end.
This Monument was erected at the cost of this Parish, in memorial of Master
John Dunster, Citizen and Cothworker of London, who lies buried near this
place, and gave amongst other charitable gifts, 200. pounds toward the late
building of this Church, and 200. pounds, which has purchased 12. pounds a
year for ever, toward the reparation of the same. He departed this life the
14. of October, 1625. being of the age of 58. years.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
and henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, etc.

Alhallowes the great.
THis Church, with much cost bestowed on the Steeple, was in many parts of it
Repaired, and thorowout richly and worthily beautified, at the proper cost and
charge of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God 1627. and 1629.

James Ashby Henry Clinket and Christopher Robotham William Pagen Churchwardens.

There was at this time a fair Gallery built at the West end of the Church,
and in the North I Will a new door made, almost at the upper end.

The last year 1632. all the Isles, to the Chancell, were raised a foot and a
half, and the Pewes a foot above that; A work much gracing the Church, but
especially done for a ready and more easy hearing. The charge of these times
rising to 600. pounds and upwards.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
If Royal Virtues ever crowned a Crown,
If ever Mildness shined in Majesty,
If ever Honor honored true Renown,
If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency,
If ever Princess put all Princes down,
For Temperance, prowess, prudence, equity,
This, this was she, that in despite of death,
Lives still admired, adored, ELIZABETH.
Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

In the figure of a Book over Her, these words.
They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, which shall not be
removed for ever. Psalm. 125.

On the one side.
Spaines rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Heavens Iem, Earths Joy,
World wonder, Natures chief.
On the other side.
Britains blessing, Englands splendour.
Religions Nurse, the Faiths Defendor.
Under her.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

Alhallowes Honylane.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the proper cost and charge of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord 1625.

Francis Waterhouse Edward Powell Churchwardens.

The charge of this repair amounting unto 55. pounds and upwards.

Alhallowes the less.
THis Church was repaired and beautified within and without, at the cost and
charge of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord 1616.

In the year 1613. two fair Dormers were made on the South side of this
Church to enlighten it, before being very dark: the one at the cost of Sir
Thomas Glover, Knight, the other at the cost of Master Thomas Jones Gentleman.

In the year 1633. a fair large Gallery built on the North side of the
Church, and within nine or ten years past, two other Galleries, which both in
their cost and ends, but especially the last, much commend their religious
Founders.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
I have fought a good fight, etc. 2. Tim. 7, 8.

Alhallowes Lumberstreet.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the proper cost of the
Parishioners, in the years of our Lord God 1622. and 1623.

The charge of this repair amounting to the sum of 171. pounds, and nine
shillings.

William Skeleton Henry Collinson Churchwardens.

Alhallowes Stayning.
THis Church was repaired in many parts of it, and very nearly and decently
beautified, at the cost of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord 1630.

Simon Parrat Robert Stileman Churchwardens.

In the South wall of this Church is a Monument with this Inscription on it.
Before this place lies the body of Em Charleton, wife to Robert Charleton
Citizen and Fishmonger of London, by whom she had Issue three Sons and four
Daughters, and died in Childbed the 23. or June, 1623. having been married ten
years, ten months, and thirteen days, and lived 31. years, 4. months, and
odd days. She was the youngest child of Thomas Harby of Adston, in the
County of Northampton Esquire, by his last Wife Katharine Throgmorton, Daughter
of Clement Throgmorton of Hasdley in the County of Warwick Esquire, and of
Katherine Nevill, sister to the then Lord Aburgavenie.

Et genus, and nomen nosti,
Nomenque Mariti,
Progeniem atque dies,
sic obitum and tumulum,
Te latet ipsa tamen,
licet haec externa tueris,
Nobilia interius,
Nobiliora latent.
Nobilitas vera est
sanctis virtutibus orta,
Hanc teneris annis,
huic dedit omnisator.
Nam cum lacte simul
Materno Religionem
Imbibit, assidue
Matre docente pia.
Posteaque ut vires Crescebam
crevit in illa
Vera Dei very cognitio,
atque fides.
Nec sine fruge fides,
fuit Alma, Pudica, Benigna,
Compatiens, humilis,
mitis, amica, Bona.
Sic veram vera cum justitia
piecatem, and
Facta bonis verbis
junxerat illa bona.
Vt Matter, Natam,
Matris sic nata Nepotes
Imbuit imprimis
cognitione Dei.
Non specie tantum,
sed vere Religiosa,
Et virgo, and conjux,
and domina and Genitrix.
Principio finis similis:
sic vltima primae
Linea conformis:
mortua viva simul.
Alhallowes at the Wall.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, in
the year of our Lord 1613.

John Stream Robert Priest Churchwardens.

It was again repaired, richly and very worthily beautified at the cost of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord 1627.

Robert Hanch Harman Brockard Churchwardens.

The charge of the last repair, accounting to the sum of 200. and 20. pounds.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Read but her Reign,
this Princess might have been
For wisdom called
Nicaulis, Sheba's Queen,
Against Spaines Holifernes,
Iudeth she.
Dauntlesse gained many
a glorious victory:
Not Deborah did her
in fame excel,
She was a Mother
in our Israel.
An Hester, who
her person did engage,
To save her people
from the public strage;
Chaste Patroness
of true Religion,
In Court a Saint,
in Field an Amazon,
Glorious in life,
deplored in her death,
Such was unparalled
ELIZABETH.
Borne Anno 1534.

Crowned Anno 1558. Ian. 15.

Reigned years 44. mon. 4. days 17.

Died Anno 1602. March 24.

S. Alphage.
THis Church (the decays in diverse parts of it, calling upon the Parishioners
for it) began to be repaired in the year of our Lord God 1624. the repair
continuing 25. and 26. in which time, the Masons work amounted to 400. pounds.
The farther repair, in 27. and 28. in the last of which it was beautifully
finished, arising to 100. pounds more; The sole cost and charge of the Parish.

William Syddon John Laurence Churchwardens.

In the South I Will, upon a fair Marble stone is this Inscription.
Hic jacet Willielmus Phillip^, Ar. (...) Rever. Patris Dom. Epi. London. suae
Cur.

Commisariatus London, and qui 80. Annorum pie transactis in Dom. placide
obdormivit 4. die Men's. Septembris, An. Dom. 1625. Relinquens post se 6. ex 18.
liberis.

On another fair stone in the same I Will.
In Christ alone I only trust,
To rise in number of the just.
Here under lies buried the body of Katharine Edwards, sometime beloved wife
of John Edwards, of this Parish of Saint Alphage; she departed this transitory
life on the sixth day of January, 1628. and in the 45. year of her age, having
had issue by her said Husband five Sons and seven Daughters.

My body here in dust does rest,
Sin caused that earth claims it as due,
My soul's in Heaven for ever blessed,
Yet both in one Christ will renew.
Andrew Hubbard.
THis Church was repaird and richly beautified at the cost and charge of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God 1630.

Enoch Lynd William Clobery Churchwardens.

The charge of it amounting to six hundred pounds and above.

Andrew Undershaft.
THis Church was repaired and laudably trimmed and beautified, at the cost and
charge of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God 1627.

William Bargins Simon Farewell Churchwardens.

Then (I say) trimmed and beautified, although for some few years before and
since, to this present year 1633. The care and cost of the Parishioners have
been still employed in the supplying and furnishing of it with such things, as
either for necessity or beauty, their love to Gods house, should find wanting.
Among other things these, viz.

They have new raised their Chancell, adding to that cost a Communion Table,
with a very fair frame about it, they have made many new Pewes, a fair
Alabaster Font, and a Clock: a necessary thing, that in the memory of man this
Parish has not had, nor the eldest Parishioner ever heard of.

They have also in this Church (much commending the Founders and Continuers of
it) at the lower end of the North I Will, a fair Wainscot Press full of good
Books, the works of many learned and reverend Divines, offering (at
seasonable and convenient times) the benefit of reading, to any that shall be
as ready to embrace it, as they and their Maintainers to impart it.

A fair Monument in the middle of the wall of the South I Will, with this
Inscription.
Death has added to the ornament of this place the blessed memorial of Edward
Warner Esquire, a worthy Citizen and Merchant of London, who departed this
mortal life the 28. of October 1628. He was the second son of Francis Warner
of Parham, in the County of Suffolk, Esquire, by Mary his second Wife, ^
Daughter and Co-heire of Sir Edmond Rowse of the said County, Knight, which
Francis Warner was truly and lineally descended from the ancient and generous
Family of the Warners, who possessed a place of their own name, at Warners
hall in great Waltham, in the County of Essex. He died without Issue, and made
Francis Warner of Parham aforesaid, Esquire, his Nephew, and next Heir in
blood, the Executor of his last Will, and principal Heir to his estate; who
out of his duty and affection to the memory of his dear Uncle, has dedicated
this Monument.

He had to his first Wife, Mary, the Daughter of Master Ailmer, of Risden in
Hartfordshire; and to his second, Margaret, Daughter of Master John Cheyney.

On a fair Gravestone lying in the same I Will, is thus written.
I. H. S. Mors Christi, mihi vita.
The memorial of Mistress Elizabeth Turnor, whose body rests here in
expectation of her Savior. She lived the sorrowful Widow of three Husbands,
Andrew White, Cutbert Burby, and Humphry Turnor, Gentleman, and the most dear
Mother of seven children, being the Issue only of her second: three of them
buried her, Edward Burby, Cutbert, and Ioane, which inherit her sorrow to
bewail their loss.

Her dissolution happened in her great Clymactericall, being on the tenth Calends
of August, in the year after her Savior, 1630.

Resurgam.

Andrew Wardrope.
THis Church was repaired, and worthily beautified at the cost and charge of
the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God, 1627.

A very fair Window on the South side of this Church, with this Inscription.
This Window was glased at the charge of Peter Leonarts the elder, of
East-Sm^^-field Brewer, Anno Domini 1627.

In the South I Will, at the lower end of the Church, is this Epitaph.
When God was pleased,
(the world unwilling yet)
Helias James, to Nature
paid his debt,
And here reposes:
As he lived, he died,
The saying strongly
in him verified,
Such life, such death:
then a known truth to tell,
He lived a godly life,
and died as well.
Anne Aldersgate.
THis Church was repaired richly, and very worthily beautified in the year of
our Lord God 1624.

In the years 1629. and 1630. the Steeple decayed and perished, with great
care and much cost was repaired, a new Turret made for the Saints-Bell.

Also the walls of the two Churchyards (the greater and the less) were
raised, two fair Arched doors made in the middle of them, with a very fair
Arched Entrance to the Church on the South side of it; and the Alley, or
passage from Saint Annes lane into Noble Street, raised, levelled, and (with
free Stone) very neatly and handsomely paved.

Gabriel Butcher Robert Dimpleton Churchwardens.

An Epitaph in the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Here lies the body of Francis Spencer, eldest son of Richard Spencer,
Esquire, who departed this life the 20. of June 1629.

Mortis memor sis, me Ridebat Horula Natum, Renatum, Mortuum.

Anne Blackfriars.
THe ancient Church belonging to the Blackfriars, London, was (before the
dissolution of Religious Houses by Henry the 8.) one of the most spacious and
fair Churches in London: but the Friars being put out, the Church (together
with other fair buildings) was utterly demolished. Therefore the Inhabitants
of the said Blackfriars, London, fitted an upper Room, of 50. foot in length,
and 30. foot in breadth, for a public place of Divine worship. The charges of
purchasing and fitting the said Room for a Church, appears not in any Record
that we can find.

In Anno 1597. when the Church was empty, and no body in it, a great part of
the Roof thereof fell down, whereupon the then Inhabitants being about to
repair their said Church, obtained of Sir George Moore Knight, so much ground
as enlarged their Church with an I Will on the West, 50. foot in length and 15.
foot in breadth: for which ground they built at their own cost a fair
Warehouse under the said I Will for the use of Sir Jerome Bows, Knight, who then
had the said ground in lease, and also gave him 133. li. The new building of
their said Church and I Will (beside the foresaid 133. li. given to Sir Ierom
Bows) cost 300. li. 18. shillings.

In June 1607. the Inhabitants of the said Blackfriars paid 120. li. to Sir
George Moore, for the purchase of their Preachers house, their Churchyard,
their Church, and the Porch appertaining thereunto, together with the right of
Patronage of, in, and to the said Church.

In Anno 1613. the Inhabitants of the said Blackfriars, purchased on the South
of their Church, so much housing as enlarged their Church aforesaid 36. foot in
length and 54. foot in breadth, the purchase whereof, together with the Vault
for burying, and other Rooms under that part of the Church, and the new
building of all, and making new Pewes, and Pulpit, cost 1546. li. 6. shillings.

In Anno 1632. the Inhabitants of the said Blackfriars, purchased the Rooms
directly under the above mentioned upper Room converted to a Church, which
said under Rooms they purchased to repair the Foundation and Walls whereon
the Church stood, which Walls were very much decayed. The Purchase whereof, and
repair of Decays, cost 500. li.

The sum of all bestowed upon Blackfriars Church, since the reformation of
Religion in England, amounts to 2600. pounds 4. shillings.

A fair Monument at the South end of this Church, with this Inscription.
P. M.
Iohannis Bill Mercatoris Librarij, qui Nationibus ab exteris supellectilem
litterariam in hoc Regnum per plusculos Annos Importavit.

Vt
Librorum Thesaurus,
Bibliothecarum Parens,
Academiarum Mercurius
Merito dici possit.
Typographi etiam Regij Iacobo and Carolo R. R. Serenissimis, per Annos XIII.
fidele in hoc opere ministerium praestantis. De Republica Libraria been, desuis
optime Merentis. Non sine luctu and Moerore Amicorum, Anno Aetatis suae LVI.
publicae vero salutis M. DC. XXX. Defuncti. Qui interim duas Vxores pudicas
duxerat, Annam Filiam Tho. Montfort Theologiae Doctoris, Quae sine liberis
obijt, and Ianan Henrici Francklin Filiam, quae liberis quinque*

Familiam auxit.
Hoc Monumentum
Fidei and Amoris ergo
Iana Vxor Moestissima P.
Quueene Elizabeth's Monument.
Sacred unto Memory:

Religion to its primitive sincerity restored, Peace thorougly settled, Coin to
the true value refined, Rebellion at home extinguished, France near ruin by
intestine mischiefs relieved, Netherland supported, Spaines Armado vanquished,
Ireland with Spaniards expulsion, and Traitors correction quieted, both
Universities Revenues, by a Law of Provision, exceedingly augmented, Finally,
all England enriched, and 45. years most prudently governed, Elizabeth, a
Queen, a Conqueresse, Triumpher, the most devoted to Piety, the most happy,
after 70. years of her life, quietly by death departed.

On the other side of the Monument.
For an eternal Memorial*

Unto Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Daughter of King Henry
the eighth, Grandchild to King Henry the seventh, great Grandchilde to King
Edward the fourth, the Mother of this her Country, the Nurse of Religion and
Learning: For perfect skill in very many Languages, for glorious Endowments, as
well of mind as body, and for Regal Virtues beyond her Sex.

She began ended her reign 17 No. 1558. 24 Mar. 1602



Under her Monument.

I have fought a good fight, etc.

S. Antholines.
THis Church was repaired and beautified in the year of our Lord 1616. toward
which the Gentlemen here under named, were free and very bountious Benefactors,
Sir William Craven, Alderman, Master Henry Iay, Alderman, Master Adrian Moore,
Master Thomas Boothby, Master Francis Dorrington, Master William Parker, Master
Cleophas Smith, Citizen and Draper of London.

Richard Dight Thomas Brown Churchwardens.

To this was added a very rich and beautiful Gallery, every Pane or division
of it (the number of them 52.) filled with the Arms of Kings, Queens, and
Princes of this Kingdom, beginning with Edward the Confessor, and ending with
the Badge or Simboll of Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavere
and Prince Elector, etc.

Begun in the year 1623.

Francis Bickely William Stacy Churchwardens.

And fully built and finished in the year 1624.

William Stacy Edward Banbury Churchwardens.

The charge of the foresaid Reparation, 1616. as I was informed by some
Officers in the Church, amounting to the sum of nine hundred pounds and
upwards.

S. Austin.
THis Church was in part Rebuilded, Leaded, and in every part of it richly and
very worthily beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the Parishioners, in
the years of our Lord God, 1630. and 1631.

Ralph Tonstell Daniel Hallingworth Samuel Langham Churchwardens.

The charge of this great and costly Repair, amounting to the sum of 1200.
pounds.

Bartholomew Exchange.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord 1620.

William Drew La^ncelot Johnson Churchwardens.

At the West door is a very fair Screene, with this Inscription.
Ex dono Richardi Croshawe, Civis and Aurifabri Londinensis 1631.

Monument in the South side of the Chancell thus written on.
Here lies Richard Croshawe, sometimes Master of the Company of Goldsmithes,
and Deputy of this Ward. He was very liberal to the poor, and in the time of
the great Plague 1625. neglecting of his own safety, he abode constantly in
this City to provide for their relief, he did many charitable acts in his
time, and by his Will he left above 4000. li. to the maintaining of Lectures,
relief of the poor, and other pious uses.

He dwelt in this Parish 31. years, and being 70. years old, he died the the
2. of June, 1621.

In the same Church, and the same I Will, upon a fair stone, is this Inscription.
Here lies interred the body of William Drew, Citizen and Grocer of London,
who departed this life the 29. day of August, 1631. being of the age of 56.
years, expecting a blessed and joyful Resurrection at the coming of Christ.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Eliza Beata,
Spaines rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Earth's joy, Englands jem,
Worlds wonder, Natures chief.
I have fought a good fight, etc.
Regni 45. Aetatis 70. obijt 24. Martij, Anno salutis 1602.

Close by the word Eliza, is the figure of three Crowns, and these words by
them.

Manet ultima Coele.

Bennet Fynck.
THis Church is now repayring, they began in March last 1633. and by Michaelmas
at the farthest, do make account (God willing) it will be finished: and so
completely and absolutely, with all things befitting furnished, that we may
for that time say of this as of the rest. This Church was repaired and (at the
cost and charge of the Parishioners) richly and very worthily beautified, in
the year of our Lord God 1633.

The charge of this repair and beautifying, by what they have done, and what
they have to do, very probably imagined, amounting to four hundred pounds and
upwards.

Edward Barcocke Robert Claxon Churchwardens.

Bennet Grace-Church.
THere has been bestowed on this Parish Church within the passage of 20.
years, several charges, amounting to the sum of 700. pounds. But the
greatest part of this in the last repair, which was in the year of our Lord
1630. in which as it was very carefully repaired, so richly and very worthily
beautified.

Some useful, necessary, and most needful things in (and since added to) this
worthy repair, were these; A new Clock, a new Dial, new Chimes, and now
1633. a very fair Turret for the Steeple. The Churchwardens in the time of
this repair 1630.

John Cudney, and John Offeley.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Daughter of King Henry the
eighth, by Queen Anne Bullen his Wife.

She died at Richmond the 24. of March, 1602. being 69. years, six months,
and seventeene days old, when she had reigned 44. years, 4. months, and 7.
days.

As in the figure of a Book.
They that put their trust in the Lord, are even as the Mount of Sion, which
may not be removed, but stands firm for ever.

On the one side.
Britains blessing, Englands splendour,
Religions Nurse, the Faiths defendor.
On the other side.
Spaines rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Heavens Iem, Earths joy,
Worlds wonder, Natures chief.
Under her.
If Royal Virtues ever crowned a Crown,
If ever Mildness shined in Majesty,
If ever honor honored true Renown,
If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency,
If ever Princess put all Princes down,
For temperance, prowess, prudence, equity,
This, this was she, that in despite of death,
Lives still admired, adored, ELIZABETH.
Bennet Pauls-Wharfe.
THis Church has had no repair or beauty bestowed upon it for many years;
but now standing in great need of both, it is shortly (as I am informed) to be
(as the rest) repaired, richly and very worthily beautified.

A fair Monument at the upper end of the South I Will, standing under and
adjoined to the Monument of his Father, Master David Smith, Imbroytherer to
Queen Elizabeth, with this inscription.
William Smith his seventh son, a willing Imitator of his Parents virtues,
who deceased the third of October, Anno 1632. aged 68.

He was the only survyving son and Heir to his Father, Aldermans Deputy of
the Ward for the space of fifteen years. He married Sarah the Daughter of
William Feake of London, Goldsmith, by whom he had Issue Katharine his only
Daughter and Heir, who was married unto Samuel Owfield of Gatton, in the
County of Surrey, Esquire.

Bennet Sherehog.
THis Church being very much decayed and perished, was amply repaired and
beautified at the cost of the Parishoners, in the year of our Lord God 1628.

Diverse fair Marble stones, that formerly lay hid under the Pewes, then
removed and placed in the body of the Church, to add (as most fit) to its
further grace and beauty.

John Reyner William Parker Churchwardens.

Botolph Billingsgate.
THis Church was repaired, and very worthily beautified, at the cost and charge
of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God 1624.

Robert Dowley Robert Lemman Churchwardens.

A very fair Monument in the wall of the South I Will, with this Inscription.
Anna Saris, nuper Vxor Iohannis Saris Armigeri, Filia Gulielmi Meggs Armigeri,
quam suscepit ex conjuge secunda Dorothea, filia venerabilis Dominae Annae
Cambel adhuc superstitis, Ex hac vita Migravit, Febru. 21. Anno Dom. 1622.

Aetatis 29. Conjugij 8.
Haec pietate Deo,
casta virtute Marito,
Decessu sanctis, Matri
conjuncta sepulcro est.
Moestissimus conjux, Meritissimae conjugi, hoc Monumentum, Amoris and
Reminiscentiae ergo posuit.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument. Eliza Beata,
Spaines Rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Heavens Iem, Earths joy,
Worlds wonder, Natures chief.
Under the figure of three Crowns. Vltimum manet in Coelo.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

This Table was the gift of William Wigmore, being Churchwarden 1625.

Christ's Church.
THis Church, within some few years past has had many repaires and charges;
but we especially here remember the fair and spacious Gallery, that (at the
cost of the Parishoners) was erected in the North I Will, in the year of our Lord
God 1628. The charge of it amounting to 149. pounds 10. shillings.

A work very worthily supplying a necessity, and adding to this Church a great
deal of grace and beauty.

Matthew Nelson Samuel Savin Churchwardens.

A Table of Arms for the Lady Digby, of all her quarterd Coats, which by the
right of Heirs general are involved into the Noble Family of her Fathers.
Insig. praeclariss. Dominae D. Venetiae Digby, e Familia Stanleyorum Com.
Darbiae exparte Patris, and Perciorum Com. Northumbriae Materno jure, aliisque
quamplurimis Christian. orbis principibus oriundae.

Hard by the other this, and thus written on.
Memoriae Sacrum.

Near to this place lies buried the body of Nicholas Beamount of Cole-Overton
in the County of Leicester Esquire, and Anne his Wife, the Daughter of William
Saunders of Welford in the County of Northampton, Esquire, by whom he left
Issue four Sons and two Daughters, viz. Henry, Francis, Thomas, and
Huntington, Dorothy and Katherine. The said Nicholas died the 24. of November,
Anno Dom. 1585. His wife died the tenth of February, 1581. In remembrance of
whom this Monument was erected, by the care and cost of Elizabeth Lady
Ashburnham Widow, late Wife of Sir John Ashburnham Knight, daughter to Sir
Thomas Beamount of Stawton, in the County aforesaid, Knight, their third son,
at the appointof her Uncle, Master Francis Beamont, Esquire, their second
son, to whom the Erector hereof was Executrix.

Upon a fair Stone in the North I Will, is this Inscription.
Spe Resurgendi hic jacet Corpus, Ioannae Vxoris Edmundi Philipps Londini
Armigeri, quae cum solo and Amantissimo Marito, in dilecto matrimonio vixit per
annos 48.

Hec doloris Amphitheatrum Reliquit, mensis Aprilis, die 12. Anno salutis 1632.
Aetatis suae 72.

Upon a fair stone at the entrance into the upper Church, with this
Inscription.
Lodovicus Williams, venedocus
Hic jacet.
Nuper Civis and Haberd. Land.
Vna cum Elizabetha, vxore ejus,
Qui objerunt
Anno Dom. M. DC. IX.
October. ij.
Hic optat Cineres suos jacere
Mauritius Wnis. in Mna. Dr. defunctorum
F. vnicus superstes.
A very fair Arms over it.
Upon a fair stone in the middle I Will, is this Inscription.
Here lies buried the body of Elizabeth Draper, the Wife of Robert Draper of
this Parish, borne the third day of December, 1581. and died the third of
December, 1613.

All those that knew her,
loved her; for her life,
Chaste, Pure, and Pions,
was of all approved;
(A rich possession's
such a virtuous Wife)
All ill she hated,
and all good she loved:
Be this his comfort then
bewailes her most,
In Heaven she is found,
that here on Earth is lost.
In a Table in the Quire, hanging upon the Organs, is this written.
Memoriae Sacrum.

Near this lies the body of Ioaxe, Daughter and sole Heir of Edmond Bigs,
Gentleman, and late Wife to Clement Goldsmith of Graies Inn, Esquire, who was
in this Church Baptized the third of March, 1564. and interred the 17. of
February, 1631.

Close by this small
Remembrance, you may find
That which apparel'd est
an honest mind,
A body there In-urn'd,
where once did rest
A charitable soul
that was its guest.
But see what sickness,
age, and death has done,
These have they parted,
yet the day shall come,
When they shall meet,
and reunite again,
And be assumed above
the Heavens to reign:
Until which time
may this poor Monument,
To Reader, show
a sad sons true intent.
But if this perish,
yet her virtue shall
(She dead) preserve
her blessed Memorial.
These two Stones lie close together, and close to the Communion Table. In
which place also lies buried the body of that learned and worthy Divine,
Doctor Sampson Price.
Fui Claphamus, pater Istius Iohannis nuper defuncti, Et hic sepulti, Qui obiit
septimo die Feb. Anno Dom. 1621.

Fui Claphamus, pater Istius Iohannis subter hunc ^^pidem sepulti.
Here lies buried the body of John Clapham, Esquire, one of the six Clearkes
of the Chancery, who died the sixth day of December, Anno 1618. his Father Luke
Clapham then living.

S. Christophers.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the proper cost of the Parish, in
the year of our Lord 1621.

But is now very shortly to be repaired and beautified again, with a great
deal of cost intended.

In the same Church is this following Epitaph.
Siste viator, leviter preme,
Iacet hic juxta, Quod mortale fuit,
C. V.
Thomae Harrioti.
Hic fuit Doctissimus ille Harriotus
de Syon ad Flumen Thamesin,
Patria and educatione
Oxoniensis,
Qui omnes scientias Calluit,
Qui in omnibus excelluit,
Mathematicis, Philosophicis, Theologicis.
Veritatis indagator studiosissimus,
Dei Trini-unius cultor piissimus,
Sexagenarius, aut eo circiter,
Mortalitati valedixit, Non vitae,
Anno Christi M. DC. XXI. Iulii 2.
Clements Eastcheape.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost and charge of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God, 1632.

John Stoner Thomas Priestman Churchwardens.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument. Monumentum Elizabethae. In the figure of a Book.
Psalm. 125.
They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed,
but remains for ever.

On the one side.
Spaines rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Heavens jem, Earth's joy,
Worlds wonder, Natures chief.
On the other side.
Britains Blessing,
Englands Splendour,
Religions Nurse,
The Faiths Defendor.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

Dionis Back-Church.
THe middle I Will of this Church was new laid in the year of our Lord 1629.

The Steeple was repaired, a new Turret built, new Frames were made for the
Bells, and this Church very decently beautified, in the year of our Lord, 1632.

A Monument in the North I Will, with this Inscription.
Cur quod partu obeas lachrimis
Rigat ora Maritus,
Et quasitu pereas
se macerat per eas?
Dum cedis domino,
discedis ab orb scelesto,
Parendo and praeis,
non pariendo peris.
Hic jaceo Triplici Monumento
a Morte beata,
Marmoris hoc, Moesto
vir mihi cord dedit;
Virtus, Nobilitas, Pietas,
Patientia nostra,
Dant alium, hoc vero
vincit honor prius:
At Ternum Aeternum est
coeloque locatus, and illud
Nec vir, nec virtus,
sed dedit ipse Deus.
In obitum Foeminae Generosissimae Dom. Mariae Stanley, Vxoris Tho. Stanley
Armigeri, Filiae Rogeri Apleton, Militis and Baronetti, Quae cum viro suo Tres
Filios peperisset (quorum duo hic jacent sepulti) ultimi partus, qui nunc
superest, laboribus extincta fuit. 4. die Iunii 1609. Anno Aetatis suae 23.

S. Dunstans in the East.
THis Church began to be repaired in the year of our Lord God 1631. And was
fully repaired, richly and very worthily beautified, in the year of our Lord
1633.

Christopher Vincent John Dines Churchwardens.

I might here dilate and enlarge my self, by spreading this general into its
particulars, but for that this shall suffice: The decays of it were many and
great, and consequently the repaires. The many and great parts of it, almost
making up the whole, which may easily be believed by the sum of this
sumptuous repair; the charge of it amounting to two thousand four hundred
pounds and upwards.

To the making up of which, many of the worthy Parishioners have lent to the
Lord, in giving to this poor decayed Church very large sums: And of such
Givers, thus the Lord says, He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord,
etc.

A fair Monument in the North I Will of the Chancell, with this inscription.
Here lies the body of Richard Wyche, Merchant and Citizen of London, free of
the Company of Skinners, amongst whom having borne all Offices, his life and
carriage was exemplary.

He married Elizabeth, the Daughter of Sir William Salting stall, Knight,
sometimes Alderman and Mayor of this Honorable City of London, by whom he had
issue, 12. Sons and 6. Daughters, viz. Richard, Thomas, Susan, Daniel,
George, Saemuel, Peter, Elizabeth, James, Mary, Anne, Edward, Julius, William,
Henry, Abigaile, Nathaniell, Rebecca.

Sons 4 8 deceased. living.


Daughters 2 4 deceased. living.


He yielded his soul in peace to his Maker the 20. of November, after 67.
years pilgrimage here amongst men, whose latter years were bestowed in
expectation of his end, expressed in settling of his estate here on earth, and in
preparation of his soul for Heaven, where it now remains in peace and
happiness.

Edmonds Lumbardstreet.
THis Church was repaired, and very worthily beautified at the proper cost and
charge of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God 1631. and 1632.

In the first year
Humphrey Gravenor Anthony Bradshaw Churchwardens.

In the last
Robert Smith Edward Hook Churchwardens.

The cost of it arising to two hundred eight and forty pounds.

S. Ethelborough.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, in
the year of our Lord 1612. In the year 1620. the Steeple greatly decayed was
repaired. And in the year 1630. a Gallery built in the South I Will, at the
proper cost of Owen Santpeere of this Parish.

William Mefflin Peter Gaile Churchwardens.

S. Faith.
WE cannot in this place keep our ordinary course, in speaking of decays and
repairing, for (as it is anciently said of this Church)

This Church needs no Repair at all,

Saint Faith's defended by Saint Paul.

And for beauty it has sufficient, being still supplied and furnished with
whatsoever the virtuous and religious Guardians of it know fit, either for use
or ornament. Which while we speak of, we cannot forget that especial addition
of beauty, Light; that Light, that by pulling down those houses that stood
before it, is plenteously descended into it: Nor (with that) the cost of the
Parishioners, (having gained such a long wanted benefit) in trimming and new
glasing their Windows.

At that time also 1632. they purchased at the lower end of the South I Will
(going up through the Entry into Paul's) a convenient place for a Vestry, upon
which (having none before) they have bestowed a great deal of cost and beauty.

William Aspeley Ioh Gill Churchwardens.

A very fair Marble stone in the Chancell under the Communion Table, with
these words.
About it.
Under this Stone lie buried the bodies of John and Francis Astley, the Sons
of Sir John Astley of Allington Castle in the County of Kent, Master of the
Revels, and a Gentleman of the Privy Chamber in Ordinary to Charles the first.

Upon it.
In obitum immaturum Ioh. and Fr. Astley, Filiorum Domini Ioh. Astley, Equitis
Aurati, quorum hic undecem, Alter Duo de viginti Annos Natus, ad superos
Migravit. Vtrique vero sub eodem Marmore Tumulantur.

Sic Rebar, solum spes tanta
invida Fata
Ostendisse viris, and
Rapuisse simul.
Aut pater omnipotens,
and qui dedit, abstulit, aptes
Vidit quippe Astris,
asseruitque sibi.
Illi autem Humanis exempti
Rebus, Olympum
Nunc habitant, ubi pax,
and sine fine quies.
Vno hoc Felices; quod cum
unus venture utrosque
Foverat, una etiam
nunc capit urna duos.
A fair Monument on the North side of the Chancell, with this Inscripion.
M. S.
Hic juxta situs est Richardus Ironside, vir summa prudentia, industria,
vstaeque integritate, vna cum 2. Lectiss. vxorib quarum posteriorem, morum
suavitate, Elegantia, and Amore Conjunctam, Fato sibi Raptam, non ita multo
post sequutus est. Quibus hoc Monumentum in opprobrium mortis, Quae has tampias
Animas eripuit a 13. liberis, qui se ipsos poene quaerunt in illarum desiderio,
Consecravit

E. I. Filius and Haeres. 1627.

A fair Monument at the upper end of the Chancell, with this inscription.
Here lies buried the body Katherine, (third Daughter of Edward Lord Nevill,
Baron of Abergaveny) Wife of Sir Stephen Lessieur, of Chiswicke, in the County
of Middlesex, Knight, She was brought from her said house to this Parish, in
hope to recover her bodily health, by the help of God and Physicians. But the
same God knowing, and having ordained that which was best for her pious soul,
has been pleased to take her from the miseries of this vain world, and to
receive her soul with his Saints in Heaven. As she did profess in all the
time that she lived in the state of a Maid, and of a Wife, to be a true and
obedient child of God; even so she did behave her self in her sickness,
bearing her affliction with a true Christian Patience, much delighting to
Read, or to hear the Word of God read unto her, hoping and trusting to be
saved by the only Merits and Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ: And
recommending her Spirit into the hands of Almighty God, she exchanged her
mortal life for the Immortal, the 4. of August 1630.

Revel. 14. 13.

Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, yea says the Spirit, that they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

Quid aliud est Mors vitae hujus mortalis, quam finis mortis hujus vitalis, and
Ianua vitae immortalis?

Ergo
Vive diu, sed vive Deo, nam vivere Mundo
Mortis opus: viva est vivere vita Deo.
A very fair Table hanging about the middle of the South I Will of Saint Faiths
Church. Anno Dom. 1630.
Benefactors, and their Gifts to the Poor of this Parish.
Years. Names. Gifts. 1586 David Smith Embroiderer, gave 20. shillings a year
for ever. 1592 The Lady Allington gave 5. pounds to be distributed. 1598 John
Pain, Esquire, gave 12. pence a week in Bread for ever. 1600 Justinian Kidd,
Gentleman, gave 10. pounds to be employed for ever. 1605 Francis Lamplow,
Clothworker, gave 10. pounds to be employed for ever. 1610 George Bishop,
Stationer, Alderman, gave 10. pounds to be distributed. 1611 William Evans,
Tallow-Chandler, gave 40. pound to be employed for ever. 1612 John Norton,
Stationer, Alderman, gave 150. pounds for 12. poor people to receive three
pence a piece every Wednesday weekly for ever. 1613 Mary Bishop, the Wife of
George Bishop, gave 10. pounds to be distributed. 1614 John Law, Proctor of the
Arches, gave 10. pounds to be employed. 1620 Thomas Adams, Stationer, gave 10.
pounds to be distributed. 1623 Jasper Underwood, Vintener, gave 10. pounds to
be distributed. 1624 John Sanderson, Draper, gave 150. pounds for 12. poor
men to receive three pence a week, every Sunday weekly, for ever. 1625
Elizabeth Underwood, Widow, gave 10. pounds to be distributed, and 60. pounds
toward a Lecture for ever. 1626 John Beliall Silkeman, gave 10. pounds to be
distributed. 1628 Ally Mercer, gave 5. pounds to be distributed. 1629 John
Speed, Merchantaylor, gave 5. pounds to be distributed.
Ex dono Iacobi Trussell.

S. Fosters.
THis Church was repaired, the Gravestones new squared and laid, the Pewes new
made, a Window in the North I Will enlarged, the rest new glased, and the whole
thorowout trimmed and beautified, in the year of our Lord 1614.

John Drake John Hall Churchwardens.

To this Church at the Chancell end, the breadth being 20. yards and above, was
added 20. foot of ground, which ground so to eng^^en the Church, was given unto
the Parish ont of a fair Court then belonging to the Sadlers Hall.

Gabriel Fen-Church.
THis Church was enlarged in length nine foot, richly and very worthily
beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the Parish, in the years of our
Lord God 163^ and 1632.

Thomas Colt George Godscall Churchwardens.

The cost of it aruing to 537. pounds 7. shillings and 10. pence.

A very fair figure of the Kings Arms in Glass in the Chancell Window, was
the free gift of Thomas Clarke of this Parish, G^asier.

Over the head, Touch not mine anointed. Under them,
Qui leo de Judah est,
and flos de Iesse Lyristae,
Carmina qui sacro
psallere sacra dedit,
Dulsisonam o faciat
Citharam, fortesque Leones,
Foecundet Florem
Carole magne tuum.
George Botolph-lane.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost and charge of the Parish,
in the year of our Lord God, 1627.

Walter Carter John Delabar Churchwardens.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Regni 45. Aetatis 70. obijt 24. Martij, Anno salutis 1602.

I have fought a good fight, etc.

Gregory's by Paul's.
THis Church was repaired, and within, without, and in every part of it, richly
and very worthily beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the
Parishioners, in the years of our Lord God, 1631. and 1632.

In the first, William Weston, Citizen and Merchanraylor of London, and John
Heart, Gentleman, and Proctor of the Arches, Churchwardens.

In the ^ast, the said John Heart and Thomas Brandwood, Churchwardens.

I have not here named any great particulars, as Roof, Wall, Arch, Porch, or
the like; but the greatness of them, of their cost, and the love of the worthy
Bestowers, may be read in the sum of this sumptuous repair, which is two
thousand pounds and upwards.

S. Hellens.
THis Church was begun to be repaired in the year of our Lord 1631. and was
fully repaired, and in every part of it richly and very worthily beautified, at
the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord 1633.

William Hurt Thomas Aldridge Churchwardens.

If this brief shall be thought too little for so great a repair and beauty,
I desire the Reader to enlarge the commendations from that, among the rest,
that most shall make to that purpose.

The charge of this great repair, the sum of one thousand three hundred
pounds, and upward.

In the South I Will of this Church, is a very fair Window with this inscription.
This Window was glazed at the charges of Joyce Featly, Daughter to William
Kerwyn, Esquire, and Wife to Daniel Featly, D. D. Anno Domini 1632.

This Window is beautified with three rich Coats, her Fathers, her first, and
her second Husbands.

Over against this Window, toward the middle I Will, is a Monument erected to the
memory of her worthy Father, the aforenamed William Kerwyn, Esquire, dated
1594. the time of his death and burial.

Also of Mistress Magdalen Kerwyn her Mother, buried in the year of our Lord
1592.

Of Benjamine Kerwyn her Brother, buried the 27. of July, Anno 1621. who had
Issue seven sons and five daughters, five of those children deceast, and here
(with them all that are before named) interred.

This Monument in this passage of 39. years, somewhat defaced and withered,
was raised, repaired, beautified, and encompast with iron Bars, in a fair
and graceful manner, at the charge of this loving Daughter, the aforenamed,
Mistress Joyce Featley, 1632.

About this Tomb these words.
Here lies the body of William Kerwyn, of this City of London Free Mason, who
departed this life the 26. of December 1594.

And here also lies the body of Magdaline Kerwyn his Wife, by whom he had
Issue three Sons and two daughters; she deceased the 23. of August, 1592.

On the one side these Verses.
Aedibus Attalicis
Londinum qui decoravi,
Exiguam tribuunt
hanc mihi fata domum^
Me duce surgebant
aliis regalia tecta,
Me duce conficitur
ossibus urna meis.
On the other side these Verses.
Magdalena jacet, virtus
post fata superstes,
Conjugiique fides,
Relligioque manent.
Corpus humo tectum
Christo veniente resurget,
Vt Mentis consors
astra suprema colat.
Christus mihi vita,
Mors mihi lucrum.
Nos quos certus amor
primis conjunxit ab annis,
Iunxit idem Tumulus,
junxit idemque polus.
About the bottom these words.
Benjamin Kerwyn, the son of William Kerwyn, deceased the 27. of July, 1621.
who had Issue seven sons and five daughters; five of these children being
buried in this Vault.

James Dukes-place.
OF this Church, from the beginning to the finishing, and of every particular
in it, you may read in page 146, 147.

James Garlick-hithe.
THe North I Will of this Church was new built, and the whole Church repaired and
beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord 1624.

William Gunnell Robert Boydell Churchwardens.

The charge of it amounting to seven hundred pounds and upwards.

John Baptist.
REaedificatum and ornatum fuit hoc. Templum, Anno Millesimo sexcentesimo
vicesimo primo Roberto Peterson Rectore.

Rogere Price, and Iohanne Smith, tunc Gardianis ejusdem Ecclesiae.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
If Royal Virtues ever crowned a Crown,
If ever Mildness shined in Majesty,
If ever Honor honored true Renown,
If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency,
If ever Princess put all Princes down,
For temperance, prowess, prudence, equity,
This, this was she, that in despite of death,
Lives still admired, adored, ELIZABETH.
Virtue lives after death,
So does Queen Elizabeth.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

John Evangelist.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the sole and only cost of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord 1626.

James Barnard Richard Malbone Churchwardens.

In the same year a Gallery new built and beautified, at the only cost of
Thomas Goodyeare, Citizen and Draper of London, and here a Parishioner.

S. John Zachary.
THis Church within the time of 12. years past has had these many Repaires
and charges.

The last, in the year 1631. the charge 27. li. 10. s. 8. d.

William Young John Devoreaux Churchwardens.

In the year 1629. the charge 76. pounds 10. shillings.

Clement Carter Henry Tyler Churchwardens.

In the year 1625. the charge 30. pounds.

Richard Morrell John Reynolds Churchwardens.

In the year 1619. the charge 32. pounds 3. shillings 8. pence.

William Young Patrick Chambers Churchwardens.

In the year 1616. the charge 44. pounds 6. shillings 8. pence.

William Rain Oliver Burnwood Churchwardens.

The whole cost of these Repaires, 120. pounds 11. shillings.

A fair Monument in the South I Will, with this Inscription.
Here under lies interred the body of Philip Strelley, late of London
Goldsmith, who gave to the poor of this Parish 40. s. a year for ever, out of
the Revenues of the Manor of Vlkerthorpe, lying in the Parish of
South-winfield, in the County of Derby, to be paid to them by the hands of the
Warden and Rentors of the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths, whom he left in
trust, to see it and other gifts disposed, as may appear by his Will, dated
September the 6. Anno Dom. 1603. though this Monument was erected but 1630.

Katherin Coleman.
THis Church was repaired and beautified in the year of our Lord 1620. In the
year 1624. their Vestry was built, and a Gallery new made for the poor of the
Parish to sit in.

Katherine Cree-Church.
THe foundation of this now famously finished House of God, was begun to be
laid upon the 23. day of June, in the year of our Lord God 1628.

The first Brick, as also the first Stone in this Foundation, was laid by
Master Martin Bond, of this Parish Aldermans Deputy of the Ward, and one of our
City Captains. The Brick was laid (as is aforesaid) the 23. of June, and the
Stone (a principal corner Stone) the 28. of July following.

Many of the Parishioners (following this worthy Leader) laid every man his
Stone, with which they laid something else, which the Workmen took up very
thankfully.

On the backside of the North wall of the old Church was a Cloister, the
breadth of it seven foot and above, which Cloister, by the taking down of that
wall, being taken into the Church, gave it all its breadth to enlarge it.

In digging under this wall, there was found the figure of half the face of a
man, cast in Lead, the Mould setting likewise upon it this word, Comes.

Digging under the South Row of Pillars, they found the scull of a man, the
thickness of which was three quarters of an inch and better, measured by many,
and admired by all that have seen it.

At the West end of this Church adjoining to the Steeple, stands a Pillar of
the old Church, as it stood and was there erected: This Pillar (from the Basis
or foot, to the Chapter or head, upon which the old Arch was raised) being
eighteen foot high, and but three to be seen above ground, shows the
measure or height to which the flore of this new Church has been raised above
that of the old, which is, the hidden part of the Pillar, or the 15. foot of it
buried.

This Structure, not of Brick, but built from the ground with the choicest
Freestone might be got, without, within, and in every part of it supplied,
furnished, and enriched, with whatsoever might add to its greatest grace and
luster, was finished in the year of our Lord God, 1630.

In this year (accounting from March to March) upon the 16. day of January, it
was consecrated by the right Reverend Father in God, Will. Lord Bishop of
London, and upon the same day (as on such it is usual with us) were the
Sacraments of the Lords Supper, and the Sacrament of Baptism administered.

In this Church the Pulpit and Communion Table are pure Cedar and (both) the
gift of Master John Dyke, a Merchant, living in this Parish.

A very fair Gate built at the East end of the South wall, was the gift of
William Avenen, Citizen and Goldsmith of London, who died in December 1631.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Spaines Rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Heavens Iem, Earths joy,
Worlds wonder, Natures chief.
Britains blessing, Englands splendour,
Religions Nurse, the Faiths defender.
Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

I have fought a good fight, etc.

If Royal Virtues ever crowned a Crown,
If ever Mildness shined in Majesty,
If ever Honor honored true Renown,
If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency,
If ever Princess put all Princes down,
For Temperance prowess, prudence, equity,
This, this was she, that in despite of death,
Lives still admired, adored, ELIZABETH.
This Table of Queen Elizabeth, one of the fairest that I have seen in this
City, was the gift of one that is a stranger to this Parish, at least to any to
be the bestower of it, he is yet concealed, and still is desirous to be so.

That of that great number of great and magnificent Benefactors, that joined to
the making up of this great, and (in our time) unparalleld piece of work, I
have only touched upon these, may (no doubt) seem strange; there being none
in this number, whose liberal hand and heart deserves not a golden Character.
I confess it. To all that may be said, my answer is (briefly) this: Being
doubtful of getting all, or all of those I might get, and loath of great things
to speak to little purpose, I only took these (that offered themselves) by
the way, leaving the rest to the Register of the Giver of their means to give:
with whom all good deeds are recorded, and (undoubtedly) shall be rewarded.

Lawrence Jurie.
This Church was repaired, richly and worthily beautified at the charge of the
Inhabitants of this Parish, in the year of our Lord 1618.

Thomas Dalby Edmond White Churchwardens.

To this, in the year 1631. they added the cost of a new and very curious
Pulpit; then also setting off their Font, and the place in which it stands,
with a great deal of cost and beauty.

In this year 1618. the time of this Repair, all the Windows in this Church
were glazed by so many good Benefactors, the Arms of the Company of every one
of them in them.

Under the middle window in the Chancell, a very rich and costly one, is thus
written.
Sir William Eastfield Knight, and Alderman of this Honorable City, and free
of the Worshipful Company of the Mercers, glazed this Window at his own
proper cost and charges, in the year of our Lord 1442. And it was afterward
repaired, and the story supplied at the charge of the said Company, in the
year of our Lord, 1618.

A fair Window on the North side of it.
Glazed at the cost and charges of Sir Baptist Hickes, Knight, in the year of
our Lord 1619.

A fair Window on the South side of it.
Glazed at the charges of Richard Pyot, Grocer, and Alderman of this City of
London, Anno Dom. 1618.

A fair Window next to this, at the upper end of the South I Will.
Glazed at the charges of Thomas Morley, Merchant, and free of the Worshipful
Company of the Lethersellers, a Parishioner here, Anno Dom. 1618.

A fair Window downward next to this.
Glazed at the charges of Edmond White, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, and
Parishioner, Anno Dom. 1618.

A fair Window next to this downward.
Glazed at the charges of Thomas Dalby, Mercer, Anno Dom. 1618.

A fair Window next to this downward.
Glazed at the charges of Rowland Wilson, Citizen and Vintner of London, Anno
Dom. 1618.

A fair Window, the lowest on this side.
Glazed at the charges of Robert Ducy, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London,
Anno Dom. 1618.

At the Westend of this I Will, a fair Window.
Glazed at the charges of William Pyot, Citizen and Grocer of London, Anno Dom.
1618.

On the North side, the lowest Window.
Glazedat the charges of Henry Hopkins, Citizen and Vintner of London, Anno
Dom. 1618.

A fair Window next to this upward, the resemblance of a blazing Star on it.
Glazed at the charges of Hugh Ley, Citizen and Skinner of London, and a
Parishioner here, Anno Dom. 1618.

At the bottom of this Window thus.
Forget you not the Blazing Star,
This year to us is shown;
Make use thereof both near and far,
The like has not been known.
Anno. Dom. 1618.
The next Window upward.
Glazed at the charges of Barbara Burnell, Widow, late wife of John Burnell,
Merchant, and free of the Clothworkers, Anno Dom. 1618.

The next Window upward.
Glazed at the charges of the Lady Elizabeth Ihones, Wife to Sir Francis
Ihones, Knight, and Alderman of this City, and Daughter to Master Henry Rolffe,
of this Parish, deceased July 1618.

The next Window upward.
This Window was Glazed at the charge of Cicilia Cleyton, late Widow to Master
Richard Cleyton, Citizen and Salter, but free of the Worshipful Company of
Dyers of London, and deceased the 23. of October 1602. Glazed in October 1618.

The uppermost Window on the North side.
This Window was Glazed at the charge of Edmond Wright, Grocer, 1618.

A fair Monument in the Chancell, on the North side, with this Inscription.
Deo O. M.
Memoriae and posteris sacrum.

Hic in Choro intra Cancellos, sub medio sacrae Mensae, Franciscae Filiae Tho.
walker, de Beconfield Armig. Dilectissimae Conjugis Gulielmi Bosweli, hujus
Ecclesiae Vicarij, sub spe gloriosae Resurrectionis, Cineres and exuviae
Reponuntur.

Lectissima Foemina, vultu, Moribus. Gestu, incessu, vestitu, venusta,
Modestissima; Lingua pauciloqua, Ma^edica nunquam; sacrae lectioni, lachrymis
and precibus assidua; Deo devotissima, Marito fidelissima, Amicis gratissima;
In re familiari, and libera and provida; Pauperibus (quoad Facultatulas)
indulgentissima; Bonis chara, Malis invisa, omnibus Aequa; post pie and sine
strepitu pacifice transactam vitam, circa medium Aetatis, Anno salutis 1630.
ult. Oct. Dominico Requievit in Domino.

Been dixit, and been tacuit,
Been vixit, and been latuit.
Moestissimus Maritus (cujus per latera transfixa jacet) L. M. Q. sero tandem,
sed and serio posuit.

Quicunque hanc Tabulam temeraris malae Conscientiae Reus esto.

Ipse post illam vixit, sed vitam vix vitalem, Annum nec integrum, demumque
moriens, October. 3. Anno 1631. Hic juxta cum illa sepultus jacet.

Natus fuit Bristolae, ubi primis litteris institutus, postea Oxonii in Artibus
Magistratum, and in Theologia Bacchalaureatum Adeptus est, Baliolensis Collegii
Socius, unde cum Domine Iohanne Digbeio, Comite Bristol. in Hispaniam, legato
Regio, profectus, Per An. 5. plus minus illi a sacris ibidem inservivit,
tandemque Reversus a Collegio Baliol. hujus Ecclesiae Vicaria, and a Domino
Digbeio, Rectoria Ecclesiae de Horton juxta Colbrooke, in Com. Buck. donatus,
postquam diu cum infirmo Corpore, men's vegeta colluctata fuisset, postremum

hi in Domo Vicariatus hujus,
placide and pie in Christo obdormivit.
Anno Aetat. 50. sobole Relicta nulla.
Ingenium floridum, Mores ingenui, Manus larga, pectus Apertum.

Gulielmus Bosvelus, hujus Ecclesiae Vicarius per An. 15.
Qui obiit October. 3. Anno 1631.
Et Vxor ejus, October. ult. 1630.
This is written upon his Graveston in the Chancell, under the Communion Table.

A very fair Monument over against it, on the South side of the Chancell.
Christi quibus obierunt Anni Isthinc Numerantur.

1619. Apocalypse. cap. 14. verse. 13. BeatI qVi In DoMIno qVIesCVnt.

1624. Prima ad Corinth. cap. 15. verse. 57. Deo sIt gratIa qVI trIbV^t NobIs
(fatI) VICtorIaM.

At the lower end of this rich Tomb this.
Memoriae Sacrum*

Richardi Pyot, nuper Civis, and Celeberrimae hujus Civitatis Adermani
venerabilis, Nec non Margeriae Pyot Vxoris suae ut Fidelissimae, ita and
Religiosissimae, qui quum in prospero rerum afflatu tranquille vitam
Transegissent, tandem Annorum pleni, Pythagorico liberorum numero beati
denario, omnium denique Bonorum suffragiis, laudibusque honorati, vitam
auspicat^ initam, Feliciter Actam, fine quoque beato (carnis soluti ergastule)
clauserunt. Hic quidem 19. die mensis Ianuarii, Anno Dom. 1619. Illa vero
mensis Februarii, vicesimo octavo; Anno Dom. 1624. Et hic Beatam manent
Resurrectionem.

Quos connexit Amor verus,
Castum que cubile,
Queis longi dantur
Nestoriique dies;
Vna quibus Regio natalis,
Dives, opima,
Vnum quique Dei
Templum adiere duo,
Per totam tenuit
nos una Paraecia vitam,
Sors rerum nobis
una eademque fuit:
Denique (lector amans)
quoniam convenimus ambo,
Nos men's una Duos,
nos rogus unus habet.
On the North side of the Chancell, a very fair Monument, with this
Inscription. M. S.
Prudens senator Mercimonii Indici,
Vigil Magister integrae famae and Rei,
Domi Beatus conjug^ atque liberis,
Poterat videri seculo felix suo,
Nisi lapidasset tot bona infestus silex,
Silex latentes cuspide lanians sinus,
Sed Christianus id mali vertit been
Virtute adaucta: Fluxanam fastidiens,
Mercator A^dax Avidus ^niri Deo,
Hac unione Reliqua mutavit libens.
Sub hoc Marmore expectat Resurrectionem Gulielmus Haliday ex Antiqua
Halidaiorum Familia in Comitatu Glocestr. Civis and Senator Londinensis,
singular, Integritatis, Prudentiae and Pietatis, exemplar: Is postquam VII.
Annos inter purpuratos Patres urbis Rebus cum magna Aequitatis and Sapientiae
laud vacasset, Indicae societati prope Biennium, quantum per Aegritudinem
licebat, summa cura praefuisset.

Longis ex calculo doloribus fractus,
Mente semper intacta, inter suorum
Amplexus and lacrymas, bonis desideratus,
Placide Animam suo Creatori Reposuit.
Anno Aetatis 58. Febr. 14. Anno Dom. 1623.

Marito dilectissimo Susanna Henrici Roe Equitis, quondam praetoris urbani
Filia, Amisso compare suavissimo. M. P.

Parenti dulcissimo Anna Vxor Henrici Mildmaei aequitis, ex Nobilis. Mildmaeor
umprosapia, in comitatu Essexiae.

Margareta nupta Edwardo Hungerford, militi ex illustri Hungerfordiorum domo in
comitatu Wiltoniae. M. M. P. P.

A very fair Stone in the South I Will, with this inscription about it.
Here lies the body of Anne Barker, the Wife of John Barker, of London,
Merchant, the Daughter of Thomas Westrow, Alderman of London; She deceased the
2. of August 1629.

In the middle of the Stone, with their Arms at the four corners of it, these
words.

Though we are dead, yet our lives are hid in Christ with God.

Christ is to me both in life and death advantage.

Though my flesh fails, and my heart also, yet God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Here lies her Type, who was of late,
The prop of Belgia, stay of France,
Spaines foil, Faiths shield, and Queen of State,
Of Arms, of Learning, Fate, and Chance:
In brief, of Women never was seen,
So great a Prince, so good a Queen.
Since Virtues Her immortal made,
Death (envying all that cannot dye)
Her earthy parts did so invade,
As in it wrackt self Majesty.
But so her Spirit inspired her Parts,
That she still lives in loyal hearts.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

Obiit 24. die Martii 1602.

Anno Regni 45.

Aetatis suae 70.

Lawrence Pountney.
THe Steeple of this Church was new Leaded, five new Bells were hung, and the
Frames they hang in new made, all the Isles were new raised and levelled, and
the whole Church within and without worthily repaired and beautified, at the
cost and charge of the Parish, in the years of our Lord God 1631. and 1632.

George Downs Robert Meade Churchwardens.

A Monument at upper end of the North I Will, with this Inscription.
Hoc est nescire, sine Christo,
plurima scire,
Si Christum been scis,
satis est, si caetera nescis.
This Monument*

Was erected Anno Dom. 1620. by the Lady Anne Bromley, late Wife unto Sir Henry
Bromley, of Holt, in the County of Worcester, Knight, Daughter of William
Beswicke of London, Alderman, in remembrance of her first Husband, William
Offley, of London, Merchant, who being free of the Merchant-Taylors, fined both
for Sheriff and Alderman.

He had issue by the said Anne 15. children, whereof five are living, viz.
William, Elizabeth, Margaret, Robert, and Mary, the rest died Infants.

Leonard Eastcheape.
IN the year of our Lord 1618. this Church by a casualty of fire, happening by
whiting of Baskets, in the house of one Jerome Baynton a Turner, (situate in
Little Eastcheape, on the North side of the said Church, whose house was burned
down, and in the place thereof another built with Brick) was fired in the
Steeple thereof, being a Spire covered with Lead; it was quenched, but not
without great pains and much danger to some persons (who were not unrewarded
by the Parish) before any great hurt was done to it by the fire, more then the
defacing of it, and other parts of the Church; but for the said Steeple was
very old, much ruined and decayed in the stone work thereof, to prevent
further danger, it was pulled down, and all the West end of the Church thereto
adjoining, a new Foundation laid, enlarged three foot toward the East, and new
built, not without great charge to the Inhabitants of the Parish, who were all
willing and ready to contribute toward the Rebuilding, Repairing, and
Beautifying of the house of God; and the better to set forward the work, the
Inhabitants of the Parish did tax themselves toward the charge at 198. li. 6.
s. 4. d. but for that the Parish is but small, and the greater part of the
Inhabitants poor, they were enforced by their Petition to seek help from his
Majesty, who was graciously pleased to grant them his Letters Patents (for
their relief) to collect and gather in several Counties within this Kingdom
toward the charge of the Rebuilding the Steeple, and the Repairing of the
Church.

The Steeple being finished as it now stands, the South wall toward the
Churchyard being much decayed, was also taken down and new built, and the
Church in other parts repaired, the charge thereof amounting to above 850.
pounds, of which the Parish received by way of collection (toward their charge)
in London, and other places, the sum of 170. li. 1. s. 9. d. and of other
Benefactors, 10. li. 15. s. they having one Patent for six Shires also, the
party that was employed to lay the Briefes, and gather the Collections, went
away with all, and brought to the Parish neither Brief nor Penny. The Steeple
of this Church, and the wall on the South side (toward the Churchyard) was
builded, and the Church in other parts repaired and beautified, in the years
1618, 1619, 1620, 1621.

Abraham Colfe Rector.
Edwin Fisher Richard Foster Richard Bourne Henry Gulstone Churchwardens.

Leonards Fosterlane.
INcurvate Domino, in decore Sanctitatis, Chron. 6. cap. 9. Psalm. 29. v. 2.
Domine dilexi decorem Domus tuae.

Psalm. 26. 8.

Haec Dei Domus, Auctior est facta, and Augustior, Opere, and Impensis
Parochianorum Sancti Leonardi Faust-lane, London. Guardianis Ecclesiae tunc
temporis existentibus, Francisco Ash, Cive and Aurifabro, una cum Richardo
Stephano Martiniensi, 1631.

Vnus huic operi suppetias fecit Majeres Johannes Trot, Civis and Mercator, Pro
singulari suo in Ecclesiam amore, hanc imprimis, quia Patria.

A very fair Window at the upper end of the Chancell, 1633.

The charge of this amounting to the sum of five hundred pounds and upwards.

S. Magnus.
THis Church, in the years of our Lord God 1623, 1624, and 1625. in many parts
of it, had many Repaires and Charges, the sums of them amounting to the sum
of 500. pounds and upward.

Also in the year of our Lord 1629. it was richly and very worthily beautified.

John Langley John Broom Churchwardens.

This, as the former, being the sole cost and charge of the Parishioners.

A very fair Monument in the South I Will of the Chancell, with this inscription.
Here lies interred the bodies of Sir John Garrard, Knight, and Dame Jane his
Wife, who was Daughter to Richard Partridge, Citizen and Haberdasher of London,
by whom he had 13. Children, five whereof died young: they lived comfortably
together 43. years.

He was Lord Mayor of London in the year of our Lord God 1601.

She departed this life the 24. of January 1616. And he left this world the 7.
of May, 1625. being 79. years old, leaving only two sons and six daughters
behind him.

This Monument was erected at the charges of Benedict Garrard, Gentleman, his
youngest Son, Anno 1629.

Margaret Lothbury.
THis Church was repaired and thorowout very worthily beautified, at the cost
and charge of the Parishiones, in the year of our Lord God, 1621.

Francis Haddon John Walker Churchwardens.

A fair Monument in the South I Will, at the upper end, with this Inscription.
Quid Diurnare Magnos invides Parea?
Heis
Robertus
Ierminorum a Rushbrooke Nobile Germen,
Hic situs est,
Plos Iuvenum, sub Aevi flore Raptus,
Qui virtutum utriusque Aetatis
Apicibus Potitus,
Ingenio and Indole Iuventutis,
Nec non senili pietate ac prudentia
Infra se turbam Coaetaneam Reliquit,
Impubes senex:
Et quod negavit saeculo, Coelo dedit.
Sic sapere ante annos nocuit,
nam maxima virtus,
Persuasit morti,
ut Crederet esse senem.
Margaret Moses.
THis Church was very worthily repaired and beautified, at the proper cost and
charge of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God, 1627.

Simon Price John Whitcombe Churchwardens.

A very fair Monument on the South side, with this inscription.
Here lies the bodies of John Harper, Citizen and Fishmonger, Treasuror of
Christ's Hospital, and Aldermans Deputy of Breadstreet Ward, London: and
Francis his Wife, Daughter to James Smith, of Great Limber, in the County of
Lincoln, Gentleman, by whom he had issue five Children, but at the time of
their death left only a son John, and a daughter Anne, married to John
Whitcombe of London. He died the 27. of November 1632. in the 79. year of his
age. And she departed this life the 30. day of October 1630. being 72. years
old.

Credimus quod Redemptor noster vivit, and Novissimo die videbimus deum
salvatorem nostrum.

Margaret New-fishstreet.
THis Church, not having any cost, or but little in a long time bestowed upon
it, is now very suddenly to be repaired, and (as we speak of the rest) very
worthily trimmed and beautified.

Margaret Pattons.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the cost and charge of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God, 1614.

Master Godwin Master Peate Churchwardens.

The charge of it then amounting to the sum of 71. li. 15. s. 6. d.

But since that time, as necessity has called upon these honest and careful
Parishioners, for a supply either of strength or beauty, it has had many
repaires and charges, the whole sum of them all, from 1614. arising to the
year of our Lord 1632. to 275. li. 5. s. 6. d.

Master Shalcrosse Master Milksoppe Churchwardens.

A pretty fine Monument on a Pillar in the Chancell, on the North, with this
inscription.
In the middle part of this Chancell, lies interred the body of Mistress
Elizabeth Freeman, Wife to Master Thomas Freeman, of this Parish, Merchant, to
whom she was espoused sixteen years, two months, and eight days, by whom
she had issue six Sons and three Daughters living, and died in Childbed of
the last Son. She descended of worshipful Parents, and as she was
virtuously bred, so lived and died, full of Faith, Hope, and Charity, as known
to many that had made use thereof, to their great comfort in time of necessity;
for her only study was, to serve God, and do good to others; she was of the
age of 35. years, and departed this life to a better the 21. of February 1631.

On a fair Marble in the Chancell is this inscription.
Here lies buried Mistress Anne Elkington, the beloved Wife of Master Thomas
Elkington, Merchant, she was the Daughter of Master John Goodwin, Merchant,
likewise of this City. She lived and died in the fear of God, and in the
faith of our Lord Jesus. She exchanged this life for a better the 27. day of
September 1632. in the 23. year of her age, and in the third year of her
marriage, leaving behind her Anne her only daughter, her only son is not.

She shall rise again.

Mary Abchurch.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God, 1611.

William Stanly John Cornish Churchwardens.

A fair Monument in the Chancell, at the upper end, with this inscription.
An Epitaph Upon the departure of the Illustrious President of bounty and pious
industry, Master Roger Montague, Esquire.
In life and death,
thy works did well pursue
The honorable name
of Montague,
Nobility of birth
ran in thy blood,
Nobility of Action
made that good.
Thy Charity,
the top of all thy fame,
The figure that thy Monument
may claim
With Justice, it is thine own,
fit to enroule
Thy memory (here)
as Heaven adornes thy soul.
Sum up all Virtues,
in man ever known,
And set them to thy actions,
they are thine own:
That Is the neer'st way
to make for thy worth room,
Particular praises
would o'respread the Tomb:
Here Is all, in brief,
who shall henceforth indite
A good man's Epitaph,
let him but write
The Copy of thy life,
it stands for all,
That ever made man's praise,
or ever shall.
Mary Aldermanbury.
THis Church, for the space of 4. years past, has in one decayed part or
another been repairing; as the Steeple, Bells, Battlements, many decayed places
of the Walls, two fair Galleries built, many of the Pewes new made, the rest
being all in hand, it can be no great offense to account them already done;
which granted, and the Church in this year finished, we may conclude as we
began with the rest of these Churches, thus: This Church was repaired, richly
and very worthily beautified at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the
year of our Lord 1633.

Bartholomew Edwards Abraham Nuns. Churchwardens

A very beautiful Tomb at the upper end on the South side of the Chancell,
with this inscription.
Mary Brigs, the Daughter of Thomas Crofts, deceased the 8. day of August, Anno
Dom. 1610. being of the age of 31. years.

William, out of a dutiful respect to his dear Parents, consecrated this
Monument.

Joining with this in the same Monument.
David Brigs, Citizen and Skinner of London, who had two Wives, Mary the
Daughter of Thomas Crofts, Draper, by whom he had two sons and four
Daughters; and Rebekah, the Daughter of Humphrey Street, Merchant-Taylor, by
whom he had no Issue; who deceased the 17. day of June, Anno Dom. 1626. being
of the age of 57. years, lies here intombed in hope of a glorious
Resurrection.

A very fair Monument in the Chancell, over against the other, with this
inscription.
Here lies the body of Master Robert Offley, Gentleman, son of Hugh Offley,
Alderman of this City, who took to Wife Elizabeth, the daughter of Humphrey
Street, by whom he had issue seven Sons and six Daughters; he died at the age
of 64. years, on the 4. day of November 1631.

A very fair Monument on the North side of the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Deo Trino and Vai-sacrum.
Thomas Hayes, Eques Auratus, secundum Christi Adventum, sub hoc Tumulo
expectat. Qui cum ab Adolescentio, per magnam Europae partem Mercaturam
exercuisset, ita industria, and judicio claruit, nt unanimi omnium consensu,
Major hujus Civitatis cooptatus fuerit, and cum hoc summum summi Magistratus
officium, non solum singulari integritate, sed and excellenti verae Religionis
promulgandae cura, and pietate exequutus fulsset, tandem septuagesimo Aetatis
Anno, Deo bonisque Charus, pie and placide in Domino obdormivit 27. Septem.
Anno salutis 1617.

Martha Vxor Moestissima viro suo optimo, Officiosae pietatis, and memoriae
ergo, hoc Monumentum posuit.

Mary Aldermary.
THis Church was repaired, richly and very worthily beautified, at the cost and
charge of the Parish, in the year of our Lord 1632.

John Edwards Thomas Archer Churchwardens.

But while we speak the love and liberality of the living, we must not
forget the dead, whose bounties (though they be dust) are as fresh in this good
work, as theirs that have seen it finished.

And first, of Master William Rodoway, one borne and buried in this Parish,
though from his youth to his end he lived and died in another, Michael
Bassishaw, who at the time of his death (which was in the year of our Lord
1626) gave toward the Re-building of the Steeple of this Church, then greatly
decayed and perished, the sum of 300. li.

In this Parish, in the same year also, there died one Master Richard Pierson,
who toward the better and more beautiful building of this Steeple, gave the
sum of 200. Marks, with this condition, with those with whom he entrusted
this money, that this Steeple (thus to be built) should follow its ancient
pattern, and go forward and be finished, according to the foundation of it,
laid 120. years since, by the Founder of this Church, a Knight, one Sir Henry
Kibbell, which within three years after was so finished, the cost of it
amounting to a thousand pounds: of which all, above the cost of these two very
worthy Benefactors (beside the charge before named) being the cost and charge
of the Parish.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument. Monumentum Elizabethae Angliae Reginae. In the
figure of a Book.
Psalm. 112. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

On the one side.
Spaines rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Heavens jem, Earth's joy,
Worlds wonder, Natures chief.
On the other side.
Britains Blessing,
Englands Splendour,
Religions Nurse,
The Faiths Defendor.
Under her Monument.
Many Daughters have done well, but thou excellest them all.

Mary le Bow.
THis Chancell was raised, the Church new Pewed, and thorowout repaired and
beautified, in the year of our Lord God, 1620.

William Parnell William Wallis Churchwardens.

In a little Chapel on the South side of the Church, is a Monument thus
written on.
Per fidem introitus.

Robertus Blankworth Scriptor peritus, justus, ac sapiens, qui desideratus
vixit, obiitque una cum Bina conjuge, Sarah fideli ac pia, Elizabetha prudente
ac sobria, and duabus filiis, Deborah patiente ac Religiosa, Martha Innocente
Puellula. Non Carni sed Carnem hic seminantes, gloriesam expectant
Resurrectionem.

Robertus Blankworth, filius Roberti ac Sarae unigenitus, unice dilectus, qui
memoriale istud, in honorem patris ac paternae sortis extrui fecit, in hac
valle Lachrymarum pacificam expetit dissolutionem.

Istos Cista capit, Lachrymarum hunc orb, utrosque pacifici gloria parta manet.

Hac spe vivo.

Dignitas ejus in ipso incipit, tua and is.

A fair Monument in the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Here lies interred the body of Edmond Criche, Esquire, late Citizen and
Merchant-Taylor of London, and Master of the said Worshipful Company, Annis
1624. and 1625. who married Thomasin, the Daughter of Simon Henden of Beneden,
in the County of Kent, Gentleman, and lived with her in conjugall love 40.
years, and had issue 12. children, and left at his decease 5. sons, viz.
John, Edward, Nathan, Samuel, Peter, and 3. Daughters, Elizabeth, Thomasine,
and Margaret; and among them eleven Grandchildren.

Obiit 23. December. Anno 1627.

Aetatis suae 73.

Johannes Criche filius suus primogenitus, ex officio, and amore suo,
Moestissimus hoc posuit.

Edward Criche, eldest son to the said John Criche, lies here interred by
his Grandfather. Obiit 25. Febru. 1628. Aetatis suae 50.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument. In the Table only this.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.

From henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not me only, but to them
also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.

Upon the Wall, on either side of this Table, these lines.
A representation of the Monument erected by King James (sacred unto Memory,
and for an eternal Memorial) for Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and
Ireland, etc. Daughter of King Henry the eighth, by Queen Anne Bullen,
Grandchild to King Henry the seventh, great Grandchild to King Edward the
fourth, and Sister to King Edward the sixth and Queen Mary; who restored
Religion to its primitive sincerity; settled Peace thoroughly; reduced Coin to
the old Standards; extinguished Rebellion at home; relieved France, near ruin
by intestine mischiefs; supported the Netherlands; vanquished Spaines Armado;
quieted Ireland, with Spaniards expulsion, and Traitors coercion; augmented
exceedingly both Universities Revenewes, by a Law of Provision, and enricht all
England:

Was
The Mother of this her Country; the Nurse of Religion and Learning; and for
perfect skill of very many Languages; for glorious Indowments, as well of Mind
as Body; and for Regal Virtues beyond her Sex;

A Prince Incomparable.
And in the 45. years most prudent and happy Government, she died; in the 70.
year of her age, and of our Redemption 1602. Whose Corpse is interred in the
famous Collegiate Church of Westminster, under the aforesaid Magnificent
Monument.

On the other side.
Fame blow aloud,
and to the world proclaim,
There never ruled
such a Royal Dame.
The Word of God
was ever her delight,
In it she meditated
day and night.
Spaines rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Earths joy, Englands ^em,
Worlds wonder, Natures chief.
She was, and is,
what can there more be said?
On Earth the Chief,
in Heaven the second Maid.
In a book held over her by an Angel these words.

Verbum Dei.

Mary Bothaw.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, in
the year of our Lord God, 1621.

John Bennet Thomas Dight Churchwardens.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland, etc. Daughter to King Henry
the eighth, and Grandchild to King Henry the seventh, by Elizabeth, ^ldest
Daughter of Edward the fourth, Having restored true Religion, reduced Coin to
the just value, assisted France and the Low Countries, and overcame the Spanish
invincible Navy, enriched all England, and administered most prudently the
Imperial State thereof 45. years in true piety, In the 70. year of her age,
in most happy and peaceable manner she departed this life, leaving her mortal
parts interred in the famous Church at Westminster.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

Mary Colechurch.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parishioners,
February 1623.

William Shamrocke Thomas Pulcher Churchwardens.

Mary Hill.
THis Church, in the many decayed parts and places of it, was repaired, richly
and very worthily beautified, at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in
the year of our Lord God, 1616.

To the continuing of which, the careful overseers of it, every third or
fourth year ever since, have bestowed a new trimming upon it: No sooner (as I
am informed) finding any defect, failing, or declining of it, than applying
their care to revive, refresh, and restore it, which appears in its present
beauty.

Mary Mounthaw.
THis Church was in part new built, and very much enlarged and beautified, in
the year of our Lord 1609.

Robert Ploncker Mark Bateman Churchwardens.

Benefactors toward this building: Robert Bennet, Bishop of Hereford, Sir
William Craven, Sir Thomas Middleton, and Doctor Edwold.

In the year 1610. this Church was wholly Glazed at the cost and charges of
Thomas Tyler, Haberdasher, and Richard Tichburne, Skinner.

In the South I Will of this Church hangs a very fair Picture of King JAMES, with
the figures of Peace and Plenty on either side of him; Peace with her Olive
Branch, and Plenty with her Sheafe of Wheat in her hands. The gift of the
aforenamed Robert Ploncker, then Churchwarden.

Mary Summerset.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, in the year of our Lord, 1624.

Robert Violet Thomas Cumbers Churchwardens.

In a Table hanging close by the Pulpit are these words.

Dictum Thomae Burtoni, Rectoris Ecclesiae, tempore Reparationis, and
exornationis hujus Aedificii.

Dominus Petra mea, and Arx mea, and Liberator meus, Deus meus, Adjutor meus,
Sperabe in cum. Psalm. 18. 2.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Psalm. 112.

The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

Prove. 6.

The memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall
rot.

2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

Mary Staynings.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost of the Parish, in the
year of our Lord, 1630. August 23.

Charles Meadows Thomas Francis Churchwardens.

The Armoriall Achievements of Sir Arthur Savage, Knight.
In the Vault underneath, lies the body of the honorable Sir Arthur Savage,
Knighted at Cadez in Spain, 1596. General of her Majesty's forces in the
Kingdom of France, at the siege of Amyaunce, the 39. of Queen Elizabeth:
Colonel, Vice-Treasurer, Receiver general, and Councellor of estate in
Ireland: He had Issue by his second Wife, Sarah Daughter of Anthony Woolhouse,
of Clapwell, in the County of Darby (Widow of George Smithes, Sheriff and
Alderman of London 1611) one only Daughter named June. He died the 13. of
March, 1632.

Mary Woollchurch.
THis Church was richly repaired and beautified, at the charge of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord 1629.

Francis Brown Robert New Churchwardens.

A very fair Screene at the middle West door of this Church, was the gift of
Captain Edward Dichfeyld, at the time of his going out of the Office of
Churchwarden, in the year 1620.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland, etc. second Daughter to
Henry the eighth, begotten of the Lady Anne Bullen his second Wife, and
Grandchild to K. Henry the seventh, and Elizabeth, eldest Daughter to Edward
the fourth, borne at Greenewich the 17. of September, 1534. She succeeded her
Sister Queen Mary, as Queen of England, restoring true Religion, reduced
Coin to the just Value, assisted France, and the Low Countries, overcame the
Spanish invicible Armies, and was for Prudence, Justice, and Piety, not only
the Patron of her Sex, but a Pattern for all Princes of Christendom.

She died at Richmond the 24. of March, 1602. being 69. years, six months,
and seventeene days old, when she had reigned 44. years, 4. months, and 7.
days.

If Royal Virtues ever crowned a Crown,
If ever Mildness shined in Majesty,
If ever Honor honored true Renown,
If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency,
If ever Princess put all Princes down,
For Temperance, prowess, prudence, equity,
This, this was she, that in despite of death,
Lives still admired, adored, ELIZABETH.
As in a Book.

They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed,
but remains for ever.

Spaines Rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Heavens Iem, Earths joy,
Worlds wonder, Naturos chief.
Under her.

Th'admired Princess
through the world applauded,
For supreme Virtues
rarest imitation;
Whose Scepters rule, Fames
loud voic'd Trump has lauded,
Unto the ears
of every foreign Nation,
Canopied under
powerful Angels wings,
To her immortal praise
sweet Science sings.
Mary Woollnoth.
IT is so long since this Church was repaired and beautified, that we now
rather look upon what it is, than what it was; and forward to a repair to
come, then backward to that that is gone. We see it seems to call upon the
Parishioners for it, and hear it is shortly to have it: for (as I am informed)
it is promised and preparing; the preparation likewise promising a great deal
of cost and beauty.

Martins Ironmonger lane.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the cost and charge of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord 1629.

A very fair Screene at the entrance into this Church, with this Inscription:

Me fieri fecerunt Hamletus Clarke, Generosus, and Radulphus Latham, Armiger,
20. Martii 1629.

In the year 1627. a great part of the North wall of this Church, being very
much decayed and perished, was at the cost of the Parish rebuilded: but in it a
very fair Window, with these words:

This Window was new built and finished, at the sole cost of John and Humphrey
Slany, 1627.

The Arms of these Gentlemen over it, with this Motto:

Deo Duce, Comite Industria.

A fair Monument at the upper end of the Chancell, on the North side, with
this Inscription.
Here under lies buried Eleanor, Wife of Hamlet Clarke, free of the
Worshipful Company of Fishmongers London, and one of the four Clerks of the
Lord Majors Court, London, aforesaid. She died on Sunday the 14. of January,
1626. and was buried on Friday the 19. of the same, after they had been
married 33. years and about two months. And they had issue only Mary,
married to Ralph Latham of Vpminster, in the County of Essex, Esquire, Common
Sergeant at Law of this Honorable City.

And the said Eleanor, had also Elizabeth, another Daughter, by Charles
Barnard, a former Husband, married to Thomas Latham of Stilford in Essex,
Gentleman.

A very fair Stone in the North I Will, with this inscription about it.
Here lies interred the body of Randoll Pickering, late Citizen and
Haberdasher of London, borne at Turvine in the County of Chester, who put off
this mortality, March 10. 1629. And Alice his Wife, daughter of William Madox,
and borne in this Parish, who departed this life the 20. of June, 1618. By her
he had Issue three Sons and three Daughters, William, Randoll, Anne, and
Elizabeth surviving, John and Mary deceased.

Martins Ludgate.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost and charge of the Parish,
in the year of our Lord God 1623.

Henry Johnson William Liod Churchwardens.

A very handsome Monument in the Wall, at the upper end of the Chancell, with
this Inscription.
M. S.
Here lies the body of Thomas Allen, of London, Gentleman, who died the 22.
day of October 1630. diverse of whose Ancestors have been interred in this
Church.

No Epitaph need make
the just man famed,
The good are praised,
when they are only named.
Martins Orgars.
IN the year 1630. the Steeple of this Church was repaired, the East Window in
the Chancell, and three great South Windows, were new Glazed, which with the
Plumbers work and Tiling, amounted to the sum of 122. li. 6. s. 6. d.

Richard Tomes James Pickering Churchwardens.

A rich and very beautiful Monument in the Chancell, with this Inscription. M.
S.
Sir Allen Cotton, Knight, and Alderman of London, sometime Lord Mayor of this
Honorable City, son of Ralph Cotton of Alkington, in the Parish of Whitchurch,
in the County of Salop, Gentleman, was espoused unto Ellinor, the Daughter of
Edmond Moore, Citizen and Draper of London, by whom he had Issue seven Sons and
seven Daughters, and lived unto the age of 70. years, generally beloved, and
died the 24. of December, 1628. being the Eve of the celebration of our blessed
Saviors Nativity, which sell out by Gods providence, to be the day of his
second birth, and convoy to eternal bliss. He left behind him three Sons,
Edmond, John, and William, and two Daughters; which sons, in a filial
expression of their duties, have caused this Monument to be erected, in memory
of their dear deceased Father.

When he left Earth, rich Bounty d^'d,
Mild Courtesy gave place to (...)
Soft Mercy to bright Justice said,
O, Sister, we are both betrayed;
White Innocence lay on the ground
By Truth, and wept at eithers wound.
The sons of Levi did lament,
Their Lamps wentout, their Oil was spent;
Heaven has his soul, and only we
Spinne out our lives in misery.
So Death, thou missest of thy ends,
And kilst not him, but kilst his friends.
Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Here lies her Type, who was of late,
The prop of Belgia, stay of France. (State,
Spaines foil, Faiths shield, and Queen of
Of A^mes, of Learning, Fate, and Chance:
In brief, of Women never was seen,
So great a Prince, so good a Queen.
Since Virtue Her immortal made,
Death (envying all that cannot dye)
Her earthy parts did so invade,
As in it wrackt self Majesty.
But so her Spirit inspired her Parts,
That she still lives in loyal hearts.
Prove. 31. 29.

Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou surmountest them all.

She is is not dead, But sleeps.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

Martin Outwitch.
IT is since this Church was repaired and beautified 39. years, in the passage
of which time, that repair and beauty being lost, it is (as I am informed, by
some that belong to the Church) to be repaired again very shortly, with a
great deal of cost and beauty.

Martins Vintrey.
THis Church was in part Re-edified, and in many parts Repaipaired and
beautified, at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the second year of
the reign of our Sovereign Lord King James, King of great Britain, France,
and Ireland.

John Woodbridge William Barnaby Churchwardens.

The charge then amounting to the sum of four hundred sixty and odd pounds.

It was again repaired, richly and very worthily beautified, in the year of
our Lord 1632. as before, at the cost of the Parish.

John Norton Richard Travers Churchwardens.

In this Church, at the upper end of the South I Will, lies buried the body of
Sir Cutberd Hacket, sometime Lord Mayor of this City; his Coat, Streamers, and
other Adornments, hanging over his Grave, but no other Monument.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
To the eternal memory of Elizabeth, Queen of England, France, and Ireland:
Daughter to King Henry the eighth, Niece to King Henry the seventh, by the
Daughter of King Edward the fourth; a Mother to her Country, a Nurse to
Religion, and all good Arts, being of incomparable Knowledge in very many
Languages, and endued with rare Ornaments of Body and Mind, in all Princely
Virtues above the Sex of Women.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

Matthew Frydaystreet.
THis Church was repaired and very worthily beautified, at the cost of the
Parishioners, in the years of our Lord, 1632. and 1633.

Richard Clay Joseph Stacy Churchwardens.

The charge 140. pounds.

Maudlin Milkestreet.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parish, in the
year of our Lord God 1619.

Gilbert Ward Thomas Smith Churchwardens.

All the Chancell Window was built at the proper cost of Master Benjamin
Henshaw, Merchant-Taylor, and one of our City Captains, the charge of it
arising to 60. pounds and upwards.

In the year 1633. there was added to this, a fair Communion Table, with a
fair Frame about it, which with some other things then done to the further
beautifying of the Church, amounted to the sum of 30. pounds.

John Rundell John Clutterbucke Churchwardens.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Obiit 24. die Martii 1602.

Anno Regni 45.

Aetatis suae 70.

In the figure of a Book over Her, these words.

Verbum Dei, manet in Aeternum.

Under her.

I have fought a good fight, etc.

On the one side.

Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland, etc. Daughter to King Henry
the eighth, and Grandchild of King Henry the seventh, by Elizabeth, eldest
Daughter of Edward the fourth, Having restored true Religion, reduced Coin to
the just value, assisted France and the Low Countries, and overcame the Spanish
invincible Navy, enriched all England, and administered most prudently the
Imperial State thereof 45. years in true piety, In the 70. year of her age,
in most happy and peaceable manner departed this life, leaving her mortal
parts interred in the famous Church of Westminster, till the second coming of
Christ.

On the other side.
Monumentum Elizabethae Reginae.

If Royal Virtues ever crowned a Crown,
If ever Mildness shined in Majesty,
If ever Honor honored true Renown,
If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency,
If ever Princess put all Princes down,
For temperance, prowess, prudence, equity,
This, this was she, that in despite of death,
Lives still admired, adored, ELIZABETH.
Spaines rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Heavens Iem, Earths Joy,
Worlds wonder, Natures chief.
Maudlins Oldfishstreet.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the charge of the Parish, in the
year of our Lord, 1630.

Richard Hubbard John Blew Churchwardens.

The charge of it amounting to the sum of 140. pounds.

A very Monument in the same Church with this Inscription.
Epitaphium. 1622.

Clarissimi viri Gulielmi Druraei, ex Antiqua and Illustri Druraeorum Familia
oriundi, Iuris Caesarii Doctoris, and Amplissimae Curiae praerogativae in
Anglia Dignissimi Iudicis, jam olim defuncti, Recenter vero Mariae Vxoris ejus
Foeminae laudatissimae, ex spendidissimo Southwellorum genere prognatae.

Hac Gulielmus humo
Terdenis dormiit Annis,
Nunc subiit tumulum
juncta Maria viro.
Iustitiae fuit hic cultor,
jurisque Magister,
Haec quoque Magnanima
Nobilitata fide.
Sena prole ferax, virtutum
exempla futuris,
Aeternanda Aevis
liquit uterque Parens,
Felices nimium utraque,
and Funere sponsos,
Dant quibus haec unum
Cor, Humus, Astra, Locum.
Charissimis suis Patri and
Matrihoc Carmine
Parentavit
Gulielmus Druraeus.
Hoc Monumentum in memoriam de functorum Amicorum poni curavit Tho. Cotton, A.
R.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Here lies her Type, who was of late,
The prop of Belgia, stay of France.
Spaines foil, Faiths shield, and Queen of State,
Of Arms, of Learning, Fate, and Chance:
In brief, of Women ne re was seen,
So great a Prince (...) good a Queen.
Since Virtue Her immortal made,
Death (envying all that cannot dye)
Her earthy parts did so invade,
As in it wrackt self Majesty.
But so her Spirit inspired her Parts,
That she still lives in loyal hearts.
Many Daughters have done virtuously but thou excellest them all.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

Michael Bassishaw.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost and charge of this Parish,
in the year of our Lord God, 1630.

Thomas Barnie Christopher Price Churchwardens.

Michael Cornehill.
HEre a Repair follows a Repair so close, that while I speak of the one I
must not forget the other, the former being in the years of our Lord God,
1618, 1619, and 1620. at the finishing.

William Stannard George Hill Francis Moss Churchwardens.

Of the beauty conceive by the cost, the charge of it amounting to 644. li.

The other in this present year of our Lord, 1633. in which the Roof over the
Chancell was new trimmed, the Chancell likewise enriched with a fair and very
curious Table of the Commandments, the Windows about it were new Glazed, the
Stones through the whole body of the Church taken up, new laid and levelled,
and in a word, every part of it at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, was
well and very worthily beautified.

John Collison Richard Norton Francis Middleton Churchwardens.

The charge of this arising to 300. li. and upward.

A very fair Monument on the Wall, in the North I Will, with this Inscription.
Memoriae Sacrum Laurentio, and Mariae Caldwall Conjugibus, sacro Foedare
Iunctis, and Duodenae prolis Parentibus; Quorum Vxor, and Matter Maria obiit
Octobris xx. Anno Dom. 1621. Maritus, and Pater Laurentius, November. xxj. 1625.
Septuagenariis utrisque; Liberalibus and suis, and de suis; Hoc sepulcrum
posuere, parentalis Haeredes bonitatis, Filii eorum observantissimi, quos
defunctos, and Deus habet, and pauperes Carendo lugent.

As it were in a Scroll, held by an Angel.

Omnia ossa justi custodit Dominus.
Under this upon the figure of a Tomb.

Here is lodged a loving pair,
Sleeping rest they free from care;
Though their journey, from their birth,
Has been tedious long on earth,
He that freed them from their sin,
Sent them to this holy Inn,
Joyful Requiems for to sing,
Hallelujahs to their King,
Till the summons, till the day,
Till the Trumpe sound, Rise, Away.
Michael Crookedlane.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, in the year of our Lord God 1610.

In the year 1621. the whole Roof of it found to be greatly decayed and
perished was taken down, with strong and sufficient Timber re-builded, and
with the Lead new cast Re-covered.

The charge of it amounting to 500. pounds.

Not long after this, two Windows at the East end of the Church, very much
defaced and decayed, were repaired; the charge of it 40. li.

A rich and very beautiful Monument on the South side the Chancell, this I Will
called The Fish-mongers Chapel.
S. S.
Nec non piae Memoriae
Ioanni Lemanni.
ViriClariss. civis, ac Senatoris integerrimi,
Equitis Aurat. olim hui Vrbis Praetoris.
Qui se, in suo munere, laudatissime Gessit,
Pietatis Cultor, Iustitiae vindex.
Suis in Coelibatu perpetuo vixit parens.
Et suis plus quam pater munifice mortuus.
Hi R. Exp.
Sallinghamiae
ex
Agro Norfolciensi
oriundus
Probitate,
Simplicitate,
Nixus.
Anno salut. Hu. CIC. ICC. XXxij.
Et suo octagesimo octavo,
die Mart. 26.
Reg. Coeleste,
Certa Fide
Praestolatur.
Upon a Marble stone in the Chancell is this Inscription.
Sub hoc Marmore Requiescit, in spe resurrectionis ad Gloriam, Maria, fidelis
Vxor Iohannis More Mercatoris, Filia Edwardi whorwood, Grocer.

Obijt 10. December. Anno Christi 1632. Aetatis 35.

The figure of a Deaths head.

Memento Mori.
Hic
Mitis, Amans, Humilis, Pia,
pulchra, pudica, Modesta,
Grata Deo, sponso Chara,
Maria jaces. I. M.
Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
The Righteous shall be had in remembrance.
Queen Elizabeth both was, and is alive,
what then more can be said
In Heaven a Saint, in Earth a blessed Maid.
She ruled England years 44. and more,
and then returned to God,
At the age of 70. years, and somewhat od.
Christ is to me life, Death is to me advantage.
Phil. 1. 21.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, etc.
Michael Queenehithe.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, great cost bestowed on the Roof, the
East and West Windows new built and glazed, with other Repaires about it, at
the cost and charge of the Parish, in the year of our Lord 1615.

Miles Gunthorpe Stephen Scot Churchwardens.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

She is not dead, But sleeps.

On the one side.

Here lies her Type, who was of late,
The prop of Belgia, stay of France,
Spaines foil, Faiths shield, and Queen of State,
Of Arms, of Learning, Fate and Chance:
In brief, of Women never was seen,
So great a Prince, so good a Queen.
On the other side.

Since Virtue her immortal made,

Death (envying all that cannot dye)
Her earthy parts did so invade,
As in it wrackt self Majesty.
But so her Spirits inspired her Parts,
That she still lives in loyal hearts.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.
Michael Querne.
THis Church was repaired, and with all things, either for use or beauty richly
supplied and furnished, at the sole cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the
year of our Lord 1617.

A fair Monument in the North I Will, with this Inscription.
John Banks, Mercer, and Esquire, whose body lies here interred, the Son of
Thomas Banks, free of the Barber-Surgeans; this John was aged 59. and expired
the ninth of September, Anno 1630.

His first Wife was Martha, a Widow, by whom he had one only Son deceased:
his second Wife was Anne Hasell, who left unto him one Daughter and Heir,
called Anna, since married unto Edmond Wallers, of Berkensfield in
Buckinghamshiere, Esquire. He gave by his last Will and Testament (written with
his own hand) to unbenificed Ministers; to decayed Housekeepers; to the poor
of many Parishes; to all (or the most) of the Prisons, Bridewells, and
Hospitalls, in and about London; to young Beginners to set up their Trades; to
the Artillery Garden, and toward the maintenance thereof, for ever, very
bountifully; to his own Company, both in Lands and Money; to his Friends, in
tokens of remembrance; to diverse of his Kindred; and to other charitable and
pious uses, the sum of 6000. li. notwithstanding Noble and sufficient Dower
to his Daughter reserved. And all these several Legacies, by his careful
Executor Robert Tichbourne, and his overseers, punctually observed, and fully
discharged.

Inbalm'd in pious Arts,
wrapped in a shroud
Of white in nocuous Charity,
who vowed,
Having enough,
the world should understand
No deed of mercy
might escape his hand,
Banks here is laid to sleep,
this place did breed him,
A president to all
that shall succeed him.
Note both his life
and immitable end,
Know he th'unrighteous
Mammon made his Friend,
Expressing by his Talents
rich Increase,
Service that gained him praise
and lasting Peace.
Much was to him committed,
much he gave,
Entering his treasure there,
whence all shall have
Return with use:
what to the poor is given,
Claims a just promise
of Reward in Heaven:
Even such a Bank,
Banks left behind at last,
Riches stored up, which
Age nor Time can waste.
A fair Monument in the South I Will, with this Inscription.
Piae Memoriae Sacrum,

Gilberto Erington, de Wolsington Armigero, ex antiqua Eringtonorum Familia, de
Denton in Comitatu Northumbriae orto. Qui ex Dorothea Vxore Chrarissima una
filiarum Iohannis de Lavale, de Seaton de Lavale, in dicto Com. Militis, tres
filios Marcum, Robertum and Cuthbertum, and sex Filias Annam, Margaretam,
Katherinam, Elizab. Dorotheam, and Graciam, suscepit. Ex agro Nativo huc in
hanc Civitatem profectus, morboque correptus, obiit xviij. die Iunii, Anno
Domini 1578 Aetatis suae 63. Patri optimo and Charissimo, efficiosae pietatis,
and Memoriae perpetuum restem, novissimum hoc parentale Munusculum persolvit,
posuit, praestitit Marcus Erington filius Maerens xx. die Feb. 1618.

In te Domine speravi, non confundar in Aeternum, Psalm. 31.

Vita bonos sed poena malos,
aeterna capescit,
Vita bonis, sed poena malis,
per secula crescit.
His mors, his vita, perpetuatur ita.
Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Here lies her Type, who was of late,
The prop of Belgia, stay of France,
Spaines foil, Faiths shield, and Queen of State,
Of Arms, of Learning, Fate, and Chance:
In brief, of Women never was seen,
So great a Prince, so good a Queen.
Since Virtue Her immortal made,
Death (envying all that cannot dye)
Her earthy parts did so invade,
As in it wrackt self Majesty.
But so her Spirit inspired her Parts,
That she still lives in loyal hearts.
Monumentum Reginae Elizabethae.

Many Daughters have done well, but thou surmountest them all.

She is not dead, But sleeps.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

Michael Royal.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the proper cost of the Parish, in
the year of our Lord, 1630.

Richard Mills William Hawes Churchwardens.

The charge of it amounting to 120. li. 9. s.

Michael Woodstreet.
THis Church was repaired, and thus beautified in the year of our Lord God,
1620. at the charge of the Parishioners.

Thomas Wilson Humphry Michael Churchwardens.

In the year 1627. the Parishioners made a new door to this Church, through
the head of the North I Will (being the Chancell end) into Woodstreet; where till
then it had only one door in the middle of the South I Will, standing in Huggin
lane.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Here lies her Type, who was of late,
The prop of Belgia, stay of France,
Spaines foil, Faiths shield, and Queen of State,
Of Arms, of Learning, Fate and Chance:
In brief, of Women never was seen,
So great a Prince, so good a Queen.
Since Virtue her immortal made,
Death (envying all that cannot dye)
Her earthy parts did so invade,
As in it wrackt self Majesty.
But so her Spirits inspired her Parts,
That she still lives in loyal hearts.
Mildred Breadstreet.
THis Church was repaired and very worthily beautified, in the year of our
Lord 1628.

The greatest part of the North wall was new built, the Arches in the middle of
the Church, four fair Windows over them, and a very fair Gallery, at the
cost and charge of the Parish.

M. Nicholas Crispe M. Ralph King Churchwardens.

This for a general charge, somewhat of particular bounties.

At the upper end of this Church, on the South side, is a fair Window with
this Inscription.

This Window was glazed at the charge of Hester Crispe, late Wife of Ellis
Crispe, Citizen and Alderman of London, who lies fixed in a Vault at the
bottom of this Window 1629.

At the upper end of the Church, on the North side, another with this
Inscription.

This Window was glazed at the charge of Samuel Crispe, Citizen and Salter of
London, 1630.

Between these two, at the upper end of the Chancell, is a fair Window full
of cost and beauty, which being divided into five parts, carries in the first
of them a very artfull and curious representation of the Spaniards great
Armado, and the battle in 1588. In the second, of the Monument of Queen
Elizabeth. In the third, of the Gunpouder plot. In the fourth, of the
lamentable time of infection 1625. And in the fifth and last, the view and
lively Portraitures of that worthy Gentleman, Captain Nicholas Crispe, at
whose sole cost (among other) this beautiful piece of work was erected, as
also the figures of his virtuous Wife and Children, with the Arms belonging
unto them: The Verses to every Story are these:

The Story of Eighty eight.
Starre-gazing Wizards
sat upon this year,
Matter of wonder,
and did threaten fear
Toward us, in so much
that Rome and Spain,
This Land accounted
their assured gain.
But mark how God did
quite their hopes confound,
Both Ships and men
we did see flee and drowned.
Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Marvel not why
we do erect this Shrine,
Since dedicated it is
to Worth divine;
Religion, Arts,
with Policy and Arms,
Did all concur
in her most happy Reign,
To keep Gods Church and us
from plotted harms,
Contrived by Romish wits,
and force of Spain.
The Powder Plot. 1605.
When force could not prevail,
nor plots abroad
Could have success,
finne now invents new fraud:
Guy Vaux is sent
Ambassador to Styx,
And thence returning,
furnishes with tricks
His damned Crew,
who forth withal conclude,
To blow up King, the State,
and Multitude.
The great Plague 1625.
The Stories past,
Gods blessings to the State
Do clearly show;
But sure we were ingrate,
For now, behold,
in stead of sweet protection,
Thousands are swept away
by foul Infection.
But mark Gods mercy,
in midst of greatest cries,
He sheathed his sword,
and wiped tears from our eyes.
The Founders figure, with his Wife, Children, and their Arms.
These Ensigns which you see,
and Monument,
Are not so much
to represent
The Founders Person,
as his zealous care
To Express Gods love,
and mercies rare
To this his Vineyard;
for to that sole end
Did he these Stories
thus commend
To after ages, that
in their distress,
They might Gods goodness
still express.
With this, this Gentleman gave toward the repair of this Church, among the
Parishioners, above his share as a Parishioner 75. li.

Also for the Communion Table, two great Flag on Pots, to the value of 57. li.

Also very fair Font, in which a Child of his own was first Christened.

His Brother, Master Samuel Crispe, beside his Window, above his ordinary share
as a Parishioner, gave to this fair Reparation 25. li.

The Mother of these worthy Gentlemen the aforenamed Hester Crispe, the late
Wife of Ellis Crispe, Citizen and Alderman of London, now (by a second, and
thrice happy Nuptials) the Lady Pie, beside her Window, gave to this fair
Reparation 20. li. though at that time out of the Parish, and removed from
thence to Christ-Church.

A fair Stone in the South side of the Chancell.
This Stone opens upon the Stairs of a Vault, made by Captain Nicholas
Crispe, Anno 1628. wherein lies buried his Grandfather, Master John Ireland,
late Deputy of this Ward, he was buried the 29. day of June, 1614. And
Mistress Elizabeth Ireland his Wife, buried the 13. day of April, 1613. And
his Father Ellis Crispe, late Alderman, and died Sheriff, he was buried the
10. day of November 1625. And his Son Nicholas. Crispe, who was buried the
23. day of January 1626.

Nicholas Elizabeth John Children of Captain Nicholas Crispe, buried Anno Dom.
1632.

A fair Monument belonging to this Stone standing over it, with this
Inscription.
Ere his worth was fully known,
London lost him, once her own;
Let that year lie buried here,
In which London two did gain,
Sheriffs good, and lost again.
City, Church, Wife, Children, weep,
Reason good, though he but sleep.
Ill can London not lament,
Spoiled of one chief Ornament,
Pity Death had him oregrowne,
Ere his worth was fully known.
Mildred Poultrey.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the proper cost of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God 1626.

George Besse Thomas Brownell Churchwardens.

The charge of it amounting to the sum of 183. li. and upwards.

A Monument on the wall in the North I Will, with this inscription.
In this I Will lies buried the body of Susan Lewin, Daughter of Thomas Lewin, of
Broxborne, in the County of Hartford, who had first to Husband, John Palmer,
having Issue only one son, which Husband deceased Anno 1589. And after some
years, the said Susan married with John Kirby, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor, of
this Parish, by whom she had four Sons and eight Daughters, who departed
this life after 30. years living, the 30. of September 1624.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland, etc. Daughter to King Henry
the eighth, and Grandchild of King Henry the seventh, by Elizabeth, eldest
Daughter of Edward the fourth, Having restored true Religion, reduced Coin to
the just value, assisted France and the Low Countries, and overcame the Spanish
invincible Navy, enriched all England, and administered most prudently the
Imperial State thereof 45. years in true piety, In the 70. year of her age,
in most happy and peaceable manner departed this life, leaving her mortal
parts interred in the famous Church of Westminster, till the second coming of
Christ.

If Royal Virtues ever crowned a Crown,
If ever Mildness shined in Majesty,
If ever Honor honored true Renown,
If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency,
If ever Princess put all Princes down,
For temperance, prowess, prudence, equity,
This, this was she, that in despite of death,
Lives still admired, adored, ELIZABETH.
On the other side of the top of the Monument.
If prayers or tears
of subjects had prevailed,
To save a Princess
through the world esteemed,
Then Atropos
in cutting here had failed,
And had not cut her thread,
but been redeemed,
But pale faced Death,
and cruel churlish Fate,
To Prince and people
brings the latest date.
Yet spite of Death and Fate,
Fame will display
Her gracious Virtues
through the world for aye.
Spaines rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Heavens Iem, Earths Joy,
Worlds wonder, Natures chief.
On the other side.
Britains blessing, Englands splendour,
Religious Nurse, the Faiths defendor.
In the figure of a Book over Her, these words.
They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed,
but remains for ever. Psalm. 125.

Under her.
The admired Empress
through the world applauded,
For supreme Virtues,
rarest Imitation,
Whose Scepters Rule, Fames
loud voyc'd Tumpet lauded,
Unto the ears
of every foreign Nation.
Canopied under
powerful Angels wings,
To her immortal praise
sweet Science sings.
Nicholas Acons.
THis Church was repaired and beautified in the year of our Lord God 1615. at
the cost and charge of the Parishioners.

Robert Old Nathaniel Buckcock Churchwardens.

A handsome Monument on the South side of the Chancell, with this Inscription.
This Picture is for others,
not for me,
For in my breast
I wear thy memory.
It is here placed,
that passengers may know,
Within thy ground no weeds,
but Corn, did grow.
That there did flow
within thy vital blood,
All that could make one
honest, just, and good.
Here is no Elbow room
to write of more,
An Epitaph yields taste,
but seldom store.
Thy troop of Virtues
graced thee amongst men,
And now attend thee
at the Court in Heaven.
Thy worth, sweet Charles,
deserves the rarest wit,
Thy Jane, for such a task,
is most unfit.
Corpus Caroli Haukins, Civis and Aromatarii Londinensis, in hoc Tumulo
depositum est. Erat Deo devotus, Charitatis plenus and virtutis; adeo
studiosus, ut vitam laudabilem, fixemque optimum peregerit. Iana Vxor ejus,
filia Iohannis Reeve Armigeri natu minima, postea nupta fuit Iohanni Suckling
Equiti Aurato, Regiae Majestati a supplicum libellis, praedicti Caroli and
Ianae insignes Dotes tanti Aestimavit, ut Monumentum hoc, sumptibus propriis,
in honorem defuncti pie posuerit, Anno Dom. 1621.

Over these lines, as in a Book in the hands of this Gentleman, these words:
Beatus vir, cui Dominus non imputavit peccatum, and in cujus Spiritu, non est
Dolus.

A Monument on the North side the Chancell, with this Inscription.
In God is all my hope.
All men are borne to dye.
In Christi is my Redemption.
John Hall, Draper, of the age of 90. years, a Householder in this Parish 58.
years, and in that time, by the providence of God, the Father of 27. Children,
all borne here. These great mercies, I do confess in my heart, not to be of
my deserts, but of God his good grace only, showed unto me more abundantly,
than unto many thousands in my time, wherefore with heart and tongue, I yield
all honor and praise unto thee, O God.

Here under lies interred the body of John Hall, once Master of the
Worshipful Company of the Drapers, and 25. years one of the Bridgemasters of
the City of London, who deceased the 19. day of November, 1618. aged 93.
years. And also the body of Anne Brown, Daughter of Master John Brown,
Gentleman, being his third Wife, by whom he had 23. Children: she died the 17.
of December 1619. being aged 73. years.

Nicholaes Coleabby.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the cost of the Parish, in the
year of our Lord 1630.

Robert Bromly Henry Hewes Churchwardens.

In the year 1626. new Frames were made for their Bells. And in the year
1628. new Battlements added to the Steeple.

Nicholas Olaves.
THis Church was repaired and beautified in the year of our Lord God 1623.

Edward Whitwell Alexander Colsen Churchwardens.

The cost of it 24. pounds.

Since that, in the year 1628. the South I Will, that like a Cottage before, was
only Tyled (and in that unseemly and unbefitting manner so left) was Seiled,
and in that decently and very gracefully beautified, which with some cost
bestowed on the Steeple, did arise to the sum of 22. li.

This, as the former, being the sole cost and charge of the Parish.

An ancient Monument on the North wall, revived and beautified with the Church,
with this Inscription hanging by it.

This Monument of Thomas Lewya, and Agnis his Wife, was newly revived and
beautified at the charge of the Right Worshipful Company of the Ironmongers,
whereof he was free, the 29. of May, Anno Dom. 1623.

Olaves Hartstreet.
THis Church in the many decayed places of it (which indeed were many and
great) was repaired richly, and very worthly supplied with whatsoever it
wanted, and furnished with whatsoever might further deck and adorn it (at the
proper cost and charge of the Parishioners) in the years of our Lord God,
1632. and 1633.

In the first Thomas Redding and Roger Dreyton, Churchwardens; in the next,
Roger Dreyton and Christopher Wigley.

The charge of this repair amounting to the sum of 437. pounds and upwards.

Some especial particulars (leaving the Steeple, Walls, and Battlements)
within the Church, were these: The Roof in the middle I Will decayed, to the
danger of falling, was with new Timber rebuilt, new Leaded, and the inside very
worthily garnished. The Stonework of all the Windows greatly defaced and
perished; were new wrought, and all the Windows new Glazed. And within some
few years before this, two very fair Galleries at the lower end of the
Church, one on the North side, the other on the South were erected.

A very fair Monument on the North side of the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Paul Bayning, Esquire, sometimes Sheriff and Alderman of London, lived to the
age of 77. years, and died the 30. of September, Anno Dom. 1616.

Consecrated to the Memory of Paul and Andrew Bayning, Esquires.
If all great Cities
prosperously confess,
That he by whom
their Traffic does increase
Deserves well of them,
then the Adventure's worth
Of these two, who
were Brothers both by birth,
And Office, prove,
that they have thankful bin,
For the Honors which
this City placed them in.
And dying old,
they by a blessed consent
This Legacy bequeathed,
Their Monument.
The happy sum and end
of their Affairs,
Provided well both
for their Souls and Heirs.
This Monument of his Brother adjoining to this.
Andrew Bayning, sometimes Alderman of London, lived to the age of 67. years,
and died the 21. of December, Anno Dom. 1610.

Over the Tomb of Paul Bayning, Esquire, hang the Ensigns of Honor, as his
Coat, Streamers, and the like of the Lord Bayning, Vicount Sudbury, his Son,
there buried in the Monument of his Father.

Next to that of Paul Bayning, Esquire, is this, having this Inscription.
Eave sis Gradum
pergas Viator,
piusquam haec
perlegeris.
In certam beatae Resurrectionis spem, Terrae sequestratum,

Hic est exanime Corpus, praeclarae quondam Mentis Hospitium, viri juvenis
Domini Ludolphi de Werder, Anhaltini, praenobili ac Antiqua werderorum Familia
Orti: Cujus summam in Deum pictatem, inclyti Generis seriem, Amplas eruditi
pectoris Dotes, cum tam angusto Marmoris non Comprehendantur, sacro silentio
merito obsignamus. Generosus hic vir Mxa^m partem, primum Germaniam lustravit,
in qua Famigerabilium aliquot Academiarum, puta Lipsien. Ienev. Gissen. non
Degenerem Incolam, diu egit, magnis literarum numinibus mirum quantum carus.
Deinde in Belgiam concessit, ubi veram Nobilitatem, decentibus studiis
Quadrien. Leidae Combussit. Tandem in Angliam perveniens hic Londini
sesquiannum phthisi solito vehementius laboravit; cujus maligna obstinatione,
etiam Factum est, ut die 26. December. Anno 1628. Natus Annos 29. Rebus humanis
valere, suis vero plangere, dixerit, Anima sua, Creatori suo, unde tam nobile
depositum acceperat, Magna in Christum Fide Redonata. Monumentum hoece Agnati,
quibus accerbum sui desiderium Reliquit, pio ducti Affectu erigi Curarunt.

Lectori.
Quisquis adhuc vitam vivis,
sic vivito vitam,
Linquere eam quovis
tempore rite queas.
Near unto the other this, having this Inscription. D. O. M. S. Viator
Commorare, Rimare, Mirare.
Christophorus Iacobus Elssenhaimer, ab Elssehaim in preprum Junior, Welsinsis
Austrius Generis splendore, vera in Deum Religione, pietate in parents,
observantia in superiores, Charitate and Comitate in quosvis, vere Nobilissimus
juvenis, Nobile Familiae Columen, Iuventutis exemplar, Artium and Linguarum
Cognitionem infignem, pro divinis ingenii sui dotibus, in Ratisponensium
Gymnasio Poetico Altorfiana Argentinensi, Basiliensi, Leidensi Academiis
acquisitam peregrinationibus adaucturus, hic in Anglia, ad Angelorum Sanctorum
Coelum avocatus, Animam sua^ Christo Redemptori reddidit, corpus vero huic solo
commisit, Desiderium sui tristissimum omnibus bonis relinquens, Imprimis
parentibus Christophoro Iacobo Elssenbaimero ab Elssenham in Preprunn Seniori,
and Dorotheae ex Nobili Haendeliorum Familia prosatae, Qui Filio unice unisoli
senectutis portui extremum hoc quod sibi ab illo desideravere animitus Amoris
Monumentum inter Candissimas Lacrymas statuerunt.

Obiit Anno Aetatis 21. Men. ix. die. 28. Anno Christi M. D. C. XVIII. die vj.
August.

Nemo nostrum sibi vivit, and nemo sibi moritur, sive enim vivimus, Domino
vivimus, sive morimur Domino morimur; sive ergo vivimus, sive morimur, Domini
sumus. Paul ad Romans cap. 14. verse. 17.

Fili ad Parent.
Vivo fruor tandem veris, ne flete parents, Deliciis, Coelo posteritate Deo.

On a fair Stone in the middle I Will, with these words about it.
Here lies the body of Alice Hull, the Wife of Walter Hull of London,
Gentleman, who was buried the 16. day of November, Anno Dom. 1627.

In the middle of the Stone, with their Arms over it, these words.
Though we are dead, yet our lives are hid in Christ with God.

Christ is to me both in life and death advantage.

Though my flesh fails, and my heart also, yet God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.

Olaves Jewrie.
THis Church was repaired in the year 1608. and again repaired and beautified
in the year of our Lord God, 1628.

A fair Monument in the same Church with this Inscription.
Memoriae Sacrum, Roberti Bowyer, Mercatoris London, ex Antiqua Familia Bouyes:
De Knipperslay, in Com. Staffordiae oriundi, secundi filii Francisci Bowyer.
Ar. Quondam Aldermani hujus Civitatis, Honorabilis Societatis Grocerum London,
olint pro tempore praefecti. Margaretam unum Filiarum Thomae Cordall, quondam
etiam Mercator London, ac Honorabilis Societatis Mercerum, ejusdem Societatis
prefecti, in Vxor: ducentis amplissimam suscipientis prolem quinque Filios,
viz. Thomam, Robertum, Williclmum, and Henricum, modo Coelebes, superstites
existentes, and Iohannem defunctum, and secundum Christi adventum hic
expectantem.

Margareta Vxor, Thomas, and Robertus filii ejus, a ultimi Testamenti
Executores, pietatis, and observantiae ergo, Moerentes posuerunt.

Under this Tomb,
the sacred Ashes hold,
The drossie part
of more Celestial gold;
The body of a Man,
a Man of men,
Whose worth to write at large,
would loose my Pen.
Then do thy worst, Death,
glut thy self with Dust,
The precious Soul
is mounted to the Just.
Yet Reader, when thou read'st,
both read and weep,
That men so good, so grave,
so wise, do sleep.
N. S. Moerens Posuit.
Olaves Silverstreet.
THis Church, being greatly decayed and perished, was in the year of our Lord
God 1609. new built, and enlarged in the breadth seven foot and above.

In the year of our Lord, 1619. it was again repaired and beautified. And in
the year of our Lord, 1632. inrched with a very fair Gallery, with this
Inscription in the several panes or parts thus:

Deo Patri Filio Spiritu Sancto
Trino and uni Gloria in aeternum.
Richardus Turner, and Johannes Morrell, Hanc porticum suis sumptibus erexerunt.

Pancras Soperlane.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, in the year of our Lord 1621.
toward which Reparation, Sir Thomas Bennet, Alderman, Dame Anne Soame, and
Master Thomas Chapman, were free and bountiful Benefactors.

The last of these, Master Thomas Chapman, having in the year 1617. given a
fair and very costly Table, bearing the figure of the Monument of that ever
famous after death, as in her life, Queen Elizabeth.

In the year 1624. the Son of this worthy Gentleman, Master Thomas Chapman
the younger, to the further beautifying of this Church, in the more graceful
entrance into it, built a very fair Porch, at his own proper cost and charges.

Also a fair Communion Table, with some other repaires in the South Wall, was
the cost of Master William Doricke, Citizen and Grocer of London.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Mors mihi lucrum Spiritus Astra petat.
To the most happy, blessed, and precious Memory, of the late famous, renowned,
and never to be forgotten Monarch, Q. Elizabeth.

The Restorer of true Religion, A tender nursing Mother of the Church of God, A
powerful Protector (under Almighty God) of her own Dominions, A ready helper
of her neighboring Princes, A hearty and unfeyned Lover, and beloved of her
Subjects; who lived gloriously full of days, and whom the eternal Jehovah
blessed with the longest life of any Prince of England since the Conquest.

By way of due thankfulness to the most holy, sacred, and individual
Trinity, and her ever honored Royal Virtues, this Memorial of hers was here
erected, set up, and Consecrated, the 17. of November, 1617.

Terram Terra Tegat.

Peter's Cheap.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, in
the years of our Lord, 1616. and 1617.

James Ridgeard Walter Eldred Churchwardens.

The charge of it amounting to 314. pounds.

Peter's Cornehill.
THis Church is yet in repair; the Steeple began to be repaired in the year
of our Lord, 1628. and was finished 1629.

The Church it self was begun to be repaired in March, 1632. and is (as they
make account) about All Saints day, in this present year 1633. to be finished,
and (at the sole cost and charge of the Parishioners) without, within, in all
and every part of it, richly and very worthily beautified.

The certain charge cannot yet be known, but as I have heard (probably
imagined by what is done and to do) it is about 1400. pounds.

The Churchwardens this year of finishing, Thomas Birket and Theophilus
Boulton.

In a Vault in the Chancell, upon the 18. day of December, in the year of our
Lord 1625. was buried the body of Thomas Westrow, Alderman and Sheriff of
London, the son of Timothy Westrow, sometime Citizen and Grocer, in this
Parish.

His Hatchments, and such Ensigns as were to his name and degree, hanging over
him.

Near to this in the Chancell, about a fair Marble stone is this inscription.
Here lies buried the body of Judith Fowler, with her newborn son,
deceased the 22. of November, Anno Dom. 1613. Stilo Angliae.

Upon it thus:
She was borne in Antwerpe, the daughter of John Schine, Merchant (stranger) of
Middlebroche, and Wife of Iaspar Fowler, Citizen and Mercer of London; she died
in Childbed in the faith and love of God. She left behind her living, one
only son, and one daughter, Richard and Cornelia.

Peter's Paul's Wharfe.
THis Church was repaired and beautified, at the cost and charge of the Parish,
in the year of our our Lord 1625. and in the first year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES.

Thomas Finch William Stanfoy Churchwardens.

There is a very fair Table of the Commandments at the upper end of the
Chancell, dated 1619. for then it was set up, standing so long as to the
aforenamed date to shrink, and was then finished.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.

From henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not me only, but to them
also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.

Peter's Poor.
THere has been in this Church since the beginning of the year 1615. to the
year 1630. many costly repaires and charges.

In the year 1615. this Church was on the West side enlarged in the breadth
eight foot and better, by the taking down of the North wall, and over a slip
of ground that formerly lay behind it so far outward, erecting another.

Upon the foundation of the old wall were erected new Pillars and Arches, and
from them to the new, a fair Roof.

This empty useless and rude piece of ground, being turned to this use and
beauty (with the very fair Windows in it) at the sole cost and charge of Sir
William Garway, Knight, who at the East end of this wall, in a Vault (made
likewise at his own cost) lies under his fair Monument interred. The charge
of this I Will was 400. pounds.

In the year 1616. this new I Will, and the whole Church was new pewed, and the
great Window in the Chancell enlarged.

In the year 1617. the Roof, and the inside of the Church thorowout, was
richly and very worthily beautified.

In the years 1629. and 1630. the Steeple, and a very costly Gallery at the
West end of the Church, were new built and beautified, and the Bells new cast
and hung.

The charge of all this amounting to the sum of 1587. pounds and upwards, all
which, deducting the 400. pounds cost of the I Will, was the cost and charge of
the Parish.

A very fair Monument at the upper end of the North I Will in the Chancell, with
this Inscription.
Hic vivit Gulielmus Garway, Eques Auratus, Civis Londinensis, qui Annos egit.
54. cum Elizabetha Vxore integerrima, Filia Thomae Anderson, Civis etiam
Londinensis, beatitudine Lecti fructifera, Pater erat 17. liberorum, illustre
probitatis, and pietatis exemplar, Industria singulari, universalem expectavit
Mercaturam. Feliciter magis quam avare, bis ad Senatoriam dignitatem vocatus,
qui Purpuram recusavit, nunc triumphat in Albis. Tandem postquam Alam hujus
Templi sinistram construxisset, placide corpus suo operi, Animam suo opifici
reposuit.

Anno Aetatis suae 88. Domini 1625. September. 26.

Templa Dei in terris duo sunt,
Ecclesia, Corpus,
Vna Domus carnis, cultus
domus altera, and Ambo
Convenient tumulo,
parvo coeuntque socello.
Non quaeras igitur Cineres
sub cespite Lector,
Est templum in templo clausum,
non essa sepulcher.
Marmore sublato,
subsellia, porta, columnae,
Ala haec, and paries, spatium
totum, atque Fenestrae,
Omnia structorem monstrant,
resonantque patronum,
Sic tenet immortalem,
and mortalem locus idem.
Conditur in Templo quod condidit,
and Monumentum
Hoc unum vitae, and mortis
commune Relinquit.
In the North I Will, upon a fair Marble Stone is this Inscription.
As in a Sheafe of Arrows.

Vis unita Fortior.

The band of love,
The unitor of brethren.
Here lies the body of Thomas Harvy, of London, Merchant,

Who departed this life the 2. of Feb. Anno Dom. 1622.

With his first Wife Elizabeth, (the Daughter of Nic. Exton, of London,
Merchant) she died the first of January Anno 1618.

He was a faithful man, and feared God above many, Ier. 7. 2.

A fair Monument at the upper end of the Chancell, with this Inscription. Anno
1624. Aetatis 54. A Memorial Of the Worshipful Master Robert Wadson, late
Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London. Epitaphium.
So frail and brittle
is the life of man,
That who lives longest
lives but a span;
In yout and age all dye,
God has so doomed,
That Earth returns to Earth
to be entombed.
Wadson, who of that substance
was composed,
Lies in his Mothers Center
here enclosed,
A sheet does hide his face,
but not his fame,
The Grave contains his corpse,
not his good name:
For his good name outlives
(O blessed man)
When others good names dye
before they can.
The sixth of January
(that fatal day)
Sixteen hundred twenty four,
he did pay
The debt to Nature,
which all men do know,
He was no sooner borne
but he did owe.
If Virtues could have stayed
the hand of Death,
Then Wadson still
had drawn his vital breath.
His soul above,
his worths do here remain,
Till Christ shall come
to raise him up again:
Thus he enjoyes
Heavens immortality,
And here on Earth,
Earths happy memory.
Post varios vitae casus,
dabit urna quietem.
Stevens Colemanstreet.
THis Church was (in many parts of it) carefully repaired, and thorowout
fairly and commendably beautified at the proper cost and charge of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God, 1622.

Francis Wheeler Thomas Newton Churchwardens.

And further enriched and beautified with a very fair Gallery in the South
I Will, in the year 1629.

Robert Kay Robert Daukes Churchwardens.

In the Chancell lies buried the body of Master Samuel Aldersey, Merchant,
Citizen and Haberdasher of London, July 25. 1633.

His Hatchments and Ensigns proper to his Name and estate hanging over him.

To the memory Of that ancient Servant to the City, with his Pen, in diverse
employments, especially the Survey of London, Master Anthony Monday, Citizen
and Draper of London.
He that has many an
ancient Tombstone read,
(Ith labor seeming, more
among the dead
To live, than with the living)
that survaid
Obstruse Antiquities,
and ore them laid
Such vive and beauteous colors
with his Pen,
That (spite of time)
those old are new again,
Under this Marble lies interred:
His Tomb,
Clayming (as worthily it may)
this room,
Among those many
Monuments his Quill
Has so revived,
helping now to fill
A place (with those)
in his Survay: in which
He has a Monument,
more fair, more rich,
Than polisht Stones
could make him, where he lies
Though dead, still living,
and in That, nere dies.
Obiit Anno Aetatis suae 80. Domini 1633. Augusti 10.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland, etc. Daugter to King Henry
the eighth, and Grandchild of King Henry the seventh, by Elizabeth, eldest
Daughter of Edward the fourth, Having restored true Religion, reduced Coin to
the just value, assisted France and the Low Countries, and overcame the Spanish
invincible Navy, enriched all England; and administered most prudently the
Imperial State thereof 45. years in true piety, In the 70. year of her age,
in most happy and peaceable manner departed this life, leaving her mortal
parts interred in the famous Church of Westminster, till the second coming of
Christ.

If Royal Virtues ever crowned a Crown,
If ever Mildness shined in Majesty,
If ever Honor honored true Renown,
If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency,
If ever Princess put all Princes down,
For temperance, prowess, prudence, equity,
This, this was she, that in despite of death,
Lives still admired, adored, ELIZABETH.
I have fought a good fight, etc. 2 Timothy 7, 8.
Stevens Walbrooke.
THis Church within the time of 12. years past, has had these many and costly
repaires.

As first, in the year 1622. all the Chancell, and the two side Isles, as far
as the Chancell, repaired; the Pulpit, Pewes, and Communion Table new.

The charge of all this amounting to the sum of 126. li. 15. s. 6. d.

Tobias Massy Affable Fairecloughe Churchwardens.

In the year 1623. in the North side of this Church two Windows new made, and
certain other Windows repaired, the charge of this amounting to the sum of
16. li. and upwards.

Tobias Massy Griffith Morgan Churchwardens.

In the year 1626. the whole body of the Church was new Pewed, the charge of
it amounting to 333. li. and upwards.

John Warner Ellis Southerton Churchwardens.

In the year 1632. the repair of the Steeple, the North side of the Church,
the Tower on the South side, with other repaires and mendings, amounted to the
sum of 35. li.

John Booker Richard Winston Churchwardens.

The whole cost of these Repaires 510. li. 15. s. 6. d.

S. Swithins.
THis Church has had no repair since the years of our Lord 1607. and 1608.
In the first of which it was begun to be repaired, Richard Glover and Thomas
Wood Churchwardens: and in the last fully beautified and finished at the cost
and charge of the Parishioners.

Thomas Wood Richard Hewit Churchwardens.

A very fair Monument on the South side of the Chancell, with this
inscription. This Monument
Was erected at the sole cost and charges of Ione, Lady Bolles, in memory of
her late dear and worthy Husband, the Right Worshipful, Sir George Bolles,
Knight, sometimes Lord Mayor of the City of London, a Gentleman worthily
descended, of an ancient and unblamed Family, seated in Lincolnshire, which
Lady Ione was the eldest Daughter of that worthy and famous deceased Knight,
Sir John Heart, sometimes likewise Lord Mayor of the said City of London, and
both Brothers of the Right Worshipful Fraternity of the Grocers. Two branches
of that virtuous Stem now flourishing: his Son John Bolles, Esquire, now living
at Skampton in Lincolnshire, and his eldest Daughter Anne, the Wife of Captain
Humphry Smith, of London, Grocer, who deceased the first of September 1621.
being aged 83. years.

Epitaph.
Honor, In^^grity,
Compassion,
Those three filled up
the life time of this man:
Of Honor, the grave
Praetorship he bare,
Which he discharged with
Conscience, Truth, and Care,
He possessed Earth,
as he might Heaven possess,
Wise to do right,
but never to oppress.
His Charity was better
felt than known,
For when he gave,
there was no Trumpet blown.
What more can be comprised
in one man's fame,
To crown a soul,
and leave a living name?
All his just praise
in her life may be read,
The true Wife of his worth
as of his bed.
Over against the other, in the same I Will, is a fair Monument, with this
Inscription. Epitaphium
Generosi, and summae spei juvenis, Georgii Bolles Armigeri, Domini Iohannis
Bolles, Baronetti, de Skampton in Comitatu Lincolniensi, and Dominae Katharinae
Vxoris Filii primogeniti, qui cum ageret Annum Aetatis vicessimum, exiit ex hac
vita, Anno Dom. 1632.

Nil opus hos cineres,
florum decorare corollis:
Flos, hic compositus
qui jacet ipse fuit.
Moribus, Ingenio,
Natura suavis, aperto
Pectore, cui niveus
nilnisi Candor, erat.
Quem Sidneiani spatiis,
umbraque lycei,
Artibus excoluit
Granta diserta suis.
Bis denos vitae, nondum
numer averat Annos,
Cum brevis extremum
clauderet hora diem.
O quantos gemit usque suis
luctusque reliquit,
Tam propere Angelices
dum sitit ire domos.
Euge Beat, tuo cum Christo
sort fruaris,
Sentiat and similem,
qui legit ista sitim.
Ri. Dugard, Moerens composuit.
Thomas Apostle.
THis Church was repaired, and very worthily beautified at the cost and charge
of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God, 1630.

Henry Whaley Robert Perkins Churchwardes.

The charge of it amounting to near 300. pounds.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
If Royal Virtues ever crowned a Crown,
If ever Mildness shined in Majesty,
If ever Honor honored true Renown,
If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency,
If ever Princess put all Princes down,
For Temperance, prowess, prudence, equity,
This, this was she, that in despite of death,
Lives stilladmir'd, adored, ELIZABETH.
If prayers or tears
of subjects had prevailed,
To save a Princess
through the world esteemed,
Then Atropos
in cutting here had failed,
And had not cut her thread,
but been redeemed,
But pale faced Death,
and cruel churlish Fate,
To Prince and people
brings the latest date.
Yet spite of Death and Fate,
Fame will display
Her gracious Virtues
through the world for aye.
Monumentum Elizabethae Angliae Reginae. As in a Book. Psalm. 112.
The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

On the one side.
Spaines rod, Romes ruin,
Netherlands relief,
Heavens Iem, Earths Joy,
Worlds wonder, Natures chief.
On the other side.
Britains Blessing,
Englands Splendour,
Religions Nurse,
The Faiths Desendor.
Under her Monument.
Many Daughters have done well, but thou excellest them all.

Trinity Parish.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost and charge of the Parish,
in the year of our Lord 1626.

Nicholas Salbye Thomas Allam Churchwardens.

This Church, in the year 1606. was so lamentably decayed and perished, that
(in that great necessity of it) they were constrained to pull it down to the
ground, and from thence, with what speed they could, with much care and cost to
rebuild it, which in the years of 1607. and 1608. was finished.

In the South I Will in the wall, hang two large Tables, the one showing the
Contributions of all her own Parishioners; the other the Contributions of all
the Parishes within and without London, toward the rebuilding of it; the
particular sums of every man in the first, and of every Parish in the last,
there fairly set down before them.

Richard Owfall George Haeffeld then Churchwardens.

To this pious work also, the worshipful Companies of the Merchant-Taylors
and Vinteners were very free and bounteous Benefactors.

As also these Aldermen:

Sir Thomas Cambell. Sir John Swinnerton. Sir John Gore. Sir William Craven.
Sir Thomas Middleton.
Their Names and Arms standing in a fair Window at the upper end of the
Chancell.

A Review also of the sixteen Parishes without the Walls of this City.
Andrew Holborne.
THis Church has had no repair or cost bestowed upon it (worthy any record or
memory) for the space of many years; indeed so many, that the many decayed
parts and places of it, call rather for a Rebuilding, than a Repairing. Which
is (as I am told) now providing for; the Parishioners purposing very shortly to
pull it all down, and rebuild, enlarge, and enrich it, with that beauty that
becomes so great a work, and the House of the great God Almighty.

What I have heard, I relate, and believe, both for the truth and speed: which
when it begins, in the progression and finishing, the blessing of God go with
it.

A very comely Monument upon a Pillar in the South I Will, with this Inscription.
Aspice, Respice, Prespice.
Near to this place lies buried the body of Elizabeth Ade, late the wife of
John Ade, of Doddington, in the County of Kent, Gentleman: and eldest daughter
of Thomas Waller, of Beckonfield, in the County of Buckingham, Esquire, who in
her time was the Mirror of her Sex, repleat with all the gifts that Grace or
Nature could afford: Religious toward God, and charitable toward men; loving
and faithful to her Husband, beloved of all, hated of none.

This world not worthy of her, she was translated to a better, the third of
May, 1619. and about the 32. year of her age, leaving by her death a most
unfortunate Husband, three Sons, John, Edward, and Nicholas, and four
Daughters, Dorothy, Elizabeth, Mary and Francis.

Whosoever thou art, that passest by,
Learn here to live, and here to dye.
On the South side of the Quire, upon a fair Marble stone, is this Inscription.
Here lies buried the body of Christopher Sherland, Esquire, Reader of Greyes
Inn, who died the 27. day of January, Anno Dom. 1631.

On a stone near unto the other, is this Inscription.
Here lies the Body of Henry Topham, Esquire, one of the Readers of Greyes
Inn, who died the first day of May, Anno 1612.

Upon a Brass plate, near the North door, is this Inscription.
Here lies a Maid,
for Heaven by her pure life
So fit, she could not stay
to be a Wife;
And with her, half a man
lies buried,
That is but half himself,
now she is dead:
His other half lives
but in hope to be
Enclosed in this Vrne,
as well as she.
In losing her, the Lovets
lost a Iemme,
A Margarite, too rich
(indeed) for Them,
But not for Him, to whom
she went from hence,
Vsher'd by Faith, Hope, Love,
and Innocence.
Then you that are her friends,
your Grief forget,
In Heaven your Margarite
is richly set.
Obiit 4. die Februarii, Anno Domini, 1631.

Bartholomew the Great.
OF this Church we are certainly informed, that from the year of our Lord,
1622. to this present 1633. there has not been a year in the passage of
which, there has not been (in one part or another of it) a great deal of
money expended.

What was done in every particular year, I do not certainly know, but what I
could learn take thus:

In the year of our Lord 1620. the Porch at the West end of the Church was new
built, which in the year 1632. was again repaired and beautified.

In the year 1622. the inside of the Church was new painted, richly and very
worthily beautified.

In the year 1624. the Gallery at the lower end of the Church, was rebuilded,
very much enlarged, and beautified.

In the years of our Lord 1625. and 1626. great cost was bestowed in Lead, and
in the Plumbers labor.

In the year 1628. the Steeple of this Church, being formerly part of Stone,
and part of Timber, the upper part especially Timber, being all ruined and
decayed, was pulled down to the very foundation, and a new re-builded of
Brick and Freestone, very richly and fairly finished.

Also the East I Will, and some other parts of this Church (very defective) were
repaired and beautified at the cost and charge of the Parishioners.

The charge of this year amounting to 698. pounds and upward.

Richard Glover Richard Toppin Churchwardens.

A Monument in the North I Will in the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Sacred to the memory of that worthy and learned, Francis Anthony, Doctor in
Physic.

There needs no Verse
to beautify thy praise,
Or keep in memory
thy spotless Name,
Religion, Virtue,
and thy skill did raise
A threefold pillar
to thy lasting fame:
Though poisonous envy
ever sought to blame,
Or hide the fruits
of thy intention;
Yet shall all they
commend that high design,
Of purest Gold
to make a Medicine,
That feel thy help
by that thy rare invention.
He died the 26. of May 1623. his age 74.

His loving Son, John Anthony, Doctor in Physic, left this remembrance of
his sorrow.

Another Monument near the Pulpit, with this Inscription.
Roberto R. F. Chamberlanio, Iacobi Magno-Britanici, Francici, Hibernici, Pii
Foelicis semper Augusti Inauguratione Nobiliss. De Balneo ordinis Militi,
Castelli de Sherburne in Agro Oxoniensi Domino, ab Antiquiss. Tankevillae in
Normandia Comitib. longa Majerum serie demisso. Quantecunque fortunae capaci
Animo Magna nato, nec vir^utibus Minorib. Quas dum sibi, suisque fovet, exteras
Nationes complurimas lustravit, Morum Calidus Linguarumque. Terram postremo
sanctam, and sepulcrum domini venerandus adiit, sumque (Heufata) quale, aut ubi
incomperto Reperiit, littore siquidem solvens, Anno Virginei partus, 161^.
Tripolim inter Cyprumque (quantum Conjici fas est) fatorum an hominum
inclementia,

Coelebs a suis procul periit.
Tam dulcis olim contubernii memor, tantoque dolori and desiderio impar, Amico
Amicus merenti Moerens. P.

Vixit Annos circiter 30.

Coelo tegitur qui non habet urnam.

A fair Monument in the South I Will, close by the Vestry door.
Here lies interred the body of Elizabeth Freshwater, late Wife of Thomas
Freshwater of Heubridge, in the County of Essex, Esquire, eldest Daughter of
John Orme, of this Parish, Gentleman, and Mary his wife. She died the 16. day
of May, Anno Domini, 1617. being of the age of 26. years.

Mors properans, quali
tinxisti tela veneno,
Vt sic trina uno
vulnere praeda cadat:
Vnam saeva feris, sed and uno
hoc occidit Ictu,
Vxor dulcis, Amans filia,
Chara soror.
Here also lies the body of the said John Orme, who died the 12. of January,
Anno Dom. 1617. And the body of the said Mary Orme, who died the 16. of April,
1618.

Upon a fair Marble Stone close by the last Monument, is this Inscription.
Hic jacet Nicholas Orme, de Hospitio Lincolniensi Armiger, qui postquam Annos
28. explevisset 4. die Februarii, Anno salutis 1628. expiravit; and jam placide
requiescit una cum utroque parente, duobus fratribus, una sorore, and duobus
sobrinis, ex Thoma Gundroy Generose oriundis, qui quod motale in illis fuit,
hoc in pulvere prius deposuerunt.

Upon a fair Stone close to the other is this Inscription.
In the figure of a Rose.

Oritur and Moritur.

Here lies the body of Abigall Coult, the Daughter of Maximilian Coult, who
departed this life the 19. day of March, 1629. in the 16. year of her
Virginity.

Bartholomew the Less.
OF this Church I can say but little; receiving in my enquiry of it, touching
its repair and beauty, so little and so slight an answer; for all that I
could get, of those that might best have informed me, was, that either for
Monument or cost, there was nothing they thought, worth the Recording.

My careful inquiry and entreats, for the knowledge of that that was,
prevailing no farther with them: If any man seem offended, that I speak
neither more or better, he sees where to place his displeasure.

Notwithstanding all this, though I cannot point upon the year, yet I must
tell you, that within these few years, it has had some repair and beauty,
though in respect of many other Churches, the cost was but slight and easy:
yet such as is worth remembrance, and such as in that, it yet remains decent
and comely.

S. Brides.
THis Church was repaired, and every part of it richly and very worthily
beautified, at the proper cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the years of
our Lord God, 1630. 1631. and 1632. In the last Thomas Lee Thomas Turner
Churchwardens.



Some memorable particulars (though included in the general commends) are
these: The Battlements were new built, the middle Roof, and a very fair
Gallery on the North side of this Church, answerable to that on the South,
which was erected in the year of our Lord, 1607.

A very fair Monument standing in the South I Will, in the Chancell, with this
Inscription.
In this Chancell lies buried Frances Trevor, Wife of Sir Thomas Trevor,
Knight, Solicitor General to the Prince, at the time of her death, and now one
of the Barons of the Exchequer; she was Daughter and Heir of Daniel
Bleverhasset of Norfolk, Esquire. She died the 6. of January, 1624. In whose
memory her said Husband, Haec pie posuit.

They had a Daughter buried near unto her.

In this Chancell also was buried, the sixth of January 1614. Prudence Trevor,
Daughter of Henry Butler, and former Wife to the said Sir Thomas, who bate him
a Son, named Thomas, now living, Also John Trevor of Trevallyn, in Comitatu
Denbighe, Esquire, Father to the said Sir Thomas, died the 15. of July, 1589.
and lies buried here.

Randulph Trevor, Brother to the said Sir Thomas, died the 21. of July, 1590.
and is buried here.

Margarite, Niece to the said Sir Thomas, and Daughter of Sir Richard Trevor,
of Trevallyn, Knight, was married to John Griffith, of Lyn, in Comitatu
Carnarvon, Esquire, and left many children, and was buried here the 19. of
March, 1624.

In the same I Will, at the upper end of this Church, on a fair Monument, in this
Inscription.
Here rests the body of Sir George Curzon, of Croxall, in the Country of
Derby, Knight, descended from ancient Gentry, and of long continuance in that
place, who, like the Race from whence he came, was a Man ofuprightlife,
religious, and Hospitable. He took to Wife Mary, the Daughter of Sir Richard
Levison, of Lolleshull, in the Country of Salop, Knight, by whom he had
Walter, who dyed young, and Mary then his only Daughter and Heir, who was
married to Edward Sackvile, Earl of Dorset, Knight Sackvile, Earl of Dorset,
Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter. Which Lady caused this Monument
to be here infixed, to the sacred memory of her dear Father. He departed this
life the 17. of NoVember, 1622.

Bridewell Precinct.
THis Chapel was enlarged and beautified, at the proper cost and charge of
the Governors and Inhabitants of this Precinct, in the year of our Lord God,
1620. Sir Thomas Middleton being then President, and Master Thomas Johnson
Treasurer of this Hospital.

This enlargement was by the taking in of a large Room, that (before the date
above named) joined upon the head of the Chapel. This ground adding to the
length of it (all the full breadth going with it) 24. foot and better.

This Room thus taken in, trimmed, beautified, and consecrated, is now a
beautiful Chapel, it being before a Room empty, vast, rude, and unsightly:
though then, in the use, deserving a fair commendation.

For then, that ground that is now a Chancell to the Prisoners of the house,
was a Chapel, into which every Sabbath (through a bye or backward passage)
they were brought from their several Lodgings, to hear divine Service and
Sermons.

So that then, and now, in that worthy use, and this worthy alteration and
beauty, we may see the Pious and Religious care of these worthy and right
Worshipful Governors, continually employed, and applied to things of this
excellent nature.

Close by the Pulpit hangs the Picture of King EDWARD the sixth, with these
lines under it.
This Edward of
fair memory, the sixth.
In whom with greatness
goodness was commixt,
Gave this Bridewell,
a Palace in old times,
For a chastising house
of vagrant crimes.
Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Here lies her Type, who was of late,
The prop of Belgia, stay of France,
Spaines foil, Faiths shield, and Queen of State,
Of Arms, of Learning, Fate and Chance:
In brief, of Women never was seen,
So great a Prince, so good a Queen.
Since Virtue her immortal made,
Death (envying all that cannot dye)
Her earthy parts did so invade,
As in it wrackt self Majesty.
But so her Spirits inspired her Parts,
That she still lives in loyal hearts.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc.

Obiit 24. die Martii 1602.

Anno Regni 45.

Aetatis suae 70.

Botolph Aldersgate.
THough I cannot here speak of a general repair and beauty, yet I may say
for this Church, that the eye of the yearly Gardians of it is so continualy
watchful over it, that whenever any part of it stands in need of either or
both, they carefully and suddenly bestow it. An instance of this thus follows:

The Steeple of this Church, being very much decayed and perished, was (so
far as they found it needful) pulled down, and rebuilded with Portland
stone, beautified with new Battlements, and a Turret; some part of the Church
repaired, and many of the Pewes were new made; as also a new Clock and Dial
(at the cost and charge of the Parishioners) in the year of our Lord God 1627.

John Wooton Anthony Ierman Churchwardens.

The charge of all this 415. li.
And but three years before (in the year 1624.) was a very fair new Pulpit
set up, the cost of that (that likewise being the charge of the Parish) 35. li.

William Wells George Graves Churchwardens.

The whole cost of these times 450. li.

A very fair Monument on the South wall of the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Vicessimum tertium aetatis Annum Ingressui obiit, vicessimo quarto die
Novembris, 1616.

Under this in an Ovall, these words.

Percivallo Smalpage, Michaelis filio Percivalli Pronepoti, ex Antiquis Baronum
Familiis Hooe Wells and Engane oriundo, optimae spei Adolescenti, Immaturae
Morte surrepto, fratri suo Charissimo, Moestissima soror Anna Monumentum hoc
Amoris and gratitudinis ergo posuit.

Upon a Stone in the Chancell, is this Inscription.
Hic jacet Iana, Filia Arthuri Ducke, L. L. L. Doctoris, obiit 1. Aprilis 1633.
Hi sequuntur Agnum quocunqueierit.

On a Stone near to the other, is this Inscription.
Here lies the body of Thomas Gillet, Gentleman, who deceased the 18. of
October, 1624.

A very handsome Monument on a Pillar on the South side of the Chancell, thus
inscribed. Pars Terrestris
Ioannis Coston Registarii sedis Archiepiscopalis Cantuarien. Principalis.
Almaeque Curiae Cant. de Arcubus Land. Procuratorum generalium unius. Sexaginta
octo annos, cum multa pietate and probitate sub polo praetergressus, 3. Iulii
1614. Animam efflavit, Relictis simone, and Anna, filio and filia unicis, in
sacros Cineres Redact. sub pedibus diem Novum expectat.

A very fair Table full of rich Coats of Arms, hanging on a Pillar in the
middle I Will, over against the Pulpit, with these several Inscriptions in it.
1. Francis Beaumont, 2. daughter, married to Sir Woolston Dyccy, of the County
of Leicester, Knight.

2. Farnham Beaumont, 2. son, married Luce Dawes, of Dawson, in the County of
Leicester.

3. Sir Henry Beaumont, Knight, eldest son, married Elizabeth, daughter of
Sir William Turpin of Knaptoft, in the County of Leicester, Knight.

4. Thomas Bcaumont, 3. son, lives unmarried.

5. Anne Beaumont, third daughter, married to Sir John Dillon, of
Northamptonshire.

6. Jane Beaumont, 6. daughter, married to William Temple, of London, Merchant.

7. Elinor Beaumont, 4. daughter, lives unmarried.

8. Elizabeth Beaument, eldest daughter, married to Sir John Ashbornham, of
Ashbornham, in Sussex, Knight.

9. Isabel Beaumont, 5. daughter, married to Hugh Snasell, of the County of
York.

10. Mary Beaumont, 7. daughter, married to Richard paramoure, Esquire.

In memory of the religious and virtuous Lady, Katharine Beaumont, late Widow
of Sir Thomas Beaumont, of Stoughton, in the County of Leicester, Knight,
Daughter and sole Heir of Thomas Farnham of Stoughton aforesaid, Esquire, who
deceased on Ascension day, Anno 1621. leaving Issue then alive, as above
written, three sons and seven daughters.

This Table was set up out of the love and true affection of Elizabeth, Lady
Ashbornham, Widow, her eldest Daughter, Anno 1622.

And Mary, one of the Daughters of the aforesaid Lady Ashboruham, was likewise
buried in this Church, November 25. 1619.

Botolph Algate.
THis Church was repaired and beautified in the year of our Lord God, 1621.

In the year of our Lord, 1633. all the ground through the Church, was new
laid and levelled. In the doing of which, where before from the lower end of
the Church to the upper end, it was all but one even floor, without any ascent
or rising, they have made a fair ascent at the beginning of the Chancell; and
in that again, at the place where they give the Communion: further gracing and
enriching it with a fair new Table, and the whole Chancell with new Pewes,
very decently wrought and disposed.

A fair Monument upon a Pillar on the South side of the Chancell, over against
the Pulpit the figure of the Gentleman for whom it was erected leaning upon a
Deaths head.
A Memorial erected by the Right Worshipful, the Company of Merchantaylors,
for Robert Dove, Esquire, Citizen and Merchantaylor of London, Master of the
same Company, and one of the Customers in the Port of London.

Who gave in his life time 3528. li. 10. s. 8. d. to perform diverse charitable
deeds for ever, to diverse poor Brethren of the same Company, and other uses
for the said Company, viz.

To Christ's Hospital. To Saint Sepulchers Parish. To the two Compters. To
Ludgate, and Newgate. To the poor of this Parish. To Saint John Baptists
College in Oxford, and to Queen Elizabeth's Hospital at Bristoll, 2958. li.
10. s. 8. d.

To the Company.
320. li. To Christ-Church Hospital.

50. li. To Saint Sepulchers.

100. li. To Saint John's College in Oxford.

100. li. To the City of Bristoll.

He lived virtuously all his life time, and died in the true faith of our Lord
Jesus, the second day of May, An. Dom. 1612. being full of days, at the age of
90. years.

His arms under him, Three Doves.

Upon a Marble Stone (in the middle of this Church) under the figure of a
Deaths-head is this Inscription.
Under this Marble stone, rests in hope of a joyful Resurrection, the bodies
of two Sisters; Elizabeth Roe, Wife to John Roe, Mariner, who died the 16. day
of July 1625.

And Sarah Stevens, Wife unto John Stevens, Citizen and Cook of London, who
died the third of August, in the same year of our Lord, 1625.

Botolph Bishopsgate.
THe North wall of this Church, with the Roof thereof, and the middle Roof
likewise were new built, and the Church begun to be repaired in the year of
our Lord, 1617. Master Stephen Gosson, being then Parson.

William Whitwell Dominicke Lomlie Churchwardens.

The repair of it, in pewing the Church thorowout, in painting, altering,
adding, and ordering, to its greater convenience and beauty, continued to the
year 1620. in which it was fully finished.

Samuel Fond John Day Churchwardens.

The charge of it amounting to 600. li. and upward.

A Monument on the South side of the middle I Will, with this Inscription.
Hugo Wicksteed, Filius Hugonis Wicksteed, nuper Civis and Mercatoris Scissoris
London, and Aliciae Vxoris ejus, hoc Monumentum, and lapidem inferius positum,
Parentibus suis, and sibi ipsi dicatum, ultimo Testamento suo curavit fieri:
Fuit Iuvenis egregiae indolis, Mira suavitate morum preditus, erga deum and
parents sum pius, Flore Iuventutis suae Arreptus, magnum dolorem amicis
Reliquit.

Quis non, qui novit juvenem,
sua funera deflet?
Terra tegit corpus,
Spiritus astra tenet.
Obiit vicesimo septimo die Augusti, Anno Them. 1625. and aetatis suae, vicesimo
primo.

Gualterus Stonus hanc Inscriptionem amici sui dilectissimi Memoriae
consecravit.

Dunstans West.
IT is since this Church was repaired 20. years, yet though so long, it has
more of that beauty still, and still remains fresher and fairer than many
other Churches, that half so much time has not wrought upon. And yet, as I am
informed (which is more to the business in hand) It is shortly again to be
repaired, richly and very worthily beautified.

A fair Table in Glass, upon a Pallar in the middle I Will, thus written on.
The comfortable farewell of a young Infant, sighed out in his dying sickness,
to his mournful Parents.

Let not my Father greeve,
or Mother moan,
That I this wretched world
have soon forgone,
Better I dye
before I do amiss,
Than live to sin,
and be berest of bliss;
All I can now be charged with
at the Tribunal Throne,
Is sin original,
for actual I have none:
And that I know
my Savior with his blood
Has washed away,
and made my badnesse good.
And cause I know (though
knowledge I have small)
That Jesus Christ did dye
to save us all,
I pass with joy, in Heaven
to meet my King,
With Angels and Archangels
there to sing.
Then Father mourn,
and Mother weep no more,
I now dye rich, that might
have lived but poor;
For had I progrest
unto man's estate,
It is not certain
what would be my sat:
Whether a Cross, or
Blessing I should prove,
Or merit Parents
direful hate, or love.
For often you see, how youths
rebellious prankes
Make sons ingrate, to those
they owe most thanks:
And might not I have been
amongst the number,
Of those that do their
Parents states incumber?
Yes, yes, I might perhaps
have been a slave,
And killed your hearts with care,
and dig'd your grave.
But now my silly Dove-like
soul does part,
In peace of God,
and love of Parents heart;
Sweet Innocence, my shield,
I bear in hand,
To guard me toward
that most holy Land,
Where Parents both,
and Sister I shall see,
In Gods appointed time
triumphantly.
Till when
Adieu, sweet Parents,
Jehovah calls away,
My name is Simon signifies obedience.
Simon,
and I must obey.
Epitaphium.
Young Simon up to Sion
is ascended,
His best life is begun,
his worst being ended.
A fair Albaster Monument at the upper end of the South I Will, with this
Inscription.
Hic requiescunt ossa Roberti Houghton, Militis, unius Iusticiariorum Dom.
Iacobi nuper Regis ad placita coram Dom. Rege tenenda Asig. Qui natus est apud
Gunthorpe, in Comitatu Norfolciae tertio die Augusti, Anno Dom. 1548. and ex
hac vita Migravit infra hanc parochiam sexto die Februarii, Anno Dom. 1623. ex
Maria Vxore Filia Roberti Rychers de Woortham, in Comitatu Cantiae Armigeri,
tres suscepit Filios, totidemque Filias, ex quibus (Roberto and Susanna in vita
ejus extinctis) Franciscus, Johannes, Elizabetha, and Maria, tempore mortis
suae, dei favore fucre superstites.

A very fair Monument on the North side of the South I Will, at the upper end,
with this Inscription. M. S. Nicholai Hare*
Viri morum suavitate and elegantia, animi candore and magnitudine, ingenii
denique Acumine and judicii gravitate Incomparabilis: Disciplinarum and
Linguarum, tam quae ad Arts, quam quae ad Aulas spectant cognitione
ornatissimi, cujus Egregias and Raras Animi dotes, Anglia, Belgia, Gallia,
ipsaque Italia jamdudum suspexere and stupuere: Qui desiderio sui apud amicos,
omnesque bonos relicto obiit, Eheu nondum quadragenarius, Anno M. DC. XXI.

Johannes Harvy, Amico dulciss^. and B. M. in perpetuam grati animi memoriam P.
Magnificentius positurus si ei suam ipsius pietatem magis quam amici voluntatem
exequi licuisset.

Vale anima candidissima, vale tuorum quos dolor and luctu conficis Aeternum
desiderium, vale Patriae and seculi summum ornamentum.

A fair Monument in the South I Will, on the wall, under the Monument of one
Cuthbert Fetherstone.
Before this Pew door, next to the body of the above named Cuthbert
Fetherstone, lies his beloved Wife, Katharine Fetherstone, who as they piously
lived in Wedlock forty odd years together, so at their deaths they desired
to be interred together, not doubting at the general Resurrection, through
Christ's merits, to rise together, and for ever in Heaven to live together.

Obiit November. 1622. Aetatis 85.

And this in part
they do attain,
Who by their deaths
new lives do gain.
Corpus moritur per poenam, resurgit per gloriam,

Anima moritur per culpam, resurgit per gratiam.

A Table with a fair Coat Arms, encompast with a Wreath of Laurel, upon a
Pillar in the Chancell, over against the Vestrey, thus inscribed.
In this fair fragrant
maiden month of May,
When earth her Flower.
embroydery does display,
Jane Watson, one of
Virtues flowers most fair,
For Beauty, Wit, and Worth,
a Primrose rare,
Adorned this Earth, changing
earths marriage bed,
To join her Virgin soul
to Christ her head.
A fair Monument over the Vestrey door in the Chancell, with this Inscription.
In memory of the Honorable, and Virtuous, Margaret Talbot, Widow, who
deceased the 31. of March, 1620.

By this small Statue (Reader)
is but shown,
That she was buried here,
but had thou known
The Piety, and Virtues
of her mind,
Thou would have said,
Why was she not enshri'nd?
Both Veres and Windsors
best blood filled her veins,
She matched with Talbot,
yet their noble strains
Were far below her Virtue,
in whose breast,
God had infused his graces
'bove the rest,
Of all her Sex, whose sacred
course of life,
Both in the State of Widow,
Maid, and Wife
For each she had been,
though her latter days
Chaste widow-hood crowned,
to her immortal praise,
Was so immaculate,
she deserves to be
The Crystal mirror
to posterity.
More honor have thou
by her burial here,
Dunston, than to thee
chanced this many a year;
Earth from her Coffin
heave thy ponderous stones,
And for thy sacredst relic
keep her bones:
Since, spite of envy,
it cannot be denied,
Saint-like she lived,
and like a Saint she di'd.
A Table hanging upon a Pillar, in the middle row of Pewes, with this
Inscription.
On the death of the Discreet and Virtuous, Mistress Mary Davies, daughter of
Thomas Croft, of Okley-Parke, in the County of Salop, Esquire, and Wife of John
Davies of Hereford, she died on New-yeeres day, 1612.

Here lies her dust,
who in a span of life,
Compast the virtue
of the worthiest Wife:
If odds therebe
(well measured) twill be found,
She more acquired;
so her bright stock renowned:
And to those Wives
that glory most do gain,
She was a mirror
that no breath could stain.
Though she a Female were,
her judgment was,
To truest Masculines
a truer Glass:
For she by Nature, Grace,
and Wisdom too,
Showed by a Woman,
what best men should do
In their best actions:
for she acted naught
That came not from a grave
and gracious thought.
But Nature (though familiar,
yet most strange,
Showing how much
she does delight in change,
In thousand fashions
does her self array)
Permits naught here
to stand at constant stay.
And Time and Death
with her therein conspire,
Else had these Ashes still
held vital fire.
But these just lines,
in Time and Deaths despite,
Shall lead all times
to do her virtue right.
A good name is better than a good Ointment, and the day of death, than the day
that one is borne, Eccles. 7. 3.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Here lies her Type, who was of late,
The prop of Belgia, stay of France.
Spaines foil, Faiths shield, and Queen of
Of Arms, of Learning, Fate, and Chance:
In brief, of Women ne re was seen,
So great a Prince, so good a Queen.
Since Virtue Her immortal made,
Death (envying all that cannot dye)
Her earthy parts did so invade,
As in it wrackt self Majesty.
But so her Spirit inspired her Parts,
That she still lives in loyal hearts.
Many Daughters have done well, but thou excellest them all.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.

From henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not me only, but to them
also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.

George Southwarke.
A Very fair Window in the North I Will, with the Arms and sums of all such
Companies as were bountiful Benefactors toward the great repair of this
fair Parish Church of Saint George.

Mercers 20. li. Grocers 15. li. Drapers 10. li. Fishmongers 26. li. 13. s. 4.
d. Goldsmithes 3. li. Skinners 6. li. 13. s. 4. d. Merchantaylors 15. li.
Haberdashers 10. li. Salters 5. li. Ironmongers 6. li. 13. s. 4. d. Vintners 5.
li. Clothworkers 13. li.
Dyers 2. li. Brewers 5. li. Leathersellers 5. li. Pewterers 3. li.
Wax-Chandlers 4. li. Tallow-Chandlers 2. li. Girdlers 2. li. 10. s. Sadlers 2.
li. Cordwainers 5. li.
The sum is 166. li. 10. s.

Under these this Inscription.
This Church, Steeple, and Gallery, was repaired, new Pewed, and beautified,
and the South I Will enlarged by the Parishioners, with the assistance of these,
and other good Benefactors, in the year of our Lord God, 1629.

Twigden Masters Thomas Cook Lancelot Hobson Churchwardens.

The enlargement of the South I Will (above named) is above half the length of
the I Will.

The ground of it, from that small part of an I Will to which it was then adjoined
(downward) taken out of the Churchyard, making a complete I Will, and adding to
the Church, as a great deal of room, so a great deal of grace and beauty.

In a Window next to this downward, is the Arms of one Master Thomas Stone,
at whose charge it was glazed.

The upper Window of the South I Will, is thus inscribed:
The Arms of John Wyndell, Citizen and Fishmonger of London, a good Benefactor
to this Parish.

There adjoynes to this Window, the Arms of the Worshipful Company of the
Fishmongers, very artfully carved in Wood, and under them a very fair large
Pew, with two long Seats, one for the Men, the other for the Women-Almes-folke
of Saint Peter's Hospital, the Fishmongers Hospital, or Almes-house at
Newington, situate and being in this Parish.

Next to this downward, is a Window with a very fair Coat, but no name, the
Motto,

Sed Sanguine.
Next to this another, with the Arms of one Master Robert Shaw, to this Church
a good Benefactor.

Next to this another, with the Arms of one Master Lionell Bennet, to this
Church a good Benefactor.

A very fair Table, with a rich Coat Arms, hanging on the South side of the
Chancell, with this Inscription.
Here lies the body of Elizabeth, the Daughter of Walter Spendelew, Gentleman,
and Ione Trussell his Wife; she departed this life in the faith of Christ the
7. of November, Anno 1625.

Upon a Marble Stone in the Chancell, near the Communion Table, is this
Inscription.
Here under lies the body of Etheldred Reynell, Daughter and sole Heir to Sir
Edward Peacocke, of Finchley, Knight, Wife to Sir George Reynell, Marshall of
the Kings Bench, by whom he had Issue three sons and three daughters: She
departed the 11. day of September 1618. in the 34. year of her age.

Modest, Humble, Godly, Wife,
Pity ever in her eyes,
Patience ever in her breast,
Great in Good, in Evil least,
Loving Wife, and Mother dear,
Such she was that now lies hear.
Upon another Stone close to the former, is this Inscription.
Sub hoc lapide, inhumatur corpus Iohannis Jones, qui migravit e vita quinto
die Februarii, Anno 1600.

Hic genitor situs es,
consumpto corpore letho,
At Coelis puro mente
manente Deo.
Giles Cripplegate.
HOw this Church, any thing in or about it (either for necessity or beauty)
has from time to time been kept, supplied, and maintained, all men that know
it know; to the perpetual credit and commends of those worthy Gentlemen, to
whom, in their several times and succession, the charge of it has been
committed.

But to leave this general commends, and come to some particulars, with their
times, but a little time past, we begin with the year 1623. In which all the
Roof over the Chancell, was on the outside repaired, and in the inside very
curiously clouded.

To the further grace and ornament of this Chancell, there was added in the
same year, the cost of a very fair Table of the Commandments, and with these
the Church (then) was thorowout very worthily beautified.

In the years of our Lord God, 1624. and 1626. the two side Galleries were
built, both very fair and spacious.

In the year of our Lord, 1629. the Steeple very much decayed, was repaired,
all the four Spires (standing in four Towers at the corners of it) taken
down, with new and very substantial Timber-worke rebuilt, and with the Lead
new cast new covered; every one of these Spires enlarged somewhat in the
compass, a great deal in height, but most in their stately, eminent, and
graceful appearance.

In the midst of these, where there was none before (gracing and being graced
by them) was a very fair Turret erected; the head of it (which much overpeeres
those Spires) covered with Lead, as also the props that support it: This, and
the Spires, having every one a Cross, with very fair Vanes upon them.

The charge of all this I could not certainly get, and would not uncertainly
speak it: But the greanesse of the things speak the cost to be great, all
being the sole charge of the Parishioners.

A very fair Table, with a rich Coat Arms hanging upon a Pillar in the middle
I Will, about it this Inscription.
The sacred corpse of Sarah, Wife of Henry Goodericke, daughter of William

Bodenham, Knight, was interred at the South end of this seat, toward the
Pulpit.

Within it thus:

Buried the 6. of June, Anno 1616.

The Bearers sorrow,
sable Lions show,
Like to that Lion
which did overthrow
The man of God:
And charged alike, do stand,
Grand Guardants here,
to check the upheav'd hand,
Vnweeting wights,
or ignorant, shall lay
Upon her hallowed corpse,
that here did pray.
A sacred Temple 'twas,
wherein did shine
Her Makers glory,
Humane and Divine:
Sweet commerce sanctified
with zeal, moved there
In Beauties Fabric,
its own proper sphere,
For which it towers
above the sight of eye,
Gods Temples must lie low
that tower so high.
Under two hands joined, one out of a Cloud, the other out of a Globe, these
words:

Till then, Farewell.

Upon a very fair Marble Stone, in the South I Will, is this Inscription.
Here lies buried the body of Ellen Monyns, who died the 29. of April, in the
year of our Lord 1632.

Here also lies buried the body of her Sister, Mistress Frances Monyns, who
died the 17. of June in the same year.

They were the Daughters of Sir William Monyns, of Waldershaw, in the County of
Kent, Baronet, and of the Lady Jane his Wife, the Daughter of Roger Twisden, of
Roydon Hall, in the same County, Esquire.

They lived Religious and Virtuous lives, and in their youths departed this
life in the true faith of Jesus Christ.

Olaves Southwarke.
THis Church was repaired and beautified at the cost and charge of the
Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God, 1617.

Edward Candish Benjamin Fry William Hundman Richard Clearke Churchwardens.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument. Monumentum Elizabethae.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.

From henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not me only, but to them
also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.

All the Monuments here being very ancient, are to be turned to before, in the
Church as it stands in its Ward, which you may find at folio 457.

Saviors Southwarke.
Upon this spacious and specious Church (for well it deserves those Epithites)
we look backward twenty years or thereupon, at which time it was in many parts
of it repaired, and within thorowout richly and very worthily beautified.

About two or three years after, that Gallery that is over that part of the
Church that is called Saint PETER'S Chapel, and that that is over against it,
as also that Gallery that crosses the middle I Will, over the entrance into the
Chancell (much gracing the Church, and supplying a great necessity) were
worthily contrived and erected.

In the years of our Lord God, 1621. and 1622. it was again in many parts of
it repaired; all the North side of it (at once) strengthened and beautified,
with a substantial and very artificial Rough-cast, the other side Plaistered
and Whited.

Among many rich and beautiful things that have been added to this Church at
diverse times, and to several parts and places, some of a general cost, and
some of particular bounties (for some reserved causes omitted) we here only
remember that extraordinary fair and curious Table of the Commandments, and
the Screene at the West door, set up in the year of our Lord God, 1618.

But passing all these, somewhat now of that part of this Church above the
Chancell, that in former times was called, Our Ladies Chapel.

It is now called, The new Chapel; and indeed, though very old, it now may be
called a new one, because newly redeemed from such use and employment, as in
respect of that it was built to, Divine and Religious duties, may very well be
branded, with the style of wretched, base, and unworthy, for that that before
this abuse, was (and is now) a fair and beautiful Chapel, by those that
were then the Corporation (which is a body consisting of 30. Vestry men, six
of those thirty, Churchwardens) was leased and let out, and this House of God
made a Bake-house.

Two very fair doors, that from the two side Isles of the Chancell of this
Church, and two that through the head of the Chancell (as at this day they do
again) went into it, were lath't, daubed, and dam d up: the fair Pillars were
ordinary posts, against which they piled Billets and Bavens; in this place they
had their Ovens, in that a Bolting-place, in that their Kneading-trough, in
another (I have heard) a Hogs-trough; for the words that were given me were
these, This place have I known a Hog-stie, in another a Storehouse, to store
up their hoorded Meal: and in all of it, something of this sordid kind and
condition.

It was first let by the Corporation before named, to one (...) Wyat, after him
to one (...) Peacocke, after him to one (...) Cleybrooke, and last to one (...)
Wilson; all Bakers, and this Chapel still employed in the way of their Trade,
a Bake-house, though some part of this Bake-house was sometime turned into a
Starch-house.

The time of the continuance of it in this kind, from the first letting of it
to Wyat, to the restoring of it again to the Church, was threescore and some
odd years, in the year of our Lord God 1624. for in this year the ruins
and blasted estate that the old Corporation sold it to, were by the Corporation
of this time, repaired, renewed, well, and very worthily beautified: the charge
of it for that year, with many things done to it since, arising to two hundred
pounds.

This, as all the former Repaires, being the sole cost and charge of the
Parishioners.

One I Will in this Chapel, was paved at the only cost of one Master John
Hayman, Tailor, and Merchantaylor, in the year 1625.

A fair Monument on the North wall of the new Chapel, with this Inscription.
Donec redeat Dominus Jesus Christus Subest quod Reliquum Iohannis Morton, in
Artibus Magistri, qui cum singular cum pietatis, tum eruditionis exhibuerat
specimen, Literatam juventutis Ambitionem Gemens, unicique salvatoris Jesus
Christi adventum anhelans, expiravit die 17. Septem. Anno salutis 1631. Annum
aetatis agens 25. V. M. Graecis Musis lugentibus.

In the same Chapel and I Will, upon a Gravestone is thus written.
Not twice ten years of age,
a weary breath,
Have I exchanged
for a happy death;
My course so short,
the longer is my rest,
God takes them soonest
whom he loves best:
For he that is borne to day,
and dies to morrow,
Loses some days of rest,
but more of sorrow.
Here lies buried the body of John Buckland, Glover, 1625. Who deceased the 16.
of August.

Upon a fair stone close to this, under the Grocers Arms, is this Inscription.
Garret, some called him,
but that was too hye,
His name is Garrard,
who now here does lie;
He in his youth was tossed
with many a wave,
But now at Port ariv'd,
rests in his grave.
The Church he did frequent
while he had breath,
And wished to lie therein
after his death.
Weep not for him,
since he is gone before
To Heaven, where Grocers
there are many more.
In the same I Will, upon a fair Marble stone, with the Merchantaylors Arms at
the head of it, is this Inscription.
This Stone was laid, and this I Will was paved, by John Hayman, Tailor, and
Merchantaylor, the 28. of October, 1625.

Next to this, upon a brass plate, is this Inscription.
Here lies the body of Alice Dudson, the Wife of Thomas Dudson, who departed
this life the 14. of October, 1626. who sometime did dwell in this Parish, but
died in Saint Georges Parish.

All these, with that rich and cosly Monument of the right Reverend Father in
God, Lancelot Bishop of Winchester, are in this Chapel.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Elizabetha Regina.
Saint Peter's Church at Westminster,
Her sacred body does interre;
Her glorious soul with Angels sings,
Her deeds live patterns here for Kings:
Her love in every heart has room,
This only shadows forth her Toome.
Sepulchers Parish.
Anno 1624.
THere was expended this year extraordinary, about the new Vestry Window, in
Masons work, Glasiers work, Iron work, and other charge extraordinary,
besides the usual charges of repaires, 30. li.

Anno 1625.
In this year the ten North Church-Windowes were new built, and repaired, the
charge whereof amounted to 86. li. 14. s. 7. d.

Anno 1626.
In this year the six Windows on the East end, and South side of the Church,
with the Water-tables, Battlements, and Buttresses, were new made and repaired,
the Windows new glazed, and the Walls pointed down, which with some Plumbers
work and Pew work, cost 105. li. 3. s. 10. d.

Anno 1627.
The charge of repair of the Church Windows at the West end, and South side
of the Church and Porch, with the Battlements, Water-table, and Buttresses, and
pointing down the Walls, and other repaires this year within the Church,
appear by the accounts to have been 169. li. 2. s. 8. d.

Anno 1628.
In making new Pewes in the Church, and Plumbers work upon the Church, and in
Glazing work this year, expended extraordinary, besides other ordinary
repaires, 40. li.

Anno 1629.
The new Pewes this year made in the Church and Chancell, the clearing of the
Churchyard, and other reparations there, 55. li. 16. s.

Anno 1630.
The charge of taking down, and new building of one of the great Pinacles of
the Steeple this year, appears by the accounts and Bills examined, to be
139. li. 19. s. 4. d.

Other Repaires done about the Church this year, in Plumbers work upon the
Steeple, and new Leading the Vestry, and making of new Pewes in the Church, 75.
li.

Anno 1631.
The new casting of the fifth Bell, with the charge of Iron and Timber-worke,
to the Bell-Founder, Bell-hanger, and Smith, paid 40. li.

The Plumbers work, and Carpenters work, in strengthening and new Leading the
Roof over Saint Stephens Chapel, and other Repaires of the Church this
year, appears by the accounts to be above 100. li.

Annis 1632. and 1633.
The three great Pinacles of the Steeple of the Church, with the Battlements,
and Water-tables round about the same, repaired, built, and made up with vent
and crest, in manner, form, height, thickness, and all other respects
answerable to that Pinnacle which was there lately new made, with the taking and
cutting out of the decayed stones, putting in new stone, working and pointing
them down, putting in new top stones, and three Vanes, answerable to the
former Vane on the other Pinnacle: the Masons work by composition, 140. li. the
Vanes, Iron, and Lead-worke, 13. li. 6. s. 8. d.

The new Leading and strengthening the Roof in the North side of the Church
thorowout with Lead and Timber work, 115. li.

Summa totalis expensarum Annis praedict. 1110. li. 3. s. 1. d.

Thomas Southwarke.
THE Steeple of this Church greatly decayed, was repaired, new Leaded; from the
ground to the top coated with a beautiful Rough-cast; and enriched with a very
fair Turret, in the year of our Lord God, 1663.

At the same time the Parishioners bestowed upon the entrance into the Church,
a new brick Wall, with a door in the middle of it, fit for so worthy passage.

About four or five years since, some cost was bestowed upon the East Window;
and in the year of our Lord 1618. (at the lower end of the Church) a very
handsome Gallery builded.

A Table with this Inscription. 1632.
The yearly gift of four pounds, given by Master Henry Smith, Esquire, to
this Parish of Saint Thomas, has been dispended on the poor this year past
in manner and form following. In witness whereof, we the Minister,
Churchwardens, and Overseers, have subscribed our names.

Widow stringfeyld, aged 95. years, a Coat, with letters, cost xviij. s. 1. d.

Dorochy Burket, aged 82. years, a Coat, with letters, cost xviij. s. iiij. d.

Thomas Wingfield, aged 61. years, a Coat, with letters, cost xvij. s. x. d.

Nicholas Leeke, aged 70. years, a Coat, with letters, cost vij. s. x. d.

Ellen Gray, Innocent, aged 34. years, a Coat, with letters, cost xviij. s.

The sum 4. li.

Benjamin Spencer, Minister.
William Phife Nicholas Eliot Churchwardens.

John Berry Gamaliel Voice Sidemen.

Trinity Minories.
THis Church greatly decayed in the Roof, (the Timber repaired and mended) was
new Tiled in the year of our Lord God, 1618.

In the year 1620. the Steeple, that before (as the Church) was covered with
Tyles, was untyled, and (the Timber repaired and strengthened) was covered
again with Lead.

In the year 1628. all the inside of the Church was well and very commendably
beautified.

Also in the year 1623. the Churchyard, that before was only paled in with
Boords, was (to the better defense and grace of it) encompast about with
Brick, with a very handsome entrance into it.

This, as all the Repaires before named, being the sole cost and charge of the
Parishioners.

A handsome Monument on the North wall of the Chancell, with these following
lines.
Death first did strike Sir John,
here tomb'd in Clay,
And then enforced his son
to follow fast;
Of Pelhams line, this Knight
was chief and stay:
By this behold,
all flesh must die at last.
But Bletsow Lord,
thy Sister most may moan,
Both Mate and Son
has left her here alone.
Sir John Pelham died the 13. of October, 1580.

Oliver Pelham his son, died the 19. of January, 1584.

About a fair Marble stone in the Chancell, close by the Communion Table, are
these words.
Constantia Lucy, D. Thomae Lucy Iunioris, Militis Aurati, and D. Constantiae
Vxoris Foeminae Filia, Natu maxima, Annum agens plus minus undecimum, pridie
Idus Februarii in Domino, quam Foelicissime, hic posita, fato fungitur, Anno
Dom. 1596.

Upon it these:
Nascimur and Morimur,
non exorabile fatum,
Vita fugax, fragilis,
lubrica, vana, brevis.
Ocyus in Campis, flos
Formosissimus aret:
Optima praetereunt,
deteriora manent.
Rapta immaturo fato,
Constantia Lucy,
Nunc jacet: and quondam
Lucida, luce caret.
Ante annos Constans,
humilis, mansueta, modesta,
Dixeris, and Paphia
membra polita manu.
In vere aetatis, persensit
frigora Brumae:
Sic sic praepro^ere
praeoquapoma cadunt.
On another Stone, near unto the last, is this Inscription.
Hic jacet corpus Irausis Mar^un. Generosi, qui obiit 14. die Septemh. Anno
Dom. 1606.

Haec verba soepissime in ore illius viventis: O Domine secundum merit a mea,
Noli me judicare. Deprecor Majestatem tuam ut misericorditer deleas iniquitates
meas.

Credo videre hona Domini, in Terra viventium.

In the body of the Church, is a Monument with this Inscription.
Vivere Cornices multos
dicuntur in Annos:
Cur nos Angusta
condition sumus.
The figure of a Child.
Henricus Nowelus, Filius D. Iohannis Noweli Doctoris Medici, optimae indolis
puerulus, unicum patris solatium, Natus 23. Iulii, 1598. and mortuus ex
Atrophia 4. Augusti, 1599. Hic sepultusjacet.

Melioribus utere fatis.

A Review also of the nine out Parishes in Middlesex and Surrey.
Clement Danes.
THe care of those that by an Annual succession, have the charge and oversight
of this Church, has continually been such, as upon the least defect or
failing, either in strength or beauty, it has instantly been employed, both
in Repaires and Adornment.

And first we begin with that great costly repair in the year of our Lord
God, 1608. at which time, upon six and twenty foot of the Churchyard in
length, and twenty foot in breadth (taken in at the East end of the Church)
they built up a very fair Chancell. The charge of this building and repairing,
amounting to the sum of 1000. pounds, and upward.

In the year of our Lord, 1616. there was laid out upon the Steeple, in
repairing and enlarging of it, with some other needful things in the Church,
the sum of 496. li.

In the year of our Lord God, 1631. some parts of this Church were again
repaired, and the whole body covered with a fair and beautiful Rough-cast,
the charge of it 40. li.

In the year 1632. and this present year 1633. this Church was within,
thorowout richly and very worthily beautified. The charge of it 50. li.

The sum of all these Repaires, all being the sole cost of the Parishioners,
1586. li.

A fair Monument in the Chancell, on the North side, at the upper end, with
this Incription.
Georgii Roberti Wilelmi Christopheri Annae
More de Lothesley Equit: Aurat: Filiae. Soror: Nept: Pronep:


Foeminae Lectissimae, Dilectissimaeque,
Conjugi Charissimae Castissimaeque,
Matri Piissimae Indulgentissimaeque,
XV. Annis in Conjugio Transactis,
VII. post XII. partum (quorum VII. superstant) dies
Immani Febre Correptae
(Quod hoc saxum Fari jussit, ^pse prae dolor infans)
Maritus (miserrimum dictu) olim
Charae Charus
Cineribus Cineres spondet suos,
Novo Matrimonio (Annuat deus) Hoc loco sociandos,
Ioannes Done,
Sacr. Theolog. Profess.
Secessit,
Anno XXIII. Aetat. suae and sui Jesus
CIO. DC. XVII.
Aug. XV.
A fair Monument over against this, on the South side, with this Inscription.
Viro praeclaris: Animi Corporisque dotibus ornate.

Qui in Angelicani juris studio Foeliciss. versatus, Iuriscons. munere, quod
Iure optimo obtinuit, intermisso, Officiis in Curia Cancellariae, cum
examinatoris, per integros 17. annos, tum sex Clericorum unius, per menses
quosdam fatales integerrime perfunctus est: vita Londini in hoc vico (ubi and
natus) Majori expartetransacta, die Apr. 26. Anno Them. 1610. Aetatis 51.
defuncto, scil. Anima Christo, Corpore hic humo traditis, relictoque sui
desiderio, non sine multis multorum lachrymis.

Maria ipsi superstes vidua

Thomae Oneli Filia, de Charleton, in Northantonensi quondam Agro Armigeri,
Fidissima conjux Charissimo Marito, Qui cum ad Annos fere 25. Conjunctissime
vizerat, Amoris inviolati perpetuum posteris Testimonium, nec sibi minus
lugubre, hoc posuit Monumentum.

A very fair Monument near unto the other, with this Inscription.
Memoriae Sacrum.

Here lies the body of Hippocrates de Otthen, Nobly descended from the Noble
Family of the Otthens, out of Holsatia, Doctor of Physic in the University of
Monutpelliers, in France, and most worthily incorporated in the University of
Oxford. After his first coming into England with his Father (who was the
Emperors Physician, and sent for over by Queen Elizabeth) he was desired by
the Earl of Lecester himself, to pertain unto him, in whose service (for
many years, both at home, and abroad in the Low Countries, with his Lord) he
performed such worthy parts, as well in his own faculty, as being employed in
other laudable services, that her Majesty and the State took especial note of
his worth. After the decease of the Earl, he was in the same esteem and
regard with the Earl of Essex, and by her Majesty commanded to attend upon him
in the wars of France, and afterward in his prosperous Voyage to Cadiz.
Returning home (hoping to retire himself to his own Practice, and a more
private life) he was again commanded to go (as Physician in service into
Ireland) with the Lord Montjoy (afterward Earl of Devonshire) her Majesty's
Leiutenant in that Kingdom. But returning again into England with his Lord,
in the beginning of his Majesty's Reign, he continued not long, but went as
Physician with the Earl of Hartford, his Majesty's Ambassador unto the
Archduke of Austria and Burgundi, in that Honorable employment: And so
returning again into England, he spent the residue of his years with his
dear and most virtuous Wife, Mistress Dorothy Drew, daughter to Master Roger
Drew, of Densworth, in Sussex, Esquire, in great bliss and happiness: And
being a most zealous and penitent Christian, full of years, and (unto his last
gasp) of perfect Memory, he ended his pilgrimage here on earth, and with
alacrity of spirit surrendered his soul into the hands of his Creator, the 13.
of November 1611. For whose love and memory, his late Wife (the now Lady and
Wife unto Sir Stephen Thorneburst of Kent, the most worthy and valerous Knight)
has caused this Monument to be erected, Amoris ergo P. P.

Next to this another handsome small Monument, with this Inscription.
Anne, the Daughter of Francis Carry, Wife of Hugh Prust of Devon, 17. years,
aged 40. havig by him 9. Children, was buried here the 13. of February 1627.

In Life and Death,
most strict in right accord,
She lived, she di'd
true Servant of the Lord.
A fair Monument on the South side of the Chancell, with this Inscription.
By the Churchwardens and Feofees of this Parish, this Monument was set up, the
20. of January, 1603.

Here lies buried the bodies of Richard Bedoe, Gentleman, and Anne his first
Wife, one of the ancientest of this Parish, and a Feosee of the poor, who
ended his life with a charitable disposition, the first day of September 1603.
Annoque Regni Regis Iacobi, etc. primo. Being when he died of the age of 56.
years, and was borne in the Parish of Ricken, in Salop, who of their Charity,
have given so many of their Tenements within the Dukes place in Cree-Church,
alias Christs-Church, near Algate, London, as do now go for 20. li. per Annum,
to the maintenance and use of the poor of this Parish for ever. And also 110.
li. to be lent gratis to 50. poor Householders, and young beginners of the same
Parish, for two years a piece, putting in good security for the same: With
condition, that this Stone, by the Churchwardens and Feofees of the same Parish
for the time being, shall from time to time for ever be maintained; and four
Sermons yearly for ever to be made, on the Feast-dayes of All Saints, the
Purification of our Lady, the Ascension of our Lord God, and Saint John
Baptist, to remember and give God thanks for the Givers thereof. God increase
Charity unfeyned.

Margaret Bedoe, last Wife of Richard Bedoe, gave by her last Will, in the
year 1633. the sum of twenty pounds to be added to her Husbands gift of a
hundred pounds, and so to be employed and disposed of, as her Husbands now is,
the Preacher four times a year, mentioning her gift with his, according to
her Will, or else her gift to be void.

A very fair Monument on the North side of the Chancell, with this
Inscription. M. S.
Nobilissimo juveni Wolfgango Balthasari a Crailsheim, ex Antiqua and clara
Familia in Franconia, cum in Sereniss. Frederici V. Electoris Palatini Comitatu
huc in Angliam profectus and morbo Correptus, pie diem obiisset 29. Ian. Anni
1612. Hoc Monumentum positum fuit.

A fair Monument at the upper end of the South I Will, with this Inscription.
Unto the Memory of Richard Jacob, late Vintener, deceased, who after 66. years
of his life, whereof he spent more than half in this Parish, wherein he had
with good credit passed through all Offices, both in the Parish, as also in his
Company, and for his Fidelity was elected one of the Governors of Bridewell,
and likewise done many charitable Acts, both to the Parish, to his Hall, to the
Hospital of Bridewell, Christs-Church, Saint Bartholomewes, and Saint Thomas
in Southwarke, to diverse persons in London, and Southwarke, and many other
places, comfortably gave up his soul to his Redeemer, the 13. of October 1612.

Sibil his mournful Wife, has caused this Monument to be erected.

On the same wall downward, another fair Monument, with this Inscription.
This Monument was made at the only charges of Katharine Metcalfe of Bedale, in
the County of York, Widow, Mother to the hereunder named Thomas and Nicholas,
and Executrix to the said Nicholas, the 28. of May, Anno Dom. 1583.

Memento Mori.
Here against this place lies buried the body of Thomas Metcalfe, late of
Bellerby, in the County of York, Gentleman, who died the 18. day of May, 1575.

And also the body of Nicholas Metcalfe, Esquire, late one of the six Clerks
of the Chancery, and Brother to the said Thomas, who died the 8. day of
September, Anno Dom. 1581.

To whom God granta joyful Resurrection, Amen.

A fair Table in Glass, hanging close by the Pulpit, with this Inscription.
S. Memoriae Virg.
Helenae Moseley ex equestri Moseleyorum Familia oriundae, cujus Annos nubiles
summa virtus at modestia merito Coronarunt, Correptae praematura morte, heu
dies 17. Feb. Anno Christi, 1607. Supremus diluxit.

Amoris ergo Moest. P. Q. A.

A fair Monument on the North side, with this Inscription.
Iussus Johannes Painus
concedere Fate,
Paruit, and Moriens
constitit ipse sibi:
Nam cum animas Caelo
deberi, corpora Terrae
Sciret, utrique suum
reddidit ipse lubens.
Hinc animam ipsius
seeds Aeterna beavit,
Foelici jussam
condition frui.
Corporis haec Domus est,
Terreni Terrea moles;
Illa Dei, haec Fidi
cura Nepotis erat.
Anno Domini 1573. Aprilis 25.

A very fair Monument in the same wall, near unto the other, with this
Inscription.
Secundum Christi Redemptoris Adventum, hoc in tumulo, expectat Rogerus
Houghton, antiqua Houghtonorum Familia, in Agro Lancastriensi oriundus, Qui
quum illustrissimi viri Dom. Roberti Cecill Salisburiae Comitis and Angliae
Magni Thesaurii per annos 42. Summa cum Fide and Industria Familia praefuissit,
in Patriam Coelestem evocatus, placide pieque emigravit, Anno Dom. 1617.
Aetatis 64.

Charissimo viro Anna Conjux, filia Iohannis Little, Moestissima, hoc
Monumentum in memoriam ejus and Filiolae, ac Mortuae, posuit.

Upon a fair Marble Stone in the middle I Will, is this Inscription.
Quam facit incertos
humani temporis annos
Addidit exemplo
mors inimica novo.
En Gulielmus erat teneris
cui nomen ab annis
Hac Saint albonus
membra sepultus humo.
Cujus non minimum
mores meruere favorem,
Regia in hoc plenus
curia testis erit.
Virtutis causa, comes
Arundellius illum
Qui summo studio
persequeretur erat.
Mitto quod assiduus
fuerat virtutis amator,
Quodque erat ex ortu
stirps generosa suo.
Membra sepulerali conduntur
frigida lecto,
Spiritus aethereis aestra
petivit equis.
William Saintalbone sleeps in rest,
Within this Marble Stone,
Whose corpse in Clay, and soul well
Deserves dispraise of none.
He had such feats, so full of fruits,
So prompt with word and pen,
So skillful in his courtly suits,
So dear a friend to men.
So ripe to rule the works of fame,
So tempering hot and cold,
His deeds deserve that his good name
Were siphered here in gold.
Upon a Stone in the middle I Will, is this Inscription. Memoriae sacrum, and Deo
opt. max. Sacrum.
Secundum Christi Redemptoris adventum hoc in Tumulo expectat Rogerus Houghton,
Antiqua Houghtonorum Familia in Agro Lancastrensi oriundus. Qui quum
illustrissimi viri Domini Roberti Cecilii Sarisburiae Comitis, and Angliae
Magni Thesaurarii, per annos 42. summa cum Fide and Industria familia
praefuisset, in Patriam Coelestem evocatus, placide pieque emigravit. Anno Dom.
1617.

Charissimo viro conjux Moestissimae Monumentum hoc, Amoris and observantiae
causa posuit.

On another Stone near to the former is this Inscription.
Here lies buried the body of Elizabeth, late Wife of George Dalton, Esquire,
who died the 2. day of January, 1605. and has left Issue of her body to her
Husband, Maximilian, and Thomas.

Yea, though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil, for thou art with me, the Rod and thy Staff they comfort me.

Jesus Christ is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? God is the
strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid?

A fair Stone in the middle I Will, near the Chancell, having this Inscription.
Bartinus Hes^rigg Armiger, Capitaneus Militiae Leicestrensis, hic sepultus
est, qui obiit 4. Maii, Anno Dom. 1630. Aetatis suae 24.

Another in the same I Will, with this Inscription.
Hic jacet Edmundus Arnold,
postremus Aprilis
Vlcere quem rapuit
tristis atroxque dies,
Istius Ecclesiae Rector
Meritissimus olim,
Et summus medica
Doctor in Art fuit,
Non Ipocrate minor erat
hic, non Peone, Doctor,
Non opifex mirum
vincis Apollo virum.
M. D. deem ter X. semel V.
Christi cadit Anno,
Cui vitam Medicus
det sine fine Deus.
A handsome Monument on the Wall, in the South I Will, with this Inscription.
Here by lies buried the body of Edward Price, Gentleman, and of Edward his
only Son, who for the space of 24. years, lived in this Parish, wherein God
so blessed him, that of his good and charitable devotion, he has given three
pounds a year for ever out of his free Land, called the Blew Lion in the said
Parish, to be bestowed in Sea-coales, and to be distributed freely to the
poor by the Churchwardens. And also twenty pounds for ever to be lent to two
poor young Householders gratis, from two years to two years, ten pounds
apiece.

He departed this life the 8. of March, 1605.

On the same Tomb, under that above, is this written.
This Tomb was erected at the charge of Elizabeth, the Wife of Henry Baten,
Esquire, one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Arms, and late Wife of Edward
Price, deceased, who of her godly disposition, has given 20. s. a year for
ever to the Preacher of this Parish, to be paid out of her house called the
three Cups, next adjoining on the West side of the same Blew Lion, only that
he shall make recital hereof at two several Sermons yearly; one on the
Sunday before Christmas day, and the other on the Sunday before Midsummer day.
And the said Elizabeth also, of her godly love and zeal to the Church, has
given a Flagon-Pot, silver and guilt, weighing 38. ounces and an half, for the
service of the Communion Table, to remain for ever; and three pounds to the
poor, to be distributed at her Funeral, and five pounds to the poor of
Kniton in Derbyshore, where she was borne. She departed the 10. of November,
Anno 1616.

A very fair Glass Table, hanging on a Pillar in the South I Will, in which
there is the figure of a Gentlewoman all in black, with a guilt book in her
hand, laid as upon her Tomb: Over her head an Angel, over her at the feet,
Death with a Dart and Houre-glasse.

Over her, adjoining to a very fair Coat, encompast with a Laurel wreath,
these words:

Filius Ararhnes Cyllenii, Factor paterque Tanaquillae. Under her. Memoriae
Sacrum
Katherinae Brydges (filiae and Haeredis Roberti Essington generosi, unius olim
Guardianorum pontis London) triplici jugo junctae: Primo Thomae Gwyn de London
generoso, filio secundo Gulielmi Vaughan de Berain in Com. Denbighe, Armigeri,
and Margaretae Gwin, Vxoris ejus, defunctorum, Cui unicum Foetum edidit
(Nimirum Edwardum Guyn, adhuc vitales Carpentem auras) Secundo Gulielmo Forset
Armigero: Postremo Guilielmo Bridges, interioris Templi London Armigero: Vitae
sua virtute Clara, omnibusque naturae dotibus eximie praedita. Cui (post
laudabilis vitae stadium, nitentemque in aulam migrationem) E. G. defunctae
proles, officiosa pietate (ut decet) Novissimum hoc Parentale Munusculums
exolvit.

Obiit 16. Maii, Anno a partu Virginis salutifero 1598. Annoque Aetatis suae 45.

Giles in the Fields.
BEfore I speak of this new Church, I must briefly say of the old, that indeed
it was very old: and in the antiquity of it, stood now still in danger of
falling: that some part of it did fall, foretelling the rest to follow, if not
speedily prevented, by pulling it down to Re-build it, which after a diligent
search, the necessity found, was done.

For this new Church, it began to be raised in the year of our Lord God,
1623. was finished 1625. and encompast with a fair brick Wall in the year
1631.

Which take more amply, in that absolute delivery of it, that I find engraven
over the door on the North side of this Church, the words are these:

Quod felix bonumque sit
Posteris,
Hoc Templum loco veteris ex Annosa
vetustate
Collapsi, Mole and Splendore Auctum
Multo paraecorum Charitas
Instauravit,
In quibus pientissimae Heroinae
D. Aliciae Duddeley
Munisicentia gratum marmoris hujus
meretur eloquium.
Huc etiam accessit aliorum quorundam
pictas,
Quibus provisae in Coelo sunt grates.
Opus Surgere Coepit Ad umbilicos deductum Muro undiquaque vallatum Anno 1623
1625 1631



Heus Viator, an effaetum est bonis operibus hoc seculum?

To the raising, finishing, and (in every part of it) richly, and very
excellently beautifying of this great work, there were many good and great
Benefactors: The names of all, with their particular gifts, my time gave not
leave to compass: neither for many of them, could any enquiry get them, they
desiring to be conceald, and by virtue of what they have done, obliging those
that know them, not to divulge or reveal them.

For the rich and costly Glazing of this Church, the Work and Workemasters
thus follow.

A very rich and beautiful Window in the head of the Chancell, of four
several Panes or Parts: In the first, the figure of Abraham sacrificing his
Son: in the second, Moses with the Table of the Commandments: in the third,
the figure of the holy Prophet David: in the fourth and last, Solomon.

The inscription to the first is this:

Credidit Abraham Deo, and reputatum est illi ad Iustitiam. Anno Dom. 1628.

Of the second is this:
Erat vir Moses Mitissimus super omnes homines qui morabantur in terra. 1628.

Of the third this:
Solum medium tutum. 1627.

Of the fourth this:
Dum Spiro Spero. 1628.

The first of these, was the charge of Abraham Speckart, Esquire.

The second, of Hamo Claxton, Esquire.

The third, of Sir John Fenner, Knight.

The fourth, of Frauncis Lord Mount-Norris.

A very fair Window on the South side of the Chancell.

At the top of it, Jehovah.

Under the figures in it,
Shelbery 1617. Shelbery and Wroth.
Domine misere nostri.
A very fair Window on the North side of the Chancell: two fair Figures in
it; the one of the Virgin Mary, with Christ in her arms; the other of Mary
Magdalen.

Under this Window lies buried, the body of Mary Pill, of this Parish; which
Window was set up at the charges of Mary Maudit, her daughter and Heir, 1629.

Under the first thief Verses:
From Mary's tears to Mary's joy,
This Mary is translated:
And after threescore years annoy,
In Heaven she is instated.
With this, she chose the better part,
Never to be repented;
And held her Savior in herart,
Thus are her joys augmented.
Under the other these:
This, sought her Savior at his Tomb,
His feet with Tears bedewed,
That, bore our Savior in her womb,
Whereby our joys renewed.
Then happy soul, thrice happy this,
Happily interessed;
In Mary's Tears, and Mary's bliss,
Rest thou for ever blessed.
A very fair Window, with the Kings Arms in it, over the entrance into the
Chancell,
Glazed at the charge of Sir William Segar, Knight, alias Garter principal
King of Arms, Anno Dom. 1626.

A very fair Window at the upper end of the South I Will,
Glazed at the charges of Marmaduke Rawdon, Citizen and Clothworker of London,
Anno Dom. 1625.

Another next to this downward,

Glazed at the charge of Robert Rawdon, Citizen and Fishmonger of London, Anno
Dom. 1625.

Another next to this downward, bearing the figure of a Lion in the
Wilderness,
Glazed at the charge of M. John Johnson, Inne-keeper, in High-Holborne, 1625.

Another next to this downward, having the Figures of Saint John, Saint
Philip, and Saint Matthew,
Glazed at the cost and charges of Philip Parker.

Next to this downward, a very fair Window,
Glazed at the charges of Katherine Best, Widow, late Wife of John Best,
deceased, who gave order in his life time for the glazing of this Window and
was buried there under, the 7. day of April, 1625. And there lie also his Son
James, and his Daughter Dorothy.

Next to this downward, a very fair Window,
Glazed at the charges of Alice Hodges, Widow, late Wife to Thomas Hodges,
Baker, deceased, who was buried under this Window, the 6. day of October, 1625.
And here lie also his three children.

A fair Window next to this, the lowest in the South wall,

Glazed at the cost of William Perkins, of London Merchantaylor, 1626.

At the lower end of this I Will, over the Southwest door, a very fair Window,
bearing in it (very curiously done) the Figure of our Savior.

Over his head, as in a garland supported by two Angels, these letters:

I^H^S^
Round about him Clouds full of Cherubins.

On one side of him this,
I am the door, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, Ioh. 10. 9.

On the other side,
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest, Matthew. 11. 28.

Beckinghamus Boteler Armiger fieri fecis.

Anno Domini 1627.

Over the great West door, is a fair Window, with the Carpenters Arms, and a
fair Coat Arms close by it.
This Window has no name, or other Inscription; It was (as I was told) the
gift of a Stranger.

One, that upon a day that they made a Collection for it, being there, was
(among the rest) desired to bestow his good will, he answered, He had no
Money, but if the glasing of a Window, if they had any yet undisposed of,
wouldbe accepted of, he would be at the charge to do it. The Collectors
giving him thanks, and showing this Window, he suddenly set a Glasier on
work, and what he had promised he performed.

A very fair Window at the head of the North I Will, bearing the figure of Christ
crucified as also (one on the one side, the other on the other) of the two
Mary's.

On the right side of him this,

Woman, Behold thy Son.
On the left,

Behold thy Mother.
Glazed at the cost of Thomas Esto, Cook, of this Parish, Anno Dom. 1625.

Another next to this downward,
Glazed at the charges of John Beacon, of the City of Westminster, Yeoman, 1625.

Another next to this downward,
Glazed at the charges of Robert Johnson, free of the Company of the Ioyners,
1625.

A fair Window over the door in the middle of the North I Will, bearing a worthy
Coat Arms, with these words: Whitaker and Egerton.
This Window is divided into three parts, under the first this,

Ego sum ostium, per me si quis introierit, servabitur, and ingredietur, and
egredietur, and pascua inveniet. Ioh. 10. 9.

Under the second thus:
In tuo lumine (Domine Jesus) lumen Ae^ernum videre sperantes, vitreum hoc
luminare fabricari fecerunt Laurentius and Margareta Whitaker, Anno salutis
humanae 1625.

Under the third thus:
Eligo frequentare limen in domo Dei mei magis quam habitare in Tentoriis
Improbitatis. Psalm. 84. 11.

A fair Window next to this downward, bearing a very fair Coat Arms, with
these words: Cope and Aston.
Glazed at the charges of the Lady Katherine Cope, Widow, late Wife to Sir Ed.
Cope, of this Parish, 1625.

A very rich Window next downward, divided into three parts, bearing the
curious Figures of the three Theological Virtues, under them, Fides, Spes,
Chaeritas. Under Faith this:
Faith Root, Hope Stock,
the branch is Charity;
Faith sees, Hope looks,
for Charity is free;
Faith knits to God, to
Heaven hope, Love to men;
Faith gets, Hope keeps,
and Love poures out again. 1626.
Mandatum novum do vobis, ut diligatis unus alium, Ioh. 13. 34.

Under Hope this:
Tres Elohim: pater est
primus qui procreat, inde
Filius est, ex his
Spiritus almus adest.
Sunt Tria dona Dei:
sit prima Fides pia Matter,
Filia Spes, ex his
^ertius ortus Amor. 1626.
Nam Speservati sumus, Spes autem si cernatur non est Spes: quod enim quis
cernit, cur speret? Romans 8. 24.

Under Charity this:
Now remain these three, Faith, Hope, Charity, but the greatest of these is
Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 13.

Scriptum est, Iustus ex Fide vivet, Romans 1. 17.

Next unto this downward, the last of this North I Will, is a plain Window,
without either color or Inscription.

Upon a fair Gravestone in the middle I Will, is this Inscription.
Here lies buried the body of Elizabeth, late Wife of Richard Maunsell,
Esquire, one of the Daughters and Heirs of Roger Wingfield, of great Dunham,
in the County of Norfolk, Esquire. She departed this life upon the sixth of
October, in the year of our Lord God, 1620.

Upon a fair Stone near to the other, it this Inscription.
Interred, the Corpse of
Baron Birch lies here,
Of Greyes Inn sometime,
by degree, Esquire;
In Chequer 18. years
a Judge he was,
Till soul from aged body
his did pass.
Alive his Wife Eliza
does remain,
Of Stydfolke stock, one Son
and Daughters twain,
She bare by him:
the eldest in his life,
He gave to Thomas Boyer
for his Wife.
His body sleeps till
Angels Trumpe shall sound,
God grant we all may
ready then be found.
Johannes Birch, Obiit Anno Dom. 1581. Maii 30. Aetatis suae 66.

On another Stone near to the former, is this Inscription.
Here lies buried the body of Elizabeth Byrche, Widow, late Wife of John
Byrche, Esquire, and one of the Barons of her Majesty's Court of the Exchequer,
Daughter of John Stydfolke, Esquire, who deceased the third day of December,
1588.

Close by the former
Lies buried the body of John Densill, sometime Sergeant at Law, and Mary his
Wife.

In the same I Will is a very fair Stone, which has been beautified with many
fair Figures in Brass: but much of it being gone, all we can see now of it is
this:

Here lies George Carew, the fourth son of Sir Edmund Carew, etc. 1583.

In the South I Will
Eyes buried the body of Alexander Barnes, Vinter, sometime Churchwarden of
this Parrish, etc. He deceased the 4. of November, 1614. being of the age of
57. years.

Alexander Barnes
here does lie,
Glory be
to God on high,
For he on earth
has finished his days,
And now lives in Heaven
to give God praise.
And now having done with the Chruch, we begin in the Churchyard with this
Inscription, standing in the middle of the South wall.

Laus Deo.
In cujus, and Christianae Sepulturae, honorem, nimis arcti olim Coemeterii
fines, novi hujus, 128. pedes longi, and 17. lati, Donatione, Abrahamus
Speckart, Arm. and Dorothea Vxor ejus Ampliarunt, Anno Dom. 1630.

A very fair Tombe-stone in the Churchyard, about it these Verses.
Thornton of Thornton,
in Yorkshire bred,
Where lives the fame
of Thorntons being dead:
Full South this stone
four foot does lie,
His Father John,
and Grandsire Henry.
Upon it.
Johannes Thornton, in Memoria Charissimae Vxoris Margaretae, Filiae Georgii
Collins, hujus parochiae sancti Aegidii in Campis, hoc Monumentum posuit.

Under this sad
Marble sleeps,
She, for whom
even Marble weeps:
Her praise lives still,
though here she lies
Seeming dead
that never dies:
Religion, Love,
in suffering Breast,
Her Charity, Mildness,
and the rest,
Has crown's her soul;
all mourn with fame,
Her Husbands loss,
and Midwives blame.
She died in Childbed,
seventy times blessed and seven,
Her child and she delivered,
both in Heaven.
Obiit octavo die Ianuarii, Anno Dom. 1611. Aetatis suae 16.

On a fair Stone in the Churchyard, is this Inscription. I^H^S^
Here under lies buried the body of Ioane Barker, late Wife of Richard Barker,
17. years of this Parish, who deceased the last day of July, Anno Dom. 1626.
whom the Lord send a joyful Resurrection.

Expecta donec veniat.
Upon it thus:

Honesta mors initium vitae.
Turn again then unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has rewarded thee;
and why? thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feer from falling.

I will walk before the Lord, in the land of the living. Psalm. 116.

This Stone was laid by her Husband Richard Barker, one of the Yeomen of the
Guard to Queen Elizabeth and King James 30. years, and now to King Charles.
And was married to his late deceased Wife 20. years and one month, and had
seven children, whereof five live, Horatio, Anne, Elizabeth, Katherine, and Mary.

Close by this lies buried the body of William How, April 3. 1626.

Also the body of Elizabeth Mason, Wife of Amos Mason, Curate of the Temple,
July 18. 1632.

Of John Cartwrite, Gentleman, August 13. 1620.

Of Richard Bestibitch, son of Daniel Bestbitch.

James at Clarkenwell. 1623.
THere has been within these few years a great sum of money expended upon
this Chruch, by the sad and lamentable accidents of twice the fall of the
Steeple. Speaking of which, I should say, the first in such a year, such a
month, such a day; and as of that for the second: but my Information (though
given me by a very good friend) could by no means make me so punctual.
Howsoever, it was about the time before dated; and the second, within a little
time after.

The first falling of this Steeple (or part of it) was through the antiquity,
or length of time it had stood, without any repair or mending; for (as I have
been certified) it has had no cost, in that kind, bestowed upon it, within
the memory of any Parishioner living: neither among their Records can they
find any such thing mentioned.

The second fall (as some have suspected) was either by the ignorance or
dishonesty of the principal Workman, that for a certain sum of money (from
the ruins of the first) had undertaken to raise and rebuild it. Ignorance in
not looking into the strength of that, upon which he was to rear such a
burden; Or dishonesty, in slightly passing over (for the speedier dispatch of
his Task) a weakness upon which he knew (or might suspect) such an eminent
danger to follow.

How just the suspicion, I know not, but in the Re-building of this Steeple,
before it was fully finished (although almost upon the end of that labor) it
fell, with the Bells, their Carriages and Frames, beating a great part of the
Roof down before them: the weight of all these together, bearing to the
ground two large Pillars of the South I Will, a fair Gallery over against the
Pulpit, the Pulpit, all the Pewes, and whatsoever was under or near it.

But now (as of all the rest) let us speak of building, repairing, and
beautifying, which briefly for this Chruch we do thus:

All those decays and losses (excepting the want of the Steeple which (at the
lower end of the South I Will) is begun, and from the ground raised as high as the
roof of the Church) are recovered and made whole again: all the Walls of it
firm and fair; in the South wall a fair new door: The Chruch, in the place
of the old, furnished with all things new, and is without and within
(notwithstanding there is much still to do) well and very worthily beautified.

The cost of all this amounting to (or much upon) 1400. pounds.

It was thus finished in the year of our Lord, 1627.

Upon my very worthy Friend, Master John Weaver, a learned Antiquary.
Weaver, who labored
in a learned strain,
To make men long since dead
to live again,
And with expense of Oil,
and Ink, did watch,
From the Worms mouth
the sleeping Course to snatch,
Has by his industry
begot a way,
Death (who insidiates
all things) to betray,
Redeeming freely
by his care and cost,
Many a sad Hearse, which time
long since gave lost;
And to forgotten dust
such spirit did give,
To make it in our
memories to live.
Where Death destroyed
when he had power to save,
In that he did not seek
to rob the Grave,
For where so e're
a ruined Tomb he found,
His Pen has built it
new out of the ground.
'Twixt Earth and Him
this interchange we find,
She has to him,
he bin to her like kind,
She was his Mother,
he (agratefull Child)
Made her his Theme,
in a large work compiled
Of Funeral Relics,
and brave Structures reared,
On such as seemed unto her
most indear'd.
Alternately a Grave
to him she lent,
Over which his Book
remains a Monument.
Master Weaver upon himself.
Lankashire gave me breath,
And Cambridge education,
Middlesex gave me death,
And this Church my humation,
And Christ to me has given
A place with him in Heaven.
Obiit Anno Aetat. suae 56.

For the ancient Monuments of this Church, turn to folio 484, 485.

Katherines Tower.
THis Church was repaired, and within thorowout trimmed, and very commendably
beautified, in the year of our Lord God, 1618.

A very fair Gallery at the lower end of the Church, built in the year 1613.
was (with a great addition in the breadth of it) enlarged in the year 1621.

The Walls and outside of this Church was again in many decayed places of it
repaired, and all over clothed in a fair and very beautiful Rough-cast, at
the sole cost and charge of Sir Julius Caesar, Knight, in the year of our Lord
God, 1629. His charge being (taken to be done by the great) 250. li.

About the same time, there was a very fair Clocke-house built at the West end
of the Chruch, and some other things done. All before named, except that of Sir
Julius Caesar, being the proper cost and charge of the Inhabitants.

Upon the South wall in the Chancell, is this inscribed.
The gift of Master Steven Scudamore, late Citizen and Vintener of London,
deceased, 20 s. per Annum, to be bestowed in Fuel amongst the poor of this
Precinct, at the discretion of the Collectors for the time being, Began the
20. day of December, Anno Dom. 1606. to be continued unto them for ever.

Near unto the former is another Inscription, as follows.
The gift of Master John Bourne, late Citizen and White-baker of London, being
5. li. per Annum, to be bestowed in Bread amongst the poor of this Precinct,
Began the 10. day of May, Anno Dom. 1609. to be continued unto them for 40.
years following.

On the same South Wall, this Monument done at the charges of William
Beereblocke, Goldsmith, one of his Executors.
Here dead in part,
whose best part never dies,
A Benefactor,
William Cutting lies:
Not dead, if good deeds
could keep men alive,
Nor all dead, since good deeds
do men revive.
Gunvile and Kaies,
his good deeds may record,
And will, no doubt,
him praise therefore afford:
Saint Katherines eke,
near London, can it tell,
Goldsmiths, and Merchantaylors,
know it well:
Two Country Towns
his civil bounty blessed,
East Derham, and
Norton-Fitzwarren West.
More did he than
this Table can unfold,
The world his fame,
this earth his earth does hold.
Leonards Shorditch.
FOr the Repaires of this Church, Monuments, and Gifts, with the names of the
bountiful Givers, and the like, turn to page 471, 472, and 473.

Martins in the Fields.
THe enlargement of this Church was begun in the year of our Lord God, 1607.
being the fifth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King James, of
England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the 41. and it was finished in
the year 1608. To the which enlargement, our said Sovereign Lord King James,
and our most Noble Prince Henry, were most gracious Benefactors; the rest of
the charges were borne by the Inhabitants of this Parish.

Randall Hopkins, and Andrew Hacket, being the first year Churchwardens.

And in the second year, Andrew Hacket, and Richard Style.

This enlargement was only that ground, that at the East end of this Church
(taken out of the Churchyard) was then made a beautiful Chancell.

A very fair Table fastened to a Pillar near the Pulpit; in which is
curiously drawn the figure of an Angel, holding the Coat of the Gentry, of
the living Husband, and dead Wife, for whom it was there set up; Also of a
Deaths-head, with an Houre-glasse upon it: The border of the Table filled
(excellent in proportion and colors) with Deaths-heads, braches of Palm, and
other fresh and beautiful Flowers.

Nascendo Morimur.
Quid Cranii sibi forma novi
vult ista? Quid Hora?
Quidque super Cranio,
lumen nova nata, segesque?
Nempe dies mortis,
vitae fit origo perennis;
Quae moritur mundo,
Nascitur illa Deo.
What does this Scull? what
does this Houre-glasse show?
The Corn and Palm, that
on the Scull does grow?
It means this, that Death
the end of strife,
Is the beginning
to eternal life:
Death is the door
to immortality,
She Is borne to God,
that to the world does dye.
The burning Taper
to his end does waste,
Whilst life and death
to meet each other haste;
Then happy she,
that did her life apply,
Here and above
to live eternally.
To the permanent honor and remembrance of the Pious and All-vertuous
Gentlewoman, Mistress Susan Price, Daughter to the Honorable Baronet, Sir
Paul Tracy, of Stanway, in Gloucester; and the late dearly beloved Wife of the
Religious, Learned, and truly Virtuous Gentleman, William Price, of Winchester,
Esquire, one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Chamber. She died the 13.
of March, 1632.

Ye holy Angels,
and ye Powers of light,
The glad injoyers
of Gods glorious sight;
You that in faithful
Abraham's bosom rest,
You have received
your sanctified Guest.
Fair Susan Price
has blessed Heaven obtained,
And for her well run Race,
Gods glory gained,
Shining in Robes
of Immortality,
Contemnes the earth
and worldly vanity.
True Christian faith
endued her constant mind,
And unto her
the promise was assigned.
Most honored be
her memory, outwasting
All Genealogies,
and everlasting.
Whilst therebe Elements,
Stars, Orbs, or Spheres,
Days Sun, or Nights
Moon, to direct the years,
The Heavens possess her soul,
the World her Fame,
And fair example, her Virtues,
Worth, and Name:
What Nature, Goodness,
Institution, Fact,
Could heap to a perfection,
was her Act.
The Angels sing her glory,
who did call
Her sweet soul home
to its original,
And now she is gone hence
for to pass the time
She ought her Husband,
in a better Clime.
There shall her Harvest
and her Summer be,
Where she shall never
any Winter see.
Then Price grieve you no more,
she lives in joy,
Wipe you your tears,
her tears are wiped away.
The Epitaph.
Stay ere you pass,
lament, and fix your eyes
Upon a worthy
Consorts obsequies.
Susan here lies, for beauty,
worth, and life,
Admired, the worthy
William Prices Wife.
Never was after death
one more desired,
Nor ever living
was one more admired.
A file of lasting praises
crowns her name,
Perpetual glories
do attend her fame:
Rich in all joys, she
now has changed her bed,
Joined in marryage
unto Christ her head.
Come, whosoever would
enjoy like state,
Endeavor all her worth
to imitate.
Over the figure of Death: Ibimus omnes.
Ladies, when you
your purest beauties see,
Think them but Tenants
to mortality:
There Is no content on earth,
Joys soon are fled,
Healthful to day we live,
to morrow dead:
I was as you are now,
young, fair, and clear,
And you shall once be
as you see me here.
Mors mihi lucrum.
Moriendo Nascimur.
Upon her Tombstone, at the foot of this Monument.
Mistress Susanna Price, the wife of William Price, Esquire, one of the
Grooms of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Chamber, Daughter of Sir Paul
Tracy, Baronet, departed this life the 13. of March, 1632. before she had
been married full 14. weeks.

She was so full of Virtue and of Goodness, few might compare with her, none
could excel her.

Her body is here interred, here is her body, her soul is in Heaven with her
Savior.

A fair Tombstone in the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Here lies buried the body of Mistress Dorothy Hervy, that Honorable
matchless Virgin, the Daughter of the Right Honorable, William Lord Hervy,
Baron of Kidbrooke, and of the Religious Lady his Wife, the Lady Cordelia
Hervy, Daughter and Heir to Master Brian Ansley, Esquire, of Lee, in Kent, who
departed this transitory life the 19. of February, Anno 1632.

Glorious Dorothy
here intombed lies,
Lord Hervies Daughter,
and fair Virtues prize.
Model of Honor,
Graces Paragon,
In whose great loss
her Parents Joys are gone.
Her life was such
as well may be denied,
That she did ever ill,
but when she died*
Pity so soon
so rare a Virgin must
Stoop to Corruption,
and be clothed in dust.
Heaven and the world being
Suitors, who should have her,
To end the strife, she went
to him that gave her.
Nascendo Morimur.
A very fair Table, with a rich Coat Arms, hanging on the North side of the
Chancell, with this Inscription.
Hae sunt Antiqua Moraviorum Insigniae, in memoriam Patricii Moravii, Domino
Carolo Regi a poculis, nuper defuncti hic posita.

Mary Whitechappell.
THis Church, in the many (and greatly) decayed parts of it, was repaired; and
within, without, and in every part of it richly and very worthily beautified,
at the cost and charge of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord God, 1633.

For Whitechappell side.
Thomas Farrar John Wood John Mannering Churchwardens.

For Wapping side.
Captain Hatch Master Allen Churchwardens.

The cost of this Repair, 300. li. and upwards.

To show the never-dying love of these Parishioners, to their deceased Pastor,
Master William Crashaw, take this Inscription from a very fair Gallery in the
South I Will.

To the honor of God, the advancement of Religion, and in thankfulness to God
for the safe return of our hopeful and gracious Prince Charles from the
dangers of his Spanish Journey, this Gallery was erected at the charge of this
Parish, Anno 1623. and the seventh year of Master Crashawes Residence.

His Name, as in this, in many other places remembered.

The ground of this South I Will was added to the Church, and the I Will new built in
the year of our Lord, 1591. And in the four and thirtieth of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, Master Richard Gardner Parson.

A fair Monument on the North wall of the Chancell, with this Inscription.
Christo optimo maxim,
pietati and posteritati,
Sacrum,
Elizabethae Conjugis dulcissimae,
Foeminae Lectissimae e Claris. Skinneriana,
and Emersoniana Familiis oriundae,
In qua (Rara Felicitate)
Pietas cum Pulchritudine,
Ingenium cum Virtute,
Forma cum pudicitia,
Mirifice conveniebant,
Quae in primo puerperio, in ipso enixu,
Animam Deo, Memoriam Mundo,
Vitam Naturae, Carnem terrae,
Patri puerulum, Amicis luctum,
Conjugi Moerorem ineffabilem,
Omnibus ingens sui ipsius desiderium
moriendo Reliquit,
W. Crashaius, hujus Ecclesiae
Rector, Conjux long Moestissimus
multis cum Lachrymis
Lugens Lubens
Invitus Posuit.
I know that my Redeemer lives, Job 19. 25.

To the honor of Christ Jesus, to the praise of Piety, to the example of
Posterity, and for the preservation of the godly memory of Elizabeth, his most
worthily beloved Wife, in whom (by a rare Conjunction) Godliness with
Comeliness, Wisdom with Virtue, Beauty with Chastity, Youth with Discretion,
and Discretion with Devotion, were most sweetly combined; who in the prime of
her years, upon her first Child, yielded up, by untimely death, as her self
often had foretold, her soul to God, her life to Nature, her body to the
Earth, her memory to the World, and left to the pensive Earth a dear bought
Son, to her friends heaviness, hard to be removed, to her Husband sorrow,
not to be expected, and to all that knew her, a longing desire after her,

William Crashaw, her most sad and sorrowful Husband, Pastor of this Church,
most unwilling to part with her, but most willing to honor her with many
sighs and tears, dedicated this Monument in assurance of her glorious
Resurrection.

She died October 8. in the 24. year of her age.

A handsome Tomb, encompast with Iron grates in the Churchyard, has this
Inscription.
To the Memory of Alice Shelton, daughter of Sir Ralph Shelton, of
Shelton-Hall, in Norfolk, Knight, who had Issue by her first Husband, Thomas
Waller, Esquire, 9. Sons, and 9. Daughters; and by her second Husband,
William Wrove, of London, Merchantaylor, had Issue two Sons and one Daughter;
but had no Issue by her third and last Husband, Tobias Wilkinson. 1630.

Another close by the former, with this Inscription.
Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity, but a woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be praised.

Here lies buried that virtuous Thamozin, that gracious young Woman, the
faithful Wife of Master William Eeles, of Limehouse, Mariner; this mirror of
young Women, departed this life on the 10. of July, 1620. She being of the age
of 25. years, and was Mother of a Son and a Daughter; but Thamozin the
Daughter, departed this life on the 18. of December, 1621. being of the age of
6. years, and lies here buried.

Every wise Woman builds her house, but the foolish pluketh it down with her
hands.

The memory of the Just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot.

Remember,
As you are now, so was she; As she is now, so you must be. William Eeles.

Magdalens Bermondsey.
THis Church was enlarged by the addition of all that ground that is now the
South I Will, taken out of their spacious Churchyard; this I Will was begun to be
built in the year of our Lord God, 1608.

Christopher Robinson Thomas Freeman Churchwardens.

The Work going on, and continuing to the year 1610. in which it was very
worthily and completely finished. The charge of it amounting to 860. li.

In the year 1619. on the top of the Steeple, was a very fair Turret erected.
The charge of it, 33. li. 16. s. In the same year a new Clock made, 7. li.

The Steeple was again repaired, and the inside of the Church trimmed and very
commedably beautified, in the year 1621.

The cost of this last (though I could not set down the sum) as of all the
former several Repaires and Building, the sole cost and charge of the
Parishioners.

A very fair Brass Branch in this Church, was the gift of Ralph Alder, of
this Parish, 1613.

Savoy Parish.
WE have not in the collection of all these Churches, looked so far back upon
any Repair as this: but as we find it we present it.

The repairing and trimming of this Church (which was at that time performed
with great cost and beauty) was in the year of our Lord God 1600. at the sole
cost and charge of the Parishioners.

James Houson Thomas Martin Churchwardens.

In the year 1618. there was a fair Gallery built at the lower end of this
Church.

Rowland Hodges Daniell Hall Churchwardens.

A very fair Monument at the upper end of the Church, having this Inscription.
Ecce pudicitia, and pietas,
Coeli utraque proles
Accingunt, Dextra haec,
haec tibi levae latus,
Iure, salo coluere, Polo
Rapuere, nec usquam
Te neque jam tumulum
destituere tuum.
Da. Humius Theag. Non Delendae Amicitiae sempiternum Monumentum.

M. N. M. S. Siste paululum quisquis es, and paucis quid Marmor hocce te volet
scies.

Hic sacrum Beatissimae Animae depositum, and felicissimae quiescunt exuviae
Nicolaae Moraviae, ex clarissima Moraviorum, cum Tilibardinorum, tum
Abircarniorum Gente, per utrumque parentem ortae, and Roberti Duglassii,
equitis Aurati, conjugis Lectissimae, Quae incredibili ingenio, rarissimo
Iudicio, Summa pietate, singulari prudentiae, omnique virtutis genere, imprimis
modestia, pudicitia, and suavissimis moribus ornatissima, cum omnem prope
Aetatem, contempt is mundi hujus Foecib. in Rerum divinarum speculatione, and
assidua meditatione consumpsisset, in Theologicis porro ad miraculum usque
docta doctissimos quosque Theologos in admirationem sui and stuporem Rapuisset,
Nihilque unquam, per universam vitam quam Christum sperasset, ad eundemque tota
jam adspirarat, primo partu longissimis, and Acerrimis doloribus divexata, ubi
Moestissimum conjugem, and circumfusos amicos ad vitae hujus fluxae ac caducae
contemptum, and ad certissimam immortalitis spem erexisset prolixissima etiam
and suavissima oratione, ipsam se suosque omnes, maxim vero conjugem Deo
commendasset, gratissimam Christo Animam reddidit, and extincto Foetu, in summo
omnium Moerore expiravit.

Abi jam quisquis es, and non dissimilem vitae exitum ipsi tibi opta and vale.
Obiit die November. Anno 1612. Aetatis suae

A fair Monument on the West side, close to the former, with this Inscription.
Morieris. Resurges. Ianua vitae sepulchrum.
Here lies Nazareth Coppin, Wife to George Coppin of London, Gentleman,
Daughter to Thomas Thwaits of Hardington, in the County of Norfolk, Esquire,
who being of the age of 24. years, in the prime of her youth and beauty, as
she lived most virtuously, so she died most godly, the 22. of June 1592. in the
34. year of the most happy reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Mors certa, inevitabilis, incertae.
On either side of her these lines.

Morti praedajaces,
potuit nec plurima formae
Gratia, nec mentis
vincere fata pudor:
Et tamen in terris ultra
spes figitur? alto
Quaerenda est merces
non peritura pole.
Peregrinatio est vita.
Vivis and aeternum victa
de morte triumphas,
Exuvias tantum
possidet illa tui:
Omnia sic patrias seeds
unde orta revisunt,
Redditur and Coelo
men's pia, corpus humo,
Mors meta laborum.
Next to the other is a very Ancient Monument, with this Inscription.
Pray for the souls of Sir Richard Rokeby, Knight, and Dame Jane his wife,
whose bones rest here under this Tomb, which Sir Richard deceased the 27. of
April, 1523. and the said Dame Jane deceased the 15. On whose souls Jesus have
mercy.

Over the Vestry door in the Chancell, is a very fair Tomb with these words.
Hic jacet Alicia, Filia Simonis Steward, de la Kingheth, Suff. Obiit 18.
Iunii, Humanae salutis, 1573.

Virtutis praemium virtus.
Upon a fair Marble Stone in the Chancell, is this Inscription.
Here lies interred the bodies of Peter Lilly, Doctor of Divinity, one of the
Brothers of the Savoy, Prebend of Paul's, and Archdeacon of Tanton, who died at
the Savoy, Anno Dom. 1614. And of Dorothy Lilly, his virtuous Wife, who also
died at the Savoy, the 1. of June, Anno Dom. 1627. and of Mary Lilly, their
only Daughter, who departed this life at Fulham, the 10. of October, 1625.

Close to the other this:
Here under lies the body of Frances Bulbecke, late of Clevedon, in the County
of Somerset, Esquire, the 8. son of John Bulbecke, of the same place and
County, Esquire, deceased, which said Frances died, being never married, the 9.
of November, in the year of our Lord God, 1585.

Close to the other this:
Here lies buried Peter Richardson, Goldsmith and Ieweller, borne in Holland,
in the parts beyond the Seas, servant to the most famous King, Henry the 8. and
King Edward the the 6. to Queen Mary, and to our most dread Sovereign Lady,
Queen Elizabeth: which Peter having married Anne, the Daughter of Robert
Wilson, lived to the age of 84. years, and died a faithful Christian, the 24.
of March, in the year of our Lord God, 1586.

There is also in this Chancell buried, the body of one David Bedo, Batchelour
of the Law, and Steward to the Lord of Carleil, etc. 1541.

Close by the former
Lies buried the body of Humphrey Lovell, Esquire, with his two Wives and five
Children. He died the 16. of November 1585.

Close to the other is this.
Hic jacet Dominus Richardus Ellis, quondam Hospitularius hujus Hospitalis. Qui
obiit 3. die Augusti 1550. quadragessimo 5. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

At the upper end of the Chancell, in the East corner, is a very ancient
Monument, with this Inscription.
Wilielmus Chaworth, secundus filius Iohannis Chaworth, de Wynerton, in
Comitatu Notingham, Militis, hic in suo Coelibatu repulverescit, cujus spiritus
in Coelis, carnis reassumptionem expectat.

Obiit 24. die Martii, Anno salutis a Christo 1582. and suae Nativitatis 28.

Necessitudinis Symbolum.
A very fair Table with a rich Coat Arms, on the East wall, toward the lower
end of the Church. Over it these words:
So good a Father and Mother are never to be forgotten.

Under it these:
Here lies the body of Rebecca Burton, Wife to Captain Nicholas Burton, and
Daughter to Henry Somaster of Painesford in Devonshire, Esquire; who departed
this life the 28. of February, Anno Dom. 1632.

In the wall on the West side of the Church, is this ancient Memorial.
The first sepulted in this place
after they it sacrated,
Was Humphrey Summerset,
Deacon, which here does lie,
Batchelour in the Arts,
whom cruel Death oppressed,
The sixteen hundred and fifteenth year
of God Almighty,
The fifteenth day of April,
which Humphrey does call and cry,
With lamentable escrikes,
and good devotion,
All devout Christen men
and women, that pass hereby,
Pray for my dolorous soul
for Christ's bitter passion.
On an ancient Plate close to the forms, is this Inscription.
Here by this wall side buried is William Vevian, Son and Heir unto Michael
Vevian, of Cornwall, Esquire, which William was servant unto the Right Noble;
Charles Sommerset, Earl of Worcester, the Kings Chamberlain, and by
misfortune drowned in the Thames, on Passion Sunday at afternoon, in the
year of our Lord God, 1520. For whose soul pray of your Charity, as you would
be prayed for.

In the body of the Church, upon a brass plate on the ground, is this
Inscription.
Here lies Humfrey Gosling, of London Vintener, of the White Heart of this
Parish, a Neighbor of virtuous behavior, a very good Archer, and of honest
mirth, a good Companykeeper,

So well inclined
to poor and rich,
God send more Goslings
to be sich.
He was servant to the Right Honorable, the Lord Hunsden, Lord Chamberlain,
and deceased the 22. of July, 1586.

Close by the other lies buried the body of George Skoowith, 1525.

Also the body of John Danson, 1577.

A very fair Stone, with a fair Picture of the party buried wrought in
Brass, having these several Inscriptions.
Over his head two brass Circles.

In the one thus:

Credo quod Redemptor meus vivit, and in novissimo die, de terra surrecturus
sum.

In the other thus:

Et in Carne mea videbo Deum salvatorem meum.

In a Circle upon his breast thus:

Repesita est haec spes mea, in sinu meo.

Under him thus:

Situs hic est pietatis, ac Religionis cultor Ioannes Floid, Artis Muscae
Bacchalaureus, qui dum vixit, Regis Henrici octavi in sacello cecinit, and
Christi Sepulcrum invisit Ierosolimis. Obiit Anno Dom. 1523. Men's. Aprilis die
tertio.

Near unto the other is this Inscription.
Here rests the body of the Lady Eleanor Kempe, Widow, late Wife of Sir
William Kempe, Knight, and Daughter and Heir unto Robert Brown, Esquire,
which Lady Eleanor, deceased the 26. of September, in the year of our Lord
God, 1559.

Near unto the former is this Inscription.
Orate pro anima Domini Iohannis Sampull, quondam unius Vicariorum Collegii
Regii Sancti Steph. Westmonasterii, and in sua aetate in Cantaria Delinwood,
Celebrans in Bassa Capella Sanctae Mariae D. Collegii. Qui obiit Anno Dom. 1510.

Near unto the other is this Inscription.
Hic jacet Anna Pynta, Ispaniae, quae obiit 8. die Martii, Anno Dom. 1523.
cujus animae propitietur Deus, Amen.

On a fair Stone close to the other, is this Inscription.
Orate pro anima Iohannis Brime, Sacerdotis, qui obiit 13. die mensis Martii
1525. cujus animae, etc.

Near to the other.
Lies buried the body of John Borwet, Esquire, sometime Sergeant Plumber to
King Henry the 7. and to King Henry the 8. deceased the 7. of December 1525.

Next unto the other is this Inscription.
Of your Charity, pray for the soul of Humphrey Cook, Citizen and Carpenter
of London, and Master Carpenter of all the works to our Sovereign Lord, King
Henry the 8. and Master Carpenter at the building of this Hospital, called The
Savoy: the which Humphrey deceased the 13. day of March, in the year of our
Lord God 1530. and lies under this Stone. On the next unto the other, is this
Inscription.
Pray for the soul of Newell Loveday, Gentleman, late Groom for the month in
the office of the Cellar, to the most excellent Prince, King Henry the 8. who
died the 18. day of May, Anno Dom. 1523.

A Table, or Memorial of all such Benefactors as have given any sums of
Money or Legacies, to the value of five pounds and upwards, to this Parish of
Saint Mary Strand, alias Savoy, for the use of the poor, or to other pious
uses within this Parish; beginning from the year of our Lord God 1597. And as
touching all other Legacies and sums of Money under five pounds, given by
Benefactors in this kind, since the time aforesaid, they are registered in a
Book kept for that purpose.
Anno Dom. 1622.
Richard Denham James Bradford Churchwardens.

Ralph Abnet of this Parish, died in the year of our Lord God 1597. and gave
unto the use of the poor of this Parish the sum of twenty pounds, and five
pounds more for the advancement of 5. poor Maidservants of this Parish in
marriage.

Richard Jacob, of the Parish of Saint Clement Danes, Vintener, died in the
year of our Lord God 1612. and gave unto the poor of this Parish, forty
shillings per annum, for 32. years, to be paid out of the Rent of the Cheaquer
Tavern, in the Parish aforesaid.

Meredith Thomas, of the Parish of Saint Clement Danes, Tailor, dyed in the
year of our Lord God 1620. and gave the sum of six pounds to this Parish
for ever, to be lent unto two poor men of this Parish, either of them three
pounds a piece for three years, without interest; they giving good security to
the Churchwardens for the time being, to repay the said six pounds at the
three years end.

Francis Smith, of this Parish, Grocer, died in the year of our Lord God,
1621. and gave the sum of twenty pounds, whereof ten pounds to the poor of
this Parish, and the other ten pounds for the maintenance of a Sermon to be
yearly preached upon Midsummer day in this Church for ever.

Dame Margaree Walter, Wife of Sir John Walter, Knight, of this Parish, died in
the year of our Lord God 1622. and gave unto the poor of this Parish, the
sum of five pounds.

John Bennet, Baker, of this Parish, died in the year of our Lord God 1625.
and gave unto the poor of this Parish, the sum of ten pounds for ever.

Jane Lane, Widow, Daughter of James Howson, of this Parish, died in the year
of our Lord God 1625. and gave unto the poor of this Parish the sum of five
pounds.

There is given unto this Parish, the six and twentieth day of March, 1628. by
the sum of five pounds, for the maintenance of two Sermons to be preached
yearly, on Easter Monday, and Whitson Monday, by some sufficient and able
Minister.

A second Memorial.
of this Parish, Widow, in the year 1629. gave unto this Parish the sum of
six pounds to buy a second Pulpit Cloth, to remain to the Church for ever*

Sir John Walter, Knight, Lord chief Baron, died in the year 1630. and gave
to the use of the poor of this Parish for ever, the sum of twenty pounds.

James Howson the elder, of this Parish, died in the year 1631. and gave unto
the poor of this Parish the sum of five pounds.

To the Reader.
WE are here to give you notice (gentle Reader) that the Monuments, Epitaphs,
and Inscriptions, that in this collection of Churches (Builded, Repaired, and
Beautified) are here (with their Churches) inserted, are only such as as have
been raised, composed, and added, since the last imprinting of this Book,
called The Survey of London, that Impression being in the year 1617. those of
greater times and antiquity, are to be turned to as they stand before in their
several Wards and Parishes.

A Schedule indented, Containing a Survey taken the xxx. day of December, Anno
Dom. 1567. and the tenth of Queen Elizabeth, of the Manor of Finsbury, in the
County of Middlesex, belonging to the Prebend of Hallywell and Finsbury, in the
Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, London. Wherein are particularly specified, as
well the capital Message and Site of the said Manor, and all other
Messuages, Houses, Gardens, Orchards, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures,
Leasures, and other Grounds, being of the Demaynes of the said Manor; with the
Butts and Bounds thereof. As also the Rents and Services belonging to the said
Manor: and the names of the Tenements by whom the same are to be paid. With
mention also, for what Lands the same Rents and Services are due: with the
Butts and Bounds thereof.
The Demayne Lands.
THe Manor house, commonly called Finsbury Farm; a great Barn, a Gatehouse,
and Stables: A Court and Orchard belonging to the said Manor house.

Six Gardens, whereof one in the tenure of William Chivall, Draper; the other
five severally held by Master Lionel Ducket, Alderman; John Bull, Grocer;
William Fulwood, Grocer; John Hewet, Clothworker; and William Leonard, Mercer.
All which lie together adjoining to the said Manor upon the North; and the
Moore Field and Lane there, leading between the said Gardens, and other
Teintors and Gardens, belonging to the Prebend of the Moore: and now in the
Tenure of the Merchant-Taylors, upon the South. And a Garden now divided into
more parcels, also belonging to the said Lordship, in the Tenure of John God
Merchant-Taylor, on the West, and the Ditch and way there, leading from London
toward Finsbury Field, and Hallywell, on the party East.

A Lodge, and certain Gardens and Teinter ground, in the Tenure of John God
Merchant-Taylor, enclosed on the North toward Chiswell street, with a brick
wall; and upon a Tenement and Garden belonging to Richard Marten, Goldsmith;
and others upon the West. And upon a Way lying between the same, and certain
Gardens and Tenters belonging to the Prebend, called the Moore, in the Tenure
of the Merchant-Taylors of London, on the South. And the great Garden and
Orchard belonging to the said Manor, now in the Tenure of John Gresham,
Mercer, and other Gardens belonging to the said Lordship, on the party East.

A Tenement, a Lodge, a Loft over a Gate, and five Gardens, now in the Tenure
of William Erdiswick, Merchant Tailor, whereof four abutting upon Finsbury
Field on the East, and Chiswell street on the South; and the Lands of late
belonging to John Coningsbye, now the Lands of William East, Gentleman, in the
right of his Wife, one of the Daughters of William Wakefield: and late in the
Tenure of John Hillyard, Goldsmiths, on the North party. And upon a Gate-way,
leading from Chiswell street, as well toward the said Gardens, as toward a
little Barn there, in the Tenure of Alban Chisselton, Bowyer, on the West. And
the fifth Garden East, upon the said great way; and South, upon the said Barn,
in part; and West in part, upon a Tenement and Garden in the Tenure of Thomas
Lee, Fletcher, being parcel of the said Demaine Lands, and the said Tenement,
Lodge, and Loft, over the said gate, abutting on Chiswell street toward the
South.

Another Tenement, a Garden, and the said old Barn, in the Tenure of Alban
Chisselton, Bowyer, butting upon the South side of Chiswell street, and next
adjoining to the said Tenement, now in the Tenure of the said Thomas Lee, on
the party East.

A Tenement and a Garden in the Tenure of Hugh Green, Fletcher, next adjoining
to the said Alban Chisselton on the East, and upon Chiswell street on the South.

A Cottage and certain Gardens, in the Tenure of John Mansbridge, Merchant
Tailor, lying in Chiswell street on the South, containing in length from South
to North, stretching along a Brick wall, belonging to the Lands sometimes
John Wishes, Founder, on the West party, thirteen Rods and eight foot of
Assise; and in breadth at the North end, butting upon the ground or Garden
plots, sometimes John Conisbies, Gentleman, and now in the Tenure of William
East, Gentleman, from the East to the West fifteen Rods and three foot of
Assise; and in length from the North to the South, toward the East, running
toward certain Gardens belonging to the said Manor, now in the Tenure of the
said Erdiswick, fifteen Rods and six foot of Assise; and in breadth, at the
end toward the South, from the East to the West, butting upon Chiswell street
aforesaid, fourteen Rods and five foot of Assise.

A piece of ground converted into certain Gardens, now in the Tenure of John
Medcalfe, Skinner, lying near Whitecrosse street, between the Pasture ground
belonging to the said Manor of Finsbury, called Bonhill Field, or Finsbury
Fields, on the East, and the ground of John Conisbye, Gentleman, now in the
Tenure of John Hillyard, Goldsmith, on the West and South, and the grounds of
late belonging to the Priors of Hally-well, now belonging to the said John
Medcalfe, on the party North.

A Garden plot, in the occupation of William Gill, stretching from Whitecrosse
street on the East, Westward 165. foot of Assise; on the South side of the said
ground, and on the North side from the said street, stretching Westward, 180.
foot of Assise; and at the West end of the same, stretching North and South 62.
foot of Assise; in breadth, right Line and Plummet, from limit to limit, and
butting South upon the Lands late belonging to the Parish Clearkes of London,
and the Lands of the said William Gill, (late Ralfe Symonds's) on the party
North and West, and the said Whitecrosse street on the party East.

And eleven Tenements lying on the West side of Grubstreet, with eleven Gardens
to the same belonging, in the several Tenures of David a Powell, John Gilham,
Nicholas Hunt, John Wildbore, John Hayes, John Tompson, John Andrews, John Ap
Rice, Henry Everton, John Reeve, and George Fuller, lying in the said Lordship,
and County of Middlesex, and adjoining to a corner Tenement, being in the
Liberties of the City of London, in the Tenure of William Franklin, Fletcher,
belonging to Henry Southcot, Mercer, and the Lands of the said Henry Southcot,
in the Tenu^e. of William Bullen, and a Garden ground in the Tenure of Philip
Garland, Cloth-worker, on the South, and extends in length upon the said
South side, from Grubstreet, aforesaid, unto certain Gardens upon the West,
belonging to John Whitehorne, and others there, 199. foot of Assise; and in
breadth, at the West end of the said Gardens, from the said South side,
stretching unto Chiswell street on the North, 183. foot of Assise, and
extends in length at the North side upon Chiswell street, 205. foot and a
half of Assise.

The Field called Bonhill Field, belonging to the said Manor of Finsbury,
butting South upon the high way there, called Chiswell street, and extending
North upon the high way that leads from Wenlocks Barn, to the Well called
Dame Agnes the clear. The high way leading from the Manor of Finsbury
aforesaid, toward Hollywell, on the East party, and the Gardens and grounds
late belonging to the Priors of Hollywell, now in the Tenure of John Medcalfe,
Skinner, William Gill, Gardener, and other the Lands belonging to John
Hillyard, Goldsmith, and certain Gardens belonging to the said Manor of
Finsbury, now in the Tenure of the said Medcalfe; the Lands of late of John
Coningsby, Gentleman, now in the Tenure of William East, Gentleman: And also
four Gardens, now in the Tenure of William Erdiswick, also belonging to the
said Manor of Finsbury, on the party West: and the same Field, with half the
Ditches measured with the same, East, West, North, and South, contains 23.
Acres, one Rod, and six Pole.

Whereof, four Acres and a half, being at the South end of the said Field,
butting upon Chiswell street, beginning at the Ditch on the party West,
extends toward the ground and Pond there (belonging to the said Manor) on
the party East, in breadth sixttene Pole: and extends from Chiswell street on
the South, unto Bonhill on the North: in length 45. Pole, and from the East
side, at the North end against the Bonhill, to the midst of the said Ditch on
the West party, 16. Pole; and from the North end upon the West side, stretching
to Finsbury Bridge, to Chiswell street there South, in length 45. Pole, every
Pole containing sixteen foot and a half. And also there is one other Acre
claimed for the lands late John Coningsbys's, Gentleman, supposed to lie in the
said Field, beyond the said Bonhill (as it is said) but it has been occupied
as parcel of the Demaines of the said Manor, by the space of 40. years last
passed.

The Field called the Mallow Field, butting upon the Railes next to the Moore
Field South, the high way leading from the Brick Bridge there toward the
Wind-mils, belonging to the said Manor of Finsbury on the party West, the high
way leading from the said Wind-mils toward Norton-Folgate, on the North, and
the Lands belonging to John Worsop, Merchant-taylor, and John Nichols, Girdler,
on the party East, containing with the half Ditch, in measure on the sides,
East, West, and North, 12. Acres and a half, and 12. Pole.

The Field called the High Field, or Meadow ground, where the three Windmils
stand, commonly called Finsbury Field, Pare of this Field is the meadow where
they usually shoot at twelve score, and where the Wrestling is usually.
butting upon the high way that leads unto Norton-Folgate, on the party
South; the high way that leads to Hollywell, and the lands belonging to the
Earl of Rutland on the party East; the lands belonging to the Heirs of
Mascall Brewer, and the high way leading from the Manor of Wenlocks Barn, to
the Well called Dame Agnes the clear, upon the Bonhill Field on the party
West: all which Field contains in measure 45. Acres, with the half Ditches
that enclose the said Field on the party South, East, and North, in the said
measure.

Where of John Worsop has on the East side of the said Field, butting upon the
high way leading to Norton-Folgate on the party South, the Windmils and ground
of the said Manor on the party West, and the Meadow and Pasture ground
belonging to the said Manor on the party North and East, six Acres and a half.

More adjoining to the said high way on the party South, and next the said
Worsops Land there on the party East, one Acre and three Rods of Meadow or
Pasture ground, belonging to John Nichols, Girdler.

The sum of the Acres of the said three Fields, are 80. Arcres, 3. Rods, and
18. Poles, by the measure aforesaid.

Whereof belongs to the said John Worsop, in the High Field aforesaid, six
Acres and a half.

To the said John Nichols, in the same Field, one Acre and three Rods.

To the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens aforesaid, in Bonhill field aforesaid,
four Acres and a half.

Sum 12. Acres and 3. Rods.

So remains 68. Acres, and 18. Poles.

Golding lane.
The Free Tenants
Of Henry Edon, Esquire, out of certain Tenements and Gardens at the North end
of Golding lane, Saint Giles Parish.
sometimes Master Ponds, and of late Richard Callerds, and since Elizabeth
Hayes, daughter and Heir of the said Richard Callerd, butting on the West side
of the said Lane; Sure of Court.
and on the South side upon the Lands late of Henry Cletheroe, now in the
Tenure of John Hillyard, 13. s. 4. d.

Of the said Henry Edon, out of a Tenement called the Swanne, and other
Tenements thereunto adjoining; in the Tenure of John Collins, Suit of Court.
Gardener, abutting on the East side of the Lane, late the said Callerds, and
since as aforesaid, 3. d. ob.

Of William Hall, out of certain Tenements there adjoining to the sign of the
Swanne in the said Lane, Suit of Court.
now in the Tenure of Richard Drake, Gardener, 3. d. ob.

Of the Master and Governors of Saint Bartholomewes Hospital in West
Smithfield, the hands of Thomas Hallway their Farmour, out of certain
Tenements and Gardens late Robert Melli;hes, Merchantaylor, of the West side of
Golding lane, Suit of Court.
at the sign of the Leg, butting upon the Lands of the aforesaid Henry Edon,
and upon the South of the Lands of William Wakefield, late in the Tenure of
Dionise Wilson, 3. s.

Of Richard Roper, Baker, out of certain Tenements and Gardens at the sign of
the George, on the East side of Golding lane, Suit of Court.
and the Lands now of William Gill, Gardener, Thomas Langham, Fishmonger, on
the North, and th'eirs of Gregory Nicholas on the South, 2. s. 2. d.

Of th'eirs of John Willoughby, since Peter Dove, in the right of Ioane his
Wife, out of certain Lands and Tenements on the East side of Golding lane,
Suit of Court.
now in the Tenure of Ioice Austen, Widow, butting upon the Lands belonging to
Gregory Nicholas, now Thomas Walton, Esquire, North and South, 2. s. 4. d.

Of the Duchess of Suffolk, out of a Message and nine Tenements on the West
side of Golding lane, butting upon the Lands of William Wakefield on the North:
Suit of Court.
and the Tenements late belonging to the Parish of Aldermary in London, now in
the Tenure of Walter Cooper, Tyler, on the South, 1, li.

Of Richard Atkinson, in the right of his Wife, out of a Cottage and Garden in
the said Lane, butting upon the Lands of Richard Buckland, Haberdasher, late
Sir Michael Fishers, Knight, North and West, and on the South, butting upon the
Lands of Henry Keen, upon Golding lane on the East, 1. s. 4. d.

Of Henry Kneene aforesaid, Tenant by the courtessie, in the right of Agnes his
Wife, Daughter and Heir of Henry Warner, deceased, out of the Tenement
Chequer, and other Cottages and Gardens on the West party of Golding lane,
butting South upon the lands belonging to the Hospital of Saint Bartholomewes
aforesaid, Suit of Court.
late the said Robert Mellishes, now in the Tenure of Thomas Hallyway; and
North, as well upon the land of Richard Atkinson, as also upon the Lands, now
the said Richard Bucklands, late the aforesaid Sir Michael Fishers, Knight, on
the party West, 1. s. 1. d.

Of Thomas Wilkinson, out of certain Tenements at the sign of the Cock, at
the North end of Golding lane, Suit of Court.
belonging to Armiger Wade, Esquire, 1. s.

Of Thomas Walton, Esquire, out of certain Tenements and Gardens lying on the
East side of Golding lane, Suit of Court.
late called Armitage Aley, late Gregory Nichola's, and before that Richard
Yongs, butting upon the Lands late Peter Doves, who married Ioane the Daughter
and Heir of John Willoughby, on the North side, and the Lands of the said
Gregory Nicholas on the South, 2. s.

Of the said Thomas Walton, out of certain Tenements and Gardens at the sign
of the Windmill, late the aforesaid Gregory Nicholasses, at the East side of
Golding lane, sometimes John Mores, Suit of Court.
and before that William Wigmorepoles, abutting upon the Lands late the said
Peter Doves, as is aforesaid, on the South: and the Lands belonging to Saint
Bartholomewes Hospital, late Robert Mellishes aforesaid, and now in the Tenure
of the said Richard Roper on the North, 2. s. 2. d.

Of John Hillyard, Goldsmith, out of the Tenement Flower-de-luce, and a Garden
on the West side of Golding lane, now in the Tenure of John Banks, Brewer,
butting upon the Tenement of John Leese, Suit of Court.
Carpenter, on the South, and the Tenements belonging to the said Hospital of
Saint Bartholomewes, late the said Robert Mellishes, and in the Tenure of
Walter Cooper, Tyler, on the North, 7. d. ob.

Beech lane.
Of the Vicar of Saint Giles Cripplegate, out of the corner Tenement at the
West end of Beech lane, Suit of Court.
on the South side of the said lane, in the Tenure of Martine Capons,
Barber-Surgeon, and opens upon Red-crosse street on the West side, 8. d.

White-crosse street.
Of William Blighton, Butcher, out of two Tenements on the West side of
White-crosse street, Suit of Court.
late Edmond Godwins, butting upon the Lands late belonging to the Parish
Clerks of London, on the North, and a corner Tenement belonging to the said
Blighton, on the South, 9. d.

Of Thomas Perkins, Butcher, Tenant of certain Lands and Tenements of late
belonging to the said Parish Clerks, Suit of Court.
now belonging to (...) How, Gentleman, on the West side of White-crosse
street, butting upon the Lands of William Blighton aforesaid, on the South
party; and the Lands of Richard Lister, late John Cores; in the Tenure of
Thomas Verey, Brewer, on the North, 1. li. 4. s. 4. d.

Of Richard Lister, Clothworker, out of certain Tenements and Gardens on the
West side of Whitecrosse street, Suit of Court.
late belonging to John Core, Grocer, and since that Nicholas Carew's, and
since that Adam Hutchinsons, butting upon the said Lands and Tenements of late
belonging to the said Parish Clerks, North and South, 4. s. 1. d.

Of the said William Gill, out of a Cottage and Gardens at the West side of
Whitecrosse street, Suit of Court.
of late Ralfe Simonds's, and after Thomas Langhams, Fishmonger; and abutting
upon a Garden belonging to the said Manor of Finsbury, on the South side, and
on the North part, of the Lands belonging unto John Worsop, 1. s. 10. d.

Of John Travies, in the right of his Wife, out of a Cottage and Garden on the
West side of Whitecrosse street, Suit of Court.
late belonging to John Worsop, Scrivener, and before that to Lettice Ireland,
and late Thomas Popplewell, adjoining to the said Gill on the South, 9. d.

Of the said Travies, out of a little parcel of ground there, Suit of Court.
on the North side of the said Gill, whereupon sometimes stood a Mill, late the
said Worshops, and late the said Popplewels, 3. d.

Of John Barnes, Mercer, out of two Tenements and a Garden, on the North side
of Chiswell street, now in the Tenure of Thomas Mountain, abutting to the
Gardens belonging to the Manor of Finsbury aforesaid, on the East side, and
the Tenements of Robert Traps, Goldsmith, late Thomas Barnes's, and before
that, John Wishes's, Founder, on the West side, 1. s. 4. d.

Finsbury Field.
Of John Worsop, Merchantaylor, for six Acres and a half of Meadow and
Pasture, lying in Finsbury Field. Suit of Court.
in the Parish of Saint Leonards in Shoreditch, toward the Windmills; abutting
upon the Windmill next Norton Folgate, in the Tenure of Thomas Pullson on the
party West, the high way leading toward Norton-Folgate aforesaid, on the party
South; and Meadow and Pasture grounds, parcel of the Demaines, belonging to the
said Lordship on the party North and East, now or late in the Tenure of John
Popebolle, 4. s. 10. d.

The said John Worsop, In the Parish of S. Leonards Sho^^dit^h.
for ten Acres and three Rods of Land, lying in the said Field called the
Moore, butting upon the Lands aforesaid of the said Nichols, now being Gardens,
on the party South; and the said Mallow Field West: the high way leading from
the said Farm of Finsbury, toward Norton-Folgate, on the party North, and the
Lands and Gardens, late Sir Martin Bows, East, 7. s. ob.

One Annual Rent of 20. s. issuing and going out of certain Tenements without
Ludgate, S. Martins within Ludgate.
adjoining to the said gate, in the Parish of Saint Martin within Ludgate, of
London, sometimes in the Tenure of John Benson, Haberdasher, and now in the
Tenure of Christopher Harbottell, Citizen and Haberdashet of London, 1. li.

Memorandum, that this Survey was copied out of the Survey annexed to the last
Lease granted to the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London, of the
said Prebend, Mar. 15. 1582. Reg. Elizabetha 25.

Additions out of several Charters of Kings, etc. concerning the ancient
Liberties, bounds and privileges, of Saint Martins le grand in Aldersgate Ward;
to be inserted Page 330. in the second Column, betwixt the words Gospel and
lower down.
An Abstract out of King William the Conquerors Charter, mentioned Page 327. of
this Book.
Willimus Conquester per chartam suam corroborat et conconfirmat, Deo and
Ecclesiae Beati Martini infra muros London Sitae; quod sit qui eta ab omni
exactione and inquietudine Episcoporum, Arohidiaconorum, etc. Et possessiones
suas ab omni regali jurisdictione liberas, and ab exercitus expeditione, pontis
restauratione, munitione and castelli auxilio, quietas, habeat; Secuam Sacam,
and Toll, and Team, and Infangthefe, Blodwite, Mundbrice, Burghbrice,
Meskenning, Seawing, Alcesting, Frithsorne, Fleamina, Firnithe, Wergeldtheofe,
Vthleap, Forfeng, Fyhfeng, Firdwyte, Firthwit, Weardwite, Hengwite, Hamsokne,
Forsteal, and si quas alias libertates, and Consuetudines, aliqua Ecclesiarum
regni mei Angliae meliores habeat. Si quis vero hoc in aliud quam concessimus,
transfer praesumpserit, cum Judah proditore Dei luat poenas. Dat. Anno Domini
1068. Annoque Regni mei secundo, die natalis Domini. Et postmodum, in die
Pentecostes confirmat: quando Matilda conjunx mea in Basilica Sancti Petri
Westmonasterii, in Reginam divino nutu est consecrata.

Subscript. per ipsum Regem, Reginam,
Forte Robertum.
Richardum filium Regis, ambos
Archiepiscopos, and diversos alios.
Notes out of King Henry the third his Charter, Anno Regni 50.
HE grants to Saint Martins, Secuam, Sak, Thol, and Theme, and Infangentheof:
cum omnibm libertatibus, consuetudinibus and quietanciis suis, in bosco and in
plano, in viis and in semitis, in pratis, pascuis and pasturis; in aquis
molendinis and vinariis, in stagnis and piscariis, in moris and maressis, in
grangiis and virgultis, infra burgum, and extra, infra civitatem and extra,
infra villam and extra: and in omnibus aliis locis and rebus, ad ipsum Decanum
and memoratam ecclesiam Sancti Martini pertinentibus. Et quod omnes terrae,
tenementa, and omnes homines praedicti Ecclesiae Sancti Martini, sint quieti de
Shiris, hundredis, and de sect. Shirarum and hundredarum and Wapentakarum: and
de pecunia danda pro forisfactum; and de murdro and latrocinio, and geldis and
danegeldis, hidagiis, assisis, and de operationibus Castellorum and murorum,
fossarum, parkarum, pontium, calcearum; and de gualtis, regardis, and de
essariis and placitis forestae: and de ferdwyta and hengwyta; and de flemenssir
the and hainsoka, and de blodwyta and frithwyta, and de leirwyta, and de
hundred spenny and de wardpenny and de haverpenny, and de vigiliis faciendis,
and de pont agio, passagio, lastagio, tallagio, stallagio, thelonio, scutagio,
and omni secua, examinatione, servitio, and servili opere; and omnibus placitis
and querelis and occasionibus and consuetudinibus Sem:

All this was confirmed in the second year of the reign of King Edward the
second, with this addition. Et prohibemus, ne de aliquo ponantur in placitum
extra curiam suam; nisi coram nobis vel capitulari Iusticiario nostro: quia
concessimus eisdem curiam suam, de omnibus hominibus tenentiis suis. Me test.

King Henry the 3. directs his Writ Vicecomitibus London, ne ingrediantur seu
levent amerciamenta infra libertates Sancti Martini, pro transgressionibus and
aliis contractibus, Regi debitis.

The like was sent by King Edward the first, July 10. in the eighth year of
his reign.

Out of a Charter of King Henry the sixth, Data per manum nostram apud
Westmonasterium 13. Martii Anno Regni 20. Per ipsum Regem, ac de dat. praedict.
authoritate Parliamenti: pro december marcis solutis in Hanaperio.

Concedimus and confirmamus, Ligier fol. 69.
quod praedicti nunc Decanus and Capitulum and successores sui, virtute and
praetextu dictarum chartarum praedictorum Progenitorum nostroru^, and verborum
in iisdem contentorum, ac vice and nomine eorum quae in dictis verbis
generalibus and obscuris continentur; in perpetuum habeant curias suas and usum
franciplegii retornas omnium brevium, praeceptorum et mandatorum et billarum
nostrorum, ac praeceptorum Iusticiariorum nostrorum et haeredum nostrorum
itinerantium, tam ad placita forestae, quam ad communia placita, and placita
coronae, and aliorum Iusticiariorum quorumcunque: necnon attachimenta tam
placitorum coronae, quam aliorum placitorum quorumcunque; de and in omnibus
terris, tenementis, et feodis dictorum nunc Decani and Capituli and successorum
suorum; qui per se and per Ballivos et ministros suos, habeant in iisdem
tenementis, terris, and feodis, executiones eorundem brevium, praeceptorum, and
mandatorum, and billarum. Ita quod nullus Vicecomes, Ballivus, vel minister
noster aut haeredum nostrorum, tenementa, terras, and feoda praedicta, pro
aliqua executione Brevium, praeceptorum, mandatoru^ and billarum praedictorum:
seu aliquas alias res hujusmodi executionem tangentes facienda, ingrediatur:
nisi in defectu ipsorum Decani and Capituli and successorum suorum, seu
ministrorum suorum.

Item, quod habeant bona and catalla forisfacta, ex causa quacunque; tam
utlegata pro proditione, etc. felonia de se, and bona forisfacta coram
quibuscunque Iusticiariis and ministris Regis.

Item exitus, Fol. 70.
amerciamenta and forisfacta quaecunque, ratione cujuscunque statuti.

Item quod dicti Decanus and Capitulum and Canonici, Ibid.
and sucessores sui, and tenentes, and alii residentes, in perpetuum sint
quieti de thelonio, pontagio, passagio, and stallagio, and carriagio, and
picagio, and terragio, in omnibus locis per totum regnum nostrum, tam per
terram quam per aquam.

Fines and forisfacta quaecunque; Fol. 71.
quascunque forisfacturas, annum diem and estreppamentum; and quicquid ad nos
vel haeredes nostros partinere poterit, de anno, die, vasto, and estreppamento.

Nec Seneschallus, Fol. 71.
marischallus neque Coronator Curiae Marischalciae hospitii nostri vel haeredum
nostrorum; nec eorum aliquis minister, serviens, vel officiarius in praesentia
nostra vel haeredum nostrorum, in feoda and terras dictorum Decani and Capituli
and successorum suorum, ad aliqua eorum officia facienda, ingrediantur: sine
speciali licentia dictorum Decani and Capituli and successorum suorum.

Quod nullus emptor nec provisor noster vel haeredum nostrorum, Ibid.
de ipsis nunc Decano and Capitulo aut successoribus suis, aut de aliquibus
tenentibus eorundem; contra voluntatem suam quicquid capiat in futurum.

By the said Ligier-Booke it likewise appears, that the said Deanery of Saint
Martins had also privilege of Sanctuary, in the time of the said King Henry
the sixth; see folio 78. and 79. There be diverse Presentations also and
Probates of Wills; from Page 81. to the end of the of the said Ligier-Booke.

For the exposition of the words of privilege, occurring in the Charters
aforesaid; I have added these following observations.

Sok, est Secta de hominibus in curia vestra (Sancti Martini) secundum
consuetudinem regni.

Sak, est placitum et Emenda de transgressionibus hominum in curia vestra. Sok,
idem pre quele acheson: et Sak dicitur pur forfet.

Tol, est quod vos and homines vestri, de toto homagio vestro sit is quieti, in
omnibus mercatis, de toto tolneto, de rebus emptis and venditis.

Tem, est quod habeatis totam generationem villanorum vestrorum, cum eorum
sectis and catallis, ubi cunque in Anglia fuerint inventi. Excepto, quodsi
aliquis nativus, quietus per unum annum et unum diem, in aliqua villa
privilegiata manserit; ita quod in eorum communitatem et guildam, tanquam unus
eorum receptus fuerit: eo ipso a villenagio liberatus est.

Infangtheof, est quod latrones capti in Dominico vel feodo vestro, and de suo
latrocinio convicti; in curia vestra judicentur.

Hangewyte, est quietus de latrone suspenso; sine judicio, vel extra custodiam
vestram evaso.

Vtfangtheof, est quod latrones de terra veslra, vel de feodo vestro, extra
terram vestram vel feodum vestrum capti cum latrocinio; ad curiaem vestram
revertantur, and ibi judicentur.

Hamsoken, est quietum esse de amerciamento promagistro hospitiorum, violenter
et sine licentia, and contrae pacem: and quod teneatis placita de hujusmodi
transgressionibus factis, in curia vestra, and in terra vestra.

Grithbrech, et pax Domini Regis fracta.

Blodwite, est quietum esse de amerciamento pro medlets: et quod teneatis
placita in curia vestra: et quod habeatis amer ciamenta inde provenientiae.

Flistwite, est quietum esse de contentione et conviciis: and quod habeatis
inde placitum in curia vestra: and quod habeatis inde amerciamenta.

Fledwite, and quietum effe de amerciamento, cum quis utlegatus fugitivus
venerit ad pacem domini Regis, sponte vel licentiatus.

Flemenefith, quod habeatis catalla sive amerciamentae hominis vestri fugitivi.

Letherwyte, est quod capiatis emendationem ab ipso qui corrupit nativam
vestram, sine licentia vestra.

Childwyte, est quod capiatis ger^^mam de nativa vestra corrupta and pregnata
sine licentia vestra.

Forstatt, and quietum esse de amerciamento de cattallis arrestatis, infra
terram vestram: and habeatis amerciamenta inde provenientia.

Scot, est esse quietum de quadam consuetudine; sicut de tallagio facto ad opus
Vice comitis, vel Ballivorum ejus.

Geld, est quietum esse de consuetudinibus servilibus, quae quondam dari
consueverunt, and adhuc dantur. Sicut Hornegeld, and de alijs similibus.

Hidage, and quietum esse si Dominus Rex talliaverit totam terram per Hidam.

Caruage, si Dominus Rex talliaverit terram per Carucas.

Danegeld, est quietum esse de quadam consuetudine, sive solutione; quam quidem
Dani levaverunt primum in Anglia.

Hornegeld, est quietum esse per totam terram de quadam consuetudine exactam
per talliam: sicut de quasunque bestia cornuta.

Lesteage, est quietum esse de quadam consuetudine exactam in nundinis and
mercatis, pro rebus cariandis, ut homo vult.

Stallage, est quietum esse de quadam consuetudine exactam proploceis captis
vel assignatis in nundinis vel mercatis.

Seawing.
Chewyng, est quietum esse de aettachiamento in aliqua curia, and coram
quibuscunque; de querelis ostensis, and non advocat.

Miskennyng, est quietum esse de amerciamento pro querela, coram quibuscunque;
in transumptione prolata.

Burgbruch, est quietum esse de transgressione facta in Civitate vel Burgo,
contra pacem.

Wardwyte, est quietum esse de denario dando pro Ward facienda.

Hundred, est quietum esse de denario, vel consuetudine facienda Praepossto and
Hundredae.

Bordhalepeney, est quietum esse de quadam consuetudine exactionis, pro tabula
levatae.

Brigbote, est quietum esse de auxilio dando ad reficiendos pontes.

Burgbote, est quietum esse de auxilio dando ad reficiendum burgum, castrum,
civitatem, vel muros prostratos.

Haverpeney, est quietum esse de denariis dandis Averagio Domini Regis; cum
similibus.

For a larger and more accurate exposition of these old words, I refer the
Reader to that most elaborate and diligent Glossary of Sir Henry Spelman,
Knight, the learnedest Antiquary of our Nation; yea (and in this kind) of all
Europe.

This Deanery, together with the Sanctuary and Privileges, was after put to the
Abbey of Saint Peter's in Westminster: as appears by what next follows.

A Declaration of William Abbot of the Monastery of St. Peter of Westminster,
concerning his title to the Privilege and Sanctuary of St. Martins le grand in
London: with the precincts, Circuit, and Bounds of the same.
FIrst the said Abbot says, That the free Chapel of St. Martins le grand in
London, and the Precincts of Saint Martins aforesaid, is a place privileged:
and was founded and endowed long time before the Conquest, as well of
possessions, as of immunities, franchises, and liberties: and corroborate and
enlarged by King William the Conqueror, like as it appears as well by the
Charter of the said King William the Conqueror; as by diverse other Charters,
Writings, and Records.

Item, the said King William the Conqueror granted by his Charter to the same
place of Saint Martins, diverse liberties and franchises, by special and
general words, as well in the Latin tongue as Saxon. And over that granted to
the said place of Saint Martins, all other liberties, immunities, and customs,
which any Church of this Realm, best had. Which grant imports and includes
in himself as great privileges, franchises, and immunities, as Westminster,
Beverlay, or any other place privileged, has within the Realm. And also the
said words in Saxon, imports such sentence. That the said place should be a
Sanctuary franchised, privileged, and have tuition and immunities of all those
persons, which for treason, felonies, trespasses, or any other cause, should
flee to the same or abide therein. Which franchises, privilege, tuition, and
immunities, the said place has always peaceably had and enjoyed, from the said
Conquerours days unto this present time.

Item, the said franchises, immunities, and privileges, of Saint Martins, have
been corroborate, confirmed, allowed and enlarged, by King Henry the first,
King Stephen, Henry the second, King John, King Henry the third, King Edward
the second, King Edward the third, Richard the second, Henry the fifth, Henry
the sixth, and in all other Kings times sithence the Conquest: as by diverse
Charters and Allowances before Justices of Oyer and Determiner, Writings and
Records, more plainly at large is showed, and may appear.

Item, it appears by diverse Returns made by the Sheriffs of London, as well
in the Kings Bench, the Common Pleas, and all other the Kings Courts, that the
said place of Saint Martins, is a place privileged, and Sanctuary: as by the
same Returns remaining of Record, more plainly may appear.

Item, the said Abbot says, That the Precinct, Circuit, and Bounds of the
privilege and Sanctuary aforesaid, be and extend, as hereafter follows.

Imprimis, beginning at a wall lying directly against a Poast that stands in
the midst of one Roger VVrights a Grocers house, which stands of the East
side of the south gate of St. Martins: and from the wall in the said Grocers
house, with the halfe-deale of the street unto the chancell of the same side
that house stands upon, Sanctuary. And so forth from the East Westward unto
the midst of Saint Martins lane next to the Chapel of Saint Martins,
against the Tenement of the Bulls head, which Tenement lies at the south end
of the said lane on the West part.

Item, half part of the street of St. Martins lane, Sanctuary, from the south
unto the North, as far forth as the houses appertaining to the Bull-head do
extend Northwards.

Item, from the said place of the Bulls head, then the whole lane of St.
Martins, Sanctuary on both sides, unto a Post or Stoop that stands of the
North side or end of the two Tenements, standing by the great gate next going
into the Deanes Court.

Item, from the said Saint Martins Lane, at the aforesaid Bulls head, turning by
a wall that divides the said Tenement of the Bulls head, and Saint Martins
ground: Which wall turns and extends from the East Westwards, unto a back
wall that closes in Saint Martins ground of the West side: all within the said
Wall, Sanctuary.

Item, along by the same back wall, that closes in the West part of Saint
Martins ground, from the South end of the said wall into the North, unto a wall
that divides my Lord of Northumberlands ground, and Saint Martins ground from
the South end; all within the aforesaid Walls, Sanctuary: and so forth from the
South side into the North my Lord of Northumberlands ground, Sanctuary; along
by a back wall of the Gray Friars: which back wall closes in my Lord of
Northumberlands ground of the West part, unto the North part of Angel Alley,
abutting Northwards upon the South side of Robert Bowmans house, into the
Streetwards. And so Sanctuary still, from the said back wall of Gray Friars,
along by the Angel Alley, and by the South part of the said Robert Bowmans
house, from the West unto the East, until you come to a Post or Stoop
standing on the North part of the two Tenements next lying on the North side of
a great gate entering into the Deanes Court.

Item, from the same Post or Stoop before rehearsed, standing North from the
great gate of the said Deanes Court directly Eastwards, by the North part of a
Tenement, with the same Tenement enclosed (as by the wall there it shows)
Sanctuary: which Tenement is now in the hands of one Hugh Pain.

Item, from the aforesaid wall, along from the North, Southward unto Hugh
Pains dwelling house; and from thence by the North side of the said Hugh
Pains Garden, Sanctuary still; from the West unto the East part thereof.

Item, again from the North side of the above rehearsed Hugh Pains Garden
Southward, unto the Deanes Garden, Sanctuary.

Item, along by the wall on the North side of the Deanes Garden, from the West
into the East thereof, Sanctuary.

Item, from the North unto the South, of the East part of the aforesaid Deanes
Garden, with Saint Leonards Church, Sanctuary, as by a wall it there shows.

Item, from the East end of Saint Leonards Church, Westwards of the South of
Saint Martins, unto the Bell-Alley, Sanctuary, as appears also thereby
another wall.

Item, from the Bell-Alley Southwards, unto the wall spoken of at the
beginning, which is within the Grocers house, against the Post that stands
within the midst of the same house. And so forth directly again unto the
Channel of the high street, that lies before the South gate of Saint Martins:
all within the bounds rehearsed, Sanctuary.

Item, by a Statute made in the year of King Edward the third, it is affirmed,
The said place of Saint Martins to be a place franchised and privileged,
having tuition and immunity, in manner and form as is above rehearsed. And in
special, and for them that come in thither for Debt, Treason, and Felony. In
proof whereof, the Judge that sits there for the King, as in a place not of
the City, but by privilege separate, (the Mayor not called thereto, as he is
to the deliverance of Newgate, and other such Acts in the City) to have
knowledge there in a case of Treason or Felony, has ever, from time that no
mind is, sitten in the gate of the said Sanctuary. And the person appeached or
endited of Treason or Felony, has been kept by the Officers on the further
side of the street before him, to the intent that he come not of the other side
of the Channel toward the Sanctuary there, to claim the liberty and
Franchises of the same.

Item, whereas diverse Kings of this land, for causes such as moved them, have
seized into their hands the Franchises and Liberties that the City of London
had, by reason whereof they were not suffered to use or enjoy the said
Franchises, for as long as it has liked unto the said Kings: yet the said
Chapel of Saint Martins le grand, in the said City of London, with the
Precinct of the same, at the said times of such seasing of the aforesaid
Franchises; was before and since always a place privileged, without any
disturbance, diminishing, or taking away by the said Kings, or by their
Ministers: and peaceably used and enjoyed their Franchises, Liberties, and
immunities, within the Sanctuary and Precinct of Saint Martins, as in a place
excepted and privileged, and no ways pertaining unto the said City, ne
parcel thereof, though it be set within the same.

And moreover, the said Abbot says, that the said Church or Chapel of Saint
Martins, within the said Sanctuary and Precinct of the same; were of late by
the late King of famous memory, King Henry the seventh, lawfully annexed and
given to the said Monastery of Saint Peter of Westminster; at which time, and
times without mind of man before that, the said Chapel, and Precinct, circuit
and bounds of the said Sanctuary, comprised within the Limits above rehearsed,
were used, allowed, and taken, and yet be, as Sanctuary.

Thus far the Abbot of Westminsters declaration, at which time (as it
appears) there fell out so much contestation, concerning the Precincts of
this Sanctuary, that the matter was feign to be tried by ancient sworn men
deposed in Court as Witnesses. Some of their Depositions are come to my hands,
which I here give you: the rest (and the beginning) have miscarried.

Item, the said Henry Williamson deposes for the claimed bounds, and also for
the privilege of Sanctuary men, in the half Street and Lane next to Saint
Martins; and for the setting up of the Gallows on Evil May day; and for the
removing thereof, as others therein before have deposed.

Item, Ralfe Twyn deposes, all wholly the claimed bounds to be Sanctuary; and
also the setting up of the Gallows, and removing of the same, and the
Pavement, to be done by the Abbot: and that he knew one Bland privileged both
for Treason and Murder, ever used to walk in the street claimed as Sanctuary,
without any disturbance.

Item, William Bayley deposes, all the claimed bounds, and also the sitting of
the Justices in the South gate: and that he heard the Justices say, that half
the street against the said gate was Sanctuary: and that there was persons then
arraigned, and others therein deposed: and that he knew the said Bland
privileged for Treason and Felony, to dwell in Angel Alley: and that the
Abbot ought to make the Pavement, as others have deposed there.

Item, John Smith, Clerk, deposes for all the claimed bounds: and further
says, that he knew Doctor Morton, and also the Cardinal Morton to lie there,
one in Roger Wrights house, and the other in Angel Alley, they both being
privileged for Treason. And also he supposes both Angel Alley and Bland
Alley, to be holden of Saint Martins by certain Rent, as parcel of the Earl
of Northumberlands Tenements. And also for the Pavement, as others before have
deposed.

At this time (I suppose) was there a Survey or Plat of the Precinct, exhibited
into the Court of Chancery, where it appears these Witnesses to have been
deposed. The figure of which Plat we here exhibit unto you.

The Gray W. Friars.

All this is Shoomakers houses, which pay Rents to the Abbots of Westminster.

Aldersgate

The Channel. Sanctuary ever used. The Channel. No Sanctuary.

S. Martins lane, and Sanctuary on both sides.

A New Window broken out by Francis Godlike.

The West Church door.

The Deanes gate.

The Post.

Hugh Pains Garden.

The Deanes Garden.

S. Leonards Church.

All the Bounds and Limits about this Plat mentioned, been contained in the
Abbots claim: and is well proved to be good Sanctuary, by diverse Witnesses
sworn in the Chancery, as well Freemen of the City, as other credible persons.

A stone Wall.

Good Sanctuary ever used.

The South Gate.

Good Sanctuary ever used.

The Channel on the South side.

Foster E. lane.

The Post in Roger Wrights house.



It seems that there has been some latter differences about a new door into
the Liberties of the Freedom; Saint Martins le grand*
whereupon a Court being called, December 20. 1625. this Order was given out,
to be enquired upon and certified.

It is ordered by the Court, that the Foreman of the Enquest, with others of
the same Enquest, shall view the South gate and Entry leading from Bladder
street into this Liberty: and also a door made by Thomas Rodes in the East
side of the same Entrey; and make their reports under their bands in writing,
on Monday next after the Epiphany.

ACcording to the direction of the Order abovesaid, we whose names are under
written, being all of the Enquest sworn for this year, having viewed the Gate
and Entry, do find, and accordingly certify, that Thomas Rodes, a
Linnen-Draper, dwelling in a house next adjoining to the said Entry, on the
East side thereof, (in part of which house Roger Wright did sometimes dwell)
has of late, without the privity or knowledge of most of the Inhabitants of
this Liberty, taken down, or caused to be taken down and carried away, a
pair of strong, sufficient, and serviceable gates, in the night time; which
were, and time out of mind have bin, the common South gate of this Liberty. And
in stead thereof, has set up a new gate of Deal, opening all one way, viz.
toward the West side; whereas the former pair of Gates or Leaves did fall
open, the one toward the East side, and the other toward the West side of the
said Entry. Also the said Thomas Rodes has broken down the partition wall on
the East side of the said Entry; against which, one Leaf of the said old Gate
did fall open, as aforesaid: and has there made a new door (where never any
was before, in the memory of man) of almost an Ell in breadth, out of the said
Shop, into the said Entry or common passage into this Liberty. Whereby a free
and open passage is made out of the City of London, through the shop of the said
Rodes into this Liberty; to the great prejudice of the Lords of the same
Liberty, and to the great hinderance and damage of the Tenants and Inhabitants
within the same. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names,
dated the 9. day of January, Anno Dom. 1625.

Matthew Iumpar William Hewes William Hewes Richard Mattock Anthony Johnson
Timothy Smart Edward Napper Thomas Spear Henry Kuevet William Hunt Philip
Richard William Purse.

A very ancient Deed, to prove Lambs-Chappell to have anciently been in the
Parish of Saint Olaves Silverstreet.
KNow all men, present and to come, that I Laurence de Frowik have granted and
dimissed, and by this present Charter of mine have confirmed, unto Richard of
Clerkenwell, Chaplain, all that Land of mine, with the houses, buildings, and
appurtenances which I have in London, in Muckwell street, in the Parish of S.
Olaves; lying between that Land which William Throtegos held of me, toward
the South, and the Land of the Friars of the new Hostell, toward the North;
and which extends it self in length, from the Kings highway, even unto the
wall of the City toward the West, etc. he paying me twenty shillings a year,
etc. and giving unto the Church of Saint Olaves aforesaid, one Wax Candle of a
pound weight, at the Feast of Saint Thomas the Apostle yearly: and unto the
Chapel (de inclusorio) in the Close or Cloister, within Criplegate, at the
upper end of Muckwell street toward the North, one other Wax Taper of three
quarters weight, upon the Feast of Saint James yearly, etc. Witnesses,
Nicholas Bat, then Mayor of London, John of Northampton, and Richard Pycard
then Sheriffs, etc.

Notes upon this Deed.
These were Mayor and Sheriffs, Anno 1253. which was the thirty eighth year
of Henry the third. Out of this so ancient a Deed, may we observe, first, That
by the bounding of this Land, betwixt the street and the City wall, toward
the West; that this was that ground which is now Lambs Chapel yard.
Secondly, by the assigning the latter Candle to be paid to the Chapel, upon
Saint James his day; that it was meant to this Lambs Chapel: which was
anciently called, The Chapel of Saint James in the wall. Upon whose
Festival, this Chapel seems to have been dedicated: and to honor the
solemnity of which Wake, the Gentleman directed this Candle to be yearly paid.

The Original of this Deed in Latin, is in the hands of that most Learned
Antiquary of our days Sir Henry Spelman Knight.

The Circuit of the Hospital or Free Chapel of Saint Katharine near the
Tower of London.
FRom the East gate of the said Tower by the Thames, unto the Bancke beyond
Saint Katharines Docke, Eastward: and from thence through all the Lane which
leads from the said Docke, and in and by every part of the said Lane, unto
the Kings high way, Northward: which way, lies between the Abbey of Grace and
the said Hospital or Free Chapel; and leads from the City of London, unto
Radcliffe. And also from the said way, against the same Lane, unto the Tower
Ditch, Westward; and from thence to the River of Thames, Southward.

An Ancient Record concerning East Smithfield to be inserted Page 268.
IN the times of King Knowt (or Kanutus) the Dane, Out of Book Danthorne in
Guildhall folio 78.
were there thirteen Knights very well beloved both of King and Kingdom.
These begged of the Kings Grace, a certain piece of Land in the East part of
London; which the Inhabitants had lately forsaken, by reason of the hardship
Pro nimia servitute.
and service they there stood charged withal. The Knights suit for to have
this Land granted unto them for ever, with the liberty of a Guild upon it, the
King upon this condition granted: Namely, that every one of them should
perform three combats upon the land, and in the water; and come off with
victory: and also, that upon a day appointed, they should run at Tilt against
all comers, in the field which is now called East Smithfield. This they having
performed gloriously, the King gave them the field, and the same day named it
K^ytte-guilden; These were English Knights; and therefore in some writings it
is called Anglish K^ytte-guilden.
appointing these Boundaries unto it. First, that it should reach from Ealdgate
to the place where the Bars now are, Eastward on both sides the Town. He
extended it another way toward Bishopsgate, as far as the house of William
the Priest. To the Southward, the liberties of this Guild reached so far into
the water of the Thames, as a horseman riding into the River at a dead low
water, could dart his horsemans staff from him. So that all East Smithfield,
with part of the right hand way, which stretches, by Doddings pond into the
Thames; and also the Hospital of Saint Katharines, with the Mills, (which
Hospital was founded in the reign of King Stephen) together with the outer
stone wall, and the new Ditch of the Tower, stand and are within the Fee
aforesaid. For the said Wall and Ditch, The Tower Ditch first made.
were not as yet made; but were afterward, in the very time that King Richard
the first was at Jerusalem. Which was done by the Bishop of Ely, the Kings
Justice over all the Kingdom. The occasion was, a difference betwixt Earl
John the Kings Brother, and the chief Justice. By the digging of this Ditch in
the ground of East Smithfield, did the Church of the Holy Trinity in London
lose half a Mark a year revenue; and the Mill which belonged unto the poor
Brotherhood of the Hispitall of Saint Katharines, and unto the Churches of
Saint Katharines, and of the Holy Trinity altogether, was feign to be removed,
to their no little hindrance. A Garden also which the King had hired of the
Brotherhood aforesaid, at the rent of six Marks a year, was for the most
part destroyed also by the said Ditch. Recompense was often sued for, but not
made very speedily, though promised faithfully. Afterward, King Edward gave
five Marks and an half unto the poor Brotherhood, for that part of their
Garden which the Ditch had destroyed, and that part which it had not, he
restored unto them again, which they hold unto this day. As for their Rent of
five Marks and a half, he gave them his Charter, by which they receive it
very duly either out of the Exchequer or the Hanaper, even until this present.

This Guild was by diverse Kings afterward confirmed. And first by Edward the
Confessor, then by King William Rufus; Out of the Book C. fol. 134.
of whose Charter, I here give you this Abstract.

William King of England, etc. to Bishop M. G de Magu, and R de Boar, and to
his faithful Fidelibus. By which perchance both in this and other Kings
Charters of those times, are meant, such as were the Kings Tenants or held
lands of him, and had sworn fealty for them, to him.
Liege-people of London, sends greeting. Know ye that I have confirmed unto
the men of Cnittengilda, their Guild and Lands pertaining unto it, with all
their customs, entire; even as they enjoyed them in the time of King Edward,
and of my Father: Witness Henry de Both at Rethyng.

Of King Henry the first his Charter this is the Abstract.
Henry King of England, etc. to Bishop M. to the Vice^omiti London.
Sheriff of London, and to all his Barons and faithful people of London,
as well French as English, sends greeting. Know ye that I have granted unto
all the men of the Cnyttengilda, their Guild, and lands pertaining unto it;
together with all their customs after the best manner, even as they enjoyed
the same in the times of King Edward and my Father, and as the King my Brother
by his Charter and Seal confirmed them. And I free it from any forfeiture that
might accrue unto my self, forbidding all men, that upon pretense hereof, they
presume not to offer them any molestation. Witnesses, R. de Momford, R. de
Bigot, and H. de Booth, at Westminster.

More concerning the Liberties and extent of the said Guild.
Know ye, Out of Book H. in fol. 48.
that the Soken of Knyttengilda, reaches from Aldgate with the lands on both
sides the street, even unto the outer Bar. On the South side it reaches
toward the Thames; joining with the Soken within the Bar, 66. foot of Saint
Paul. On the North it goes within the Bar 16. foot of St. Paul. The Soken
also extends toward Bishopsgate, even unto the house belonging sometimes
unto William the Priest, and after unto Geffrey Tannar, together with all
Smithfield, and so far into the Thames as a horseman at low water riding upon
his Super dextrarium his Horse of service, or great Horse.
Destrier into the River could dart his Lance from him; together with the right
hand part of the street, which goes by Doddings pond to the Thames. But as for
that on the left hand, it is not of that Soken; but yet in the Parish of Saint
Botolphs.

More, concerning the Tower Ditch before mentioned; and of the enclosing the
whole City of London with a Ditch.
Whilst King Richard in his return from Jerusalem, Out of Book Dunthorn fol.
82.
was kept prisoner by the Emperor of Almayne, there sell out a dissension
betwixt Earl John the Kings Brother, and the Bishop of Ely, Lord Chief
Justice of England: whereupon, the Bishop thought good to fortify the Kings
The Tower.
Castle, which the Earl at that time provided to beleager. It seemed good to
the Bishop therefore, to encompasse in the whole Bulwark, with a wall of a
most wonderful thickness, and to make a broad and deep Ditch about that,
which the Thames flowing into, the whole Tower might both be encompassed and
fortified by it. Upon occasion therefore of this Ditch, which was then made in
Smithfield; and by reason of that other Ditch, which the Citizens for the same
cause then began to make round about their City: did the Church of the Holy
Trinity lose half a Mark of yearly revenew; and the Mill also belonging unto
the poor of the Hospital of Aldgate was taken away. Whereupon there accrewed
no small damage both unto This is a Character of the antiquity of this writing,
and also that it was done either by the Parson, or some of the Parishioners of
Trinity Parish.
us, and to those poor people: for which, though recompense has been often
promised, yet have we hitherto received no satisfaction.

More concerning this matter, out of a french Record in Book H. folio 199. and
in Book Dunthorne, folio 88. Which is a desire of the Master of Saint
Katherines Hospital, to have leave of the City to enclose a certain piece of
ground near the Tower of London.
It was told unto the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty, how that John
Hermesthorpe, Master of Saint Katherines Hospital, by the Tower of London, had
a certain piece of Land, which had somewhile been a portion of the Garden of
his Hospital; which portion King Edward, son to King Henry, had purchased of
those of the said Hospital, for the enlargement of the Tower Ditch; for which
he paid unto the Master, Brothers, and Sisters of the said Hospital, 3. li.
13. s. 4. d. yearly for ever: and that the said Hospital had received the
said Rent ever since the time of the Purchase. This place indeed, had
heretofore lain void and waste, and had been of no profit to any; serving
only for a resort or meeting place of Rogues and Women of ill conversation.
For the restraining of which naughtiness and pilferies, the said John had
again purchased it of King Edward the third, of whom he had received license
to enclose the said void piece for the benefit of his Hospital: he paying to
the King and his Heirs, into their Exchequer, vj. s. viij. d. for ever. By
virtue of which License, the said Master had already begun to enclose the
said void Plat of ground. This the Mayor, etc. hearing of, sent to forbid the
enclosure of; affirming, that the said Plat belonged unto the Commonalty of the
City of London: whereupon the Master forbear to proceed further for six or
eight years together.

At the end of this term, the said Master made sure unto the Mayor and
Commonalty, that they would please to give him leave to enclose the said place,
were it but only to prevent and take away the Villainies which he affirmed to
be there committed: for which courtesy he then promised, that himself, and
all the Brothers and Sisters of the said Hospital, would particularly, and in
especial manner, pray for the good estate of the City; and be willing moreover
to pay some small yearly Rent unto the Chamber of Guihald, London, for ever.
To this suit the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty consented: and further made
choice of some certain Aldermen and Commoners, who should take a view of this,
and other void places belonging to the City, and make report to them, etc.

To prove that the Hospital of Saint Katherines, with the Mils, and all that
belong to it, together with the Tower Ditch, all East-Smithfield without the
Posterne, before the Abbey of Grace, with the right hand part of the street
leading along by Duddings Pond, are, and time out of mind have been within
the Liberty of the City of London, and parcel of Portsoken Ward without
Algate, in the Suburbs. I find two several Copies of this: one in Book
Dunthorne, fol. 80. and another in Book K. fol. 56.

The Mayor and Commonalty of the City of London affirm, that in the time of
the Conqueror, and long before, the said Ward of Portsoken, was called the
Ward of Anglish Knightgilden. And that afterward, about the eighth of King
Henry the first, Ralfe the son of Algode, Wolfard le Deverish, Otgar le
Prude, with diverse other substantial Citizens of London, descended of the
ancient race of the English Knights, being Lords of the Liberty of the said
Guild, in the Soken aforesaid, and were seized of all the Lands in the said
Soken (as by the Charter of the said King Henry it appears) did bequeath the
said Soken and Lands, unto the Church and Canons of the Holy Tinity, within
Algate, London. Which gift the said K. Henry, by his Charter (which the Mayor
and Commonalty have here to show) also confirmed. Upon pretext of which Gift
and Confirmation, Norman, at that time Prior, and the Covent of the Church
aforesaid, as also their Successors, stood a long time possessed. Afterward,
among other things, Ralfe the Prior, with the Canons of the said Church, did
grant unto Maud Queen of England, Wife to King Stephen, a certain parcel of
Land in the said Soken (the very same, namely, upon which the said Hospital of
Saint Katherines is now founded) together with all the Mill there in the In
Escambio.
Shambles, in lieu of six yard land in the Manor of Bracching, in the County
of Hertford: even as by two Patents of the said King and Queen made upon that
occasion, it manifestly is declared. Moreover they affirm, That whereas the
Lord Edward the first, sometimes King of England, had not any piece of ground
of his own proper Lands near enough unto his Tower of London, whereupon to
build up his Wall, and to make his Ditch about the Tower, which he purposed to
do a new; he purchased of the Master, Brethren, and Sisters of the Hospital
of Saint Katherines by the Tower aforesaid, a certain Plat of ground with the
appurtenances in East Smithfield, adjoining unto the Tower, both for the laying
of the Sand, Gravel, and Marle, which should be dug out of the Ditch, and
that which should serve for the repairing of the Wall aforesaid. And that he
paid unto the Master, Brothers, and Sisters aforesaid, five Marks, six
shillings and nine pence, both for the purchase of the said Plat, and the
recompense of their loss long since sustained, by the enlargement of the
Ditch, and reparation of the Wall aforesaid: which he caused for himself and
his Successors to be yearly payable out of the Exchequer. Which five Marks
six shillings nine pence, the Masters, Brothers, and Sisters (for the time
being) of the said Hospital, have ever since the said Grant received, and do
actually at this present receive it by virtue of the said Patent, which they
now have by them, etc. the Copy whereof was entered upon Record in the Chamber
of This is several times written Gin^ald.
Guildhall; and acknowledged by them before Nicholas Brembre, then Mayor, and
the Aldermen. They affirm also, that in the fourteenth year of King Edward
the second, at such time as he held Assizes in the said Tower; it was proved,
that the said Ward of Portsoken, (heretofore called English Knightgeld) was in
and of the Liberties of London; and that, so often as any Tax was to be
raised for the King, or to be assessed for the Commonalty of London, upon the
Commoners of the said City, or that any other Assessement was to be made by
the said Commonalty, either for the raising of some Wall, making of any
enclosure, or for the defense of the City: that all the people inhabiting the
said Ward, were accustomed to pay the said Taxes, like other Freemen of the
City; and the said Assessements were wont to be levied upon them, as upon
other Freemen of the City, like as by the Transcript of the Rolls of the said
In (...).
Assizes of the Kings, now remaining in the Treasury of the Guildhall of the
same City, most clearly it appears.

They further affirm, that the Lord Edward the third, late King of England,
Progenitor of our Lord the King that now is, in the seventeenth year of his
Reign, directed by his Per (...) suum.
Letter unto John Hamond, at that time Mayor of his City of London, and his
Majesty's Escheator in the same: in which Letters he made rehearsal of all the
former business concerning the Wall and Ditch of the Tower, made in his
Grandfathers time. He rehearsed also, how Ralfe of Sandwich, and John de
Weston, late Constables of the Tower, did let out the same place by parcels
unto diverse men, without leave or license had therefore, either from the Kings
his Grandfather, Fathers, or Himself; and that the said place was then
builded upon, East Smithfield builded upon.
and rented out for 40. s. a year, and that himself had given out Commissions
to enquire upon the reasons, manner, right, and value of every thing, etc. And
that the said John Hamond making enquiry hereupon, made return of all into the
Chancery, etc.

They affirm moreover, that all the Lands and Tenants, upon the foresaid right
hand of the way by Duddings Pond, and about the said places of East Smithfield,
Tower Hill, and Romeland, circularly situated, were and have been in the time
of the holding the Assizes of the said King, impleaded and sued within the said
City, and not elsewhere; as by the evidences of the said Lands and Tenants,
upon Record enrolled in the Guildhall, etc. appears.

They further say, That in the times of all the former Kings and Assizes (time
out of mind) so often as any mis-hap or casualty, such as Murder, Drowning,
or other indirect death of any person, in any of the places forementioned, has
fallen out, upon which there was any enquiry to be taken, or any Summons,
Attachment, or Execution to be made in any of the said places: yea, and which
more is, even within the Tower it self, and at such time as the King (now and
then) has been present, have the Sheriffs, Coroners, and other Officers of
the said City of London for the time being, and no other, used to make such
Quests of Enquiry, Summons, Attachments, and Executions, and had right so to
do: as it is most manifestly to be proved by diverse Rolls of the Crown, and
other Records of the times aforesaid, now being in the said Treasury.

They say moreover, that amongst other Liberties granted by the Kings
Predecessors unto the Citizens of London, and ratified in diverse Parliaments,
this expressly is one, That no Arrest, Attachment, or Execution, be made by
any Officers of the Kings within the said Liberty, either by Writ or without
Writ, but only by the Officers of the City. By all which Charters, Letters,
Patents, Bills, Acts of Assize, Writs, Enquests, Returns, Rolls of the
Escheators, and Crown Office, Assizes, Pleadings, Enrollments, Freedoms, and
most plentiful other kinds of Records and Proofs, it may easily and
undoubtedly be concluded, That the said Hospital of Saint Katherines, with the
Mills and other its appurtenances, as also the whole Tower Ditch, with all the
Lands of East Smithfield without the Posterne, before the Abbey of Grace,
together with the right side of the street going by Duddings Pond, as also the
whole Ditch and Plain without the Tower, within the Posterne, called Romeland,
with all the Houses and Gardens round about them, have all the time aforesaid,
bin within the compass of the Liberty of the City.

The self same Copy of what is last above, is something differently recorded
also in Book Dunthorne, fol. 84. the different points whereof, not mentioned
in this former, I have transcribed.

That the Hospital, Ditch, and the Tower hill, are of the Parish of Saint
Botolphs Algate, and parcel of Portsoken Ward. That another part, by Romeland
and the Thames, toward the Posterne, by Saint Katherines Hospital, were of
the Parish of Alhallowes Berking, and of the Ward of the Tower of London. That
Queen Maud was the Foundresse of Trinity Church within Algate; that the Ditch
begun by the Citizens in Richard the firsts time, was for the defense of the
City. That there is another Soken within the Walls of the City, called the
Inner Soken, Inner Soken*
which reaches from Algate, even unto that gate of the Tower called
Cuninggate, perchance, or the Kings gate.
Cinigate; which Soken is within the Liberties of the City, as by some Records
kept by the Prior does appear. That the Inhabitants of Portsoken and the
Tower, are to be impleaded only in the Courts of the City, for all Matters,
Causes, and Contracts howsoever arising. That the Tower has no proper Court of
its own, but only the Court of the Baron, which is no Court of Record; as by
Records exemplified in the Kings Bench it appears. That when any murder or
drowning has been within the said Hospital or Tower, the City Officers have
attached the Malefactors within the Tower, notwithstanding that the King
himself sometimes happened to be present within the said Tower, and have carried
the said men so arrested into some of the Kings Prisons within the City. That
when the Justices Itinerant have used to come to keep Assizes in the Tower,
the Officers of the City have had the keeping both of the inner and outer Gates
of the said Tower; and that nothing was executed within the Tower, which
pertained to the office of a Sergeant perchance
servant, but by the servants of the City. That the Sheriff of London has had
the charge of all the Prisons in the Tower, so often as the said Justices
itinerant have comne thither: as appears in many Rolls of Pleas of the Crown,
and of the said Itinerant Justices.

By another short Record in the said Dunthorne, Refer all this concerning the
privilege or the City within the Tower, unto page 125.
fol. 85. it is specified, That if any were murdered within the Tower, or
drowned in the Tower Ditch, or in the Gate, called The Water Gate, that
notwithstanding the King himself were there present, yet have the City
Sheriff and Coroner sitten upon the dead body, and empanelled their Iuries.

The Letter or Commission of King Edward, unto John Hamond Mayor of London,
before mentioned, is to be seen in Dunthorne, fol. 87. It Is dated at
Westminst. Octo. 21. in the 17. year of his Reign over England, and over
France the 4. The L. Majors return of the Inquisition is also there recorded.

Of the founding of Trinity Church within Aldgate, and of the beginning of the
Canons Regular, and Augustine Friars in ENGLAND.
Insert this in page 145.
IN the year of Christ 1108. and in the eighth year of King Henry, Out of
Book C. in Guildhall folio 135. and Dunthorne, fol. 79.
was the Church of the holy Trinity, within Aldgate, London, founded by the
Venerable Lady, Maud, Wife unto the said King, by the persuasion of Archbishop
Anselme. It was given unto Norman, who became the first Prior not only there,
and first Canon Regular of the whole Kingdom. For by him was all England
(says my Record) adorned with the Rule of Saint Augustine, and the Canonical
habit of that Order. Which Order, by the gathering together of many Friars into
that Church, was the number of those that praised God day and night so much
increased, that the whole City was much delighted with the sight of it.
Insomuch, that in the year of our Lord, 1125. certain Burgesses of the City,
descended of the ancient race of the English Knights; by name, Ralfe the son
of Algode, Wolsard le Deverish, Orgar le Prude, Edward Vp^^^^hill, Blacstan,
and his Cousin Alwin, Alwis and Robert his brother, sons of Leostan, Leostan
the Goldsmith, and Wyz^ his son, Hugh the son of Wolgare, Algar Secusenne,
Orgar the son of Dereman, Osbert Drinchepyn, and Adelardus Hornpite, meeting
together in the Chapter of the Church of Christ, which is situated within the
Walls of the City near Aldgate, freely gave unto the said Church, and unto the
Canons serving God, all that Land and Soken, which was called Anglish
Cnithgilda, which lies by the wall of the City without Aldgate, and reaches
into the Thames. They gave it, I say, themselves becoming Friars, and
partaking of the benefits of that place, by the hand of Norman the Prior, who
received them into the Society, as he had done others before them; by an oath
taken upon the Text of the Gospel.

And to the intent that this gift of theirs might stand firm and unchangable;
they surrendered up (among other Writings which they had for it) the Charter of
St. Edward. After which, they gave the Prior seisin and possession of the said
Land, by That is, by giving him entrance and possession into the Church of St.
Botolphs; which was the head, or (as it were) the Capita^ Message of the
Manor.
the Church of Saint Botolph which had been builded upon the same, and was the
head of it. All this was done before these Witnesses, Bernard, Prior of
Dunstaple, John Prior of Landa, and diverse others French and English people.
The said Donors hereupon, sent one of their own Company (Ordgar le Prude by
name) unto King Henry, with their petition, that he would be pleased to give
his consent and confirmation to their said gift; Whereupon, the King very
willingly allowed the said Land and Soken unto the Church; and to be free and
acquitted from all service to himself, as franck Alms ought to be: which he
thus confirmed by his Charter.

Henry King of England, to R. Bishop of London, and to the Sheriff Et Vice.
comiti and Praeposito.
and Provost, and to all the Barons, and to his Liege people both French and
English, both of London and Middlesex greeting.

Know ye that I have granted and confirmed unto the Church and Canons of the
Holy Trinity, London, the Soken of the English Cnittengilda, with the Lands
which belong unto it, and the Church of Saint Botolphs, even as the Homines.
Lords of the same Guild have given and granted it. And I will, and firmly do
command, that they may well and honorably Honorisice
and freely hold it; together with Sak and Sok, and Toll, and Thea, and
Infangtheof, and all other their old customs; like as the men of it in the
best manner did, in the times of King Edward, and like as King William my
Father, and my Brother, by their Charters granted it unto them. Witness A. the
Queen, and Geffrey the Chancellor, and Geffrey de Clinton, and William de
Clinton, at Wdestocke. The King also sent his Sheriffs; namely, Albric de
Veer, and Roger Nephew of Or Hubert.
Herbert; which, for his part, should invest the Church in the said possession.

More, concerning the same matter; and of the restoring to the Church of a
little piece of Land, encroached upon by the Constables of the Tower.

Stephen King of England, to the Bishop of London, and to the Justices,
Sheriffs, Barons, Officers, and all his Fidelibus.
Liege people of London, French and English, greeting. Know ye, that I have
restored and new granted unto God and the Church of the Holy Trinity, London,
and to the Canons Regulars serving God there, for the soul of King Henry, and
for the salvation of my self and Queen Maud my wife, and Eustace my Son, and
of other my Children, and for ever do restore and grant, that Land of theirs
in East Smithfield.
Smithfield, which Earl Geffrey had in his occupation for the making of his
Vineyard. Wherefore I will, and hereby firmly do command; that they shall
well and peaceably, freely, quietly and honorably, have and hold the Land
aforesaid: even as after the best manner they did freely and quietly enjoy
other their Lands: and even as King Henry had before granted, and by his
Charter confirmed it unto them. Witness Maud the Queen, Thomas my Chaplain,
William de Ipra, and Richard de Lucye, at London.

At the same time did Earl Geffrey resign up his possession, as by this his
Deed appears.

Geffrey Earl of Essex, principal Constable of the Tower, etc. to the Bishop
of London, Fidelibus Ecclesiae.
and all that hold of holy Church, greeting. Know ye that I have restored unto
the Church of Christ in London, and to the Friars there, their Mills near unto
the Tower, and all their land without the Tower; belonging sometimes unto the
English Cnittengilda; with Smithfield, and the Hominibus.
tenants, and all other things belonging thereunto. I also restore unto them
half a hide of land Hidam de terrae de Brebelegia.
of Brebelegia, with the Land and meadows and pastures, and all other things,
liberties and customs; as William Widois sometimes gave it unto them, when as
he took the habit of a Canon Regular upon him. And I will and command, that
they hold the said Lands from me and from mine heirs, free, cleared, and
acquitted, from all claim and secular service. That is to say, in such manner
as it shall never be lawful either for me or for mine heirs to do them any
injury or contumely in consideration of the Lands aforesaid. Witness, R. In
the Transcript taken out of the Original, which I used: I find her written
Rosha, with a dash, ignorantly; so that I know not what to make of (...).
the Countess my wife, Gregory Draper, Pain of the Temple, etc.

And I also give unto them one Mark of silver, out of the service of Edward de
Sekegeford. Witness those abovenamed, and William Archdeacon of London.

King Stephen also restored something unto the said Church; as by this
following Charter appears; which the Constables of the Tower had encreached.
This was done after the lands were proved by oath to belong to the Church,
before the Kings Chief Justice.

Stephen King of England, to the Bishop of London, the Justices, Sheriffs,
Barons, Officers, and all his Liege people, both French and English, of the
County of Hertford, greeting. Know ye that I have given and granted unto the
Church of the Holy Trinity, and to the Canons serving God there, T. S. of Land
in the Manor of Bracking in perpetual alms; for the rest of the souls, that
is to say, of Baldwin my son, and Maud my Daughter, which lie buried there. I
have further also given and granted unto the said Church and Canons six yeards
of Land in the same Manor of Bracking; for the Pro escaembio.
exchange of their Mil and that plat of their ground, which they heretofore
granted unto Queen Maud my wife, near unto the Tower of London; upon which
she has now founded an Hospital St. Katharines.
for the poor. Those six yeards of Land, I mean, which I still kept in mine
own Dominico meo.
demaines, after I had made partition of the other parcels of the said Manor:
that is to say, that part upon which the Church is founded, and unto which, the
Market belongs. Wherefore I will, and firmly hereby command, that the said
Church and Canons shall well, peaceably, freely, and honorably for ever
possess the said Lands, acquitted from all secular exaction, as it becomes
free Alms. That is to say, my demaines with Sak, and Sok, and Toll, and Thea,
and Infangtheof, with all such other customs, as they now hold other their
possessions. Witness Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert B. of London,
Robert B. of Hereford, and Robert B. of Excester, and I^ard B. of Chichester,
and William B. of Norwich, and Maud my Queen, and Earl Eustace my son, and
William (...), and Robert de Veer, and William Mart, Henry de Essex, and
Richard de Lucye.

Then next follows Queen Mands confirmation of the Kings gift; dated at
London, under the same Witnesses, where the same things are repeated.

Other things given by Queen Maud, to the same Church.
Maud by the grace of God Queen of English, Out of Book, C. fol. 136.
to Robert Bishop of London, and to all that hold on holy Church, greeting.
Know ye that (...) the counsel of the Archbishop Anse^me, and by the grant
and confirmation of my Lord King Henry, I have given and confirmed the Church
of Christ within the Walls of London, to be free and acquitted from all
subjection, as well of the Church of To understand this, see page 145.
Waltham, as of all other Churches, excepting the Church of S. Paul, and of the
Bishop of London; together with all the appurtenances, unto the honor of God
and to the Canons Regular there serving God with Norman the Prior, for ever;
and that for the redemption of our souls, and the souls of our Parents. In
like manner have I given unto them, the gate called Aldgate, with the Soken
thereunto belonging, which was mine own demaines; and two parts of the
revenues of the City of Excester. And I will and command that the said Canons
shall well, peaceably, freely, and honorably possess those Lands and all
belonging unto their Church; together with those customs and liberties, which
my Lord King Henry has by his Charter confirmed unto them; so that no injury
or reproach be therefore done unto them. Witness William Bishop of
Winchester, Roger Bishop of Sarum, Robert Bishop of Lincoln, etc. Dated at
Westminster.

Notes upon the foresaid Charters.
First, observe the time of the building of Saint Botolphs Church without
Aldgate, which was about the age of the Conqueror. So much we know by this;
that it was builded betwixt the time of Canutus, and Henry the firs;t. Add
this to page 118.

Secondly, whereas the Kings write to the Barons of London; know what Matthew
Paris in his Henry the third says, that the Citizens of London, both for their
antiquity and the honor of the City, were called Barons. But they were only
the principal Citizens that had this title. The chief men of the City, whom
we now call Barons, were heretofore styled Captains. They were the Kings Free
Tenants, privileged all over England. Sometimes the Kings Writs were directed
to the Sheriff and Barons of London. The Church also had its Barons or Free
Tenants; and diverse other Cities of England. See for this word, in Sir Henry
Spelmans Glossary.

Thirdly, observe London and Middlesex to be in those days joined together, as
in King Henry's Charter.

Of the setting up of the Stone Conduit by the Stocks. To be inserted page
244. after the fifth line. Not^s of Survey taken out of Acts of Common
Council, holden in the City.

AT a Common Council held on Tuesday, November 27. in the first year of King
Henry the 8. was this patition preferred, and granted. To the Right Honorable
Lord the Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen, and to the discreet persons of
the Common Council of this City of London.

Beseeching your good Lordship and Masterships, the Inhabitants dwelling about
the Stocks, that by the space of five or six years past, a vent of water
has run by a Pipe of Lead beside the Stocks; which pipe of Lead by reason
that it is not closed, is daily hurt with Horses and Carts. It may therefore
please your good Lordship and Masterships, and all our Masters of the Common
Council, to grant and give license unto the said Inhabitants, upon their own
proper costs and charges to make or cause to be made, a little Posterne of
Stone with a Cesterne of lead therein: so that the said water shall be therein
preserved and conveyed: and so to be drawn out by Cocks, to the Common weal
of all the said Inhabitants thereabout dwelling. Thus at the reverence of God,
and in the way of charity.

This is the Posterne now presently there standing over against the South-East.

A Note concerning Bretaske lane in Downegate Ward. To be inserted page 253.
Col. second, after, Edward the fourth.
AT a Common Council holden December 11. Anno 3. of Henry the 8. A Bill was
exhibited at this Court by the Wardens of the Dyers Company; whereby they
claimed a lane in the Ward of Downegate, called Bretaske lane, to be their
several ground. For this, a search was made in the Books and Records of the
City; by which it appeared, that the said lane was the common Lane of the City,
and not several to them. And so they were answered by the Court.

Concerning Blackwell Hall; An Act of Common Council held August the first, in
the 8. of Henry 8. To be inserted Page 129. Col. 1. after these words: This
house (of late years)
WHereas by an Act of Common Council, in the 22. year of the reign of King
Richard the second, it was ordained and established, that no manner of person
should bring or conveigh any Woollen Clothes to the said City to be sold,
except they were first brought, harbored, and discharged at the Common Market
of Blackwell hall, therefore ordained and provided, and of old time accustomed,
upon pain of forfeiture of all the said Clothes so harbored and laid,
contrary to the said Ordinance; which Act and Ordinance, was by another Act of
Common Council holden at the Guild hall aforesaid, the day and year
abovesaid, ratified, approved, and confirmed. And over that, it is now at this
present ordained, established, and enacted, that no manner of person being
Freeman of this City, after the Feast of the Nativity of our Lady next coming,
suffer any manner of person whatsoever, be he free or foreign, to buy or
sell any manner of Woollen Clothes harbored or lodged contrary to the said
Ordinance: As broad Clothes, Carsies, Cottons, Bridgewater Frizes, Dosseins, or
any other manner of Cloth made of Wool, within his Shop, Chamber, or other
place within his house, unless the said Clothes were first brought to
Blackwell hall aforesaid, and there bought and sold. Or else the said Freeman,
the said Clothes lawfully bought in the Country out of the said City, upon
pain to forfeit and to pay to the use of the Commonalty of this City; for his
first offense, for every Broad-Cloth so sold, harbored, or lodged, contrary to
the said Ordinance, vj. s. viij. d. for every Carsie iij. s. iiij. d. for every
Dosseine, Bridgewaters, and other pieces of Cloth made of Wool, xx. d. And for
the second offense, the said pains to be doubled: and for the third offense,
the party so offending to be disfranchised and deprived clearly from the
Liberties of this City for ever.

Of the enlargement of the Crossed Friars Church.
AT the Common Council, the day and year above mentioned, was there an Act
passed for the grant unto the Prior and Covent of the Crossed Friars, besides
the Tower of London (to the intent that they should pray for the good estate of
the City) of the common ground of the said City, for the enlargement of their
Church, viz. in breadth from the East end of their Church, from the maine Wall
thereof on the North part, into the high street there, five foot of Assise; and
at the West end of their Church, in breadth four foot and a half, stretching
in length from the East part to the West part, seven score and eight foot and
an half.

Afterward, at a Common Council holden on Tuesday, September 25. Anno 12. of
Henry 8. the said Prior and Covent petitioned for succor toward the edifying
and maintenance of their new Church, and to take upon them and the whole City
to be their second Founders. Whereupon it was agreed, that several
exhortations should be made in Writing to every Fellowship in London, to see
what they would do of their devotions toward the same; and such sums to be
certified to the Mayor and Aldermen, to the intent it may be known to what it
will amount.

Of the Conduit of Saint Giles Creplegate. To be inserted page 319.
AT a Common Council held April, the same year, it was agreed, that the
Chamberlain should, at the costs of the Chamber, cause the common Well and
Spring at Saint Giles, to be covered with a house of Brick.

Something to be added to page 281. concerning Saint Thomas of Acons in
West-Cheape.
TVesday, April 27. Anno 10. of Henry the 8. it was granted unto the Master
and his Brethren of the Hospital of Saint Thomas of Acon, in West-Cheape,
where Thomas Becket.
Saint Thomas the Martyr was borne, because they wanted room in the said
Hospital, that for their more ease they might make a Gallery in convenient
height and breadth, from their said house overthwart the street in the Old Jury,
into a certain Garden and Buildings, which the Master and Brethren had then
lately purchased. So as the said Gallery should be of such height, as should
not annoy Man, Horse, nor Cart. And to make a Window on either side of the said
Gallery, and therein yearly in the Winter to have a sufficient Light for the
comfort of them that pass that way.

Of Leaden Hall. To be inserted page 206. Column 2. after Chamber of London.
AT a Common Council, holden September 28. Anno 10. Henry 8. was there a
Petition exhibited, to the Right Honorable the Mayor, and his Worshipful
Brethren the Aldermen, and to the discreet Commoners in this Common Council
assembled.

Meekely beseeching and showing unto your Lordship and Masterships, diverse and
many Citizens of this City, which with your favors under correction think,
that the great place called Leaden Hall, should nor ought not to be letten to
farm to any person or person; and in especial, to any Fellowship or Company
incorporate, to have and to hold the same Hall for term of years; for such
inconveniences as may thereby ensue and come, to the hurt of the Common weal
of the same City in time to come. As somewhat more largely may appear in the
Articles hereafter following.

1 If any Assembly or hasty gathering of the Commons of the said City, The uses
of Leaden Hall.
for oppressing or subduing of mis-ruled people within the said City, hereafter
shall happen to be called or commanded by the Mayor, etc. there is none so
convenient, meet, and necessary place to assemble them in within the said City,
as the said Leaden Hall; both for largeness of room, and for their City
defense in time of their counselling together about the Premises. Also in that
place has been used the Artillery, Gunnes, and other common Armors of the
said City, safely to be kept in a readiness for the safeguard, wealth, and
defense of the City, to be had and occupied at times when need required. And
also, the Store of Timber for the necessary reparations of the Tenements
belonging to the Chamber of the said City, there commonly has been kept.

2 Item, if any Triumph or Noblesse were to be done or showed by the
Commonalty of this City for the honor of our Sovereign Lord the King, or
Realm, and for the Worship of the said City, the same Leaden Hall is a most
meet place to prepare and order the same Triumph therein, and from thence to
issue forth to the places thereto appointed.

3 Item, at every Largess or Dole of Money made unto the poor people of this
City, by or after the death of any Worshipful person within the said City, it
has been used to be done and given in the said Leaden hall, for that the
said place is most meet therefore.

4 Item, the honorable Father that was maker of the said Hall, had a special
intent, will, and mind (as it is commonly said) that the Market men and women
that came to the City with Victual and other things, should have their free
standing within the said Leaden hall in wet weather, to keep themselves and
their Wares dry, and thereby to encourage them and all other to have the better
will and desire, the more plenteously to resort to the said City to Victuale
the same. And if the said Hall should be letten to farm, the Will of the said
Honorable Father should never be fulfilled nor take effect.

5 Item, if the said place (which is the chief Fortress, and most necessary
place within all this City, for the tuition and safeguard of the same) should be
letten to farm out of the hands of the chief heads of the same City, and
especially to another body politic, it might at length (by likelihood) be the
occasion of discord and debate, between the said bodies politic, which God
defend, etc.

For these and many other great and reasonable causes, which hereafter shall be
showed to this honorable Court, your said beseechers think much necessary,
that the said Hall be still in the hands of the City, and to be surely kept by
discreet and sad Officers: in such wise that it may always be ready to be used
and occupied for the common Weal of the said City, when need shall require,
and in no case to be letten out to any body Politic.

This Petition was granted.

Of the new Seal of the Bridge-house.
AT a Common Council, July 14. Anno 33. Henry 8. It was ordered that the Seal
of the Bridge-house should be changed, because the Image of Thomas Becket,
sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury was graven therein. And a new Seal to be
made, to be devised by Master Hall, to whom the old Seal was delivered.

Note, This was occasioned by a Proclamation, which commanded the names of the
Pope and Thomas of Becket to be put out of all Books and Monuments; which is
the reason that you shall see them so blotted out, in all old Chronicles,
Legends, Primers, and Service books printed before those times.

Of the privilege of Saint Bartholomewes Hospital. To be inserted, Page 345.
AT a Common Council, Tuesday July 19. 33. Henry 8. The most gracious Letters
Patents of King Edward the second, made and granted to S. Bartholomewes
Hospital in Smithfield, were allowed; for and concerning such Privileges as
they do claim thereby at this present time. Which is, that none of the
Officers or Ministers of the City, should do or execute any Arrest within the
Precinct of the said Hospital, and that the Arrest made by Underhill (one of
my Lord Majors Servants) upon Alice Brown, shall be discharged, etc.

Also at a Common Council, August 1. the sixth of Edward the sixth, it was
enacted, that the Lord Mayor and Aldermen should have leave to break down a
piece of the City Wall behind Christ Church, for the making of a door or
passage through the said Wall, for the Governors of the house of the poor, of
the Foundation of King Henry the 8. in West Smithfield, and other Citizens, to
go to and from the same house, unto and from the house ordained by the City
for the relief of the poor, called The house of Work, and Law, etc.
notwithstanding.

Against abuses offered to Paul's. To be inserted Page 371. Col. 2. after To
his Will.
AT an Act of Common Council, August 1. Anno 1. and 2. of Philip and Mary.
Forasmuch as the Material Temples of God were first ordained for the lawful
and devout assembly of people, there to lift up their hearts, and to laud and
praise Almighty God, and to hear his Divine Service, and most holy Word and
Gospel, sincerely said, sung, and taught, and not to be used as Markets, or
other profane places or thorowfares, with carriage of things. And for that
(now of late years) many of the Inhabitants of the City of London, and other
people repairing thither, have (and yet do) commonly use and accustom
themselves very unseemely and unreverently (the more the pity) to make their
common carriage of great Vessels full of Ale and Beer, great Baskets full of
Bread, Fish, Flesh, and Fruit, and such other things, Fardels of stuff, and
other gross Wares and things, through the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul's: and
some in leading Moyles, Horses, and other Beasts through the same unreverently,
to the great dishonor and displeasure of Almighty God, and the great grief
also and offense of all good people. Be it therefore for remedy and
reformation thereof, ordained, enacted, and established, etc. that no person,
either free or foreign, of what estate or condition soever, do at any time
from henceforth carry or convey, or cause to be carried or conveyed through the
said Cathedral, any manner of great Vessel or Basket with Bread, Ale, Beer,
Fish, Flesh, etc. or any other like thing or things, upon pain of forfeiture
or losing for every such his or their first offense, 3. s. 4. d. for the second
6. s. 8. d. for the third x. s. and for every other offense after such third
time, to forfeit x. s. and to suffer two days and two nights imprisonment,
without Bail or Mainprise. The one moity of all which pains and penalties
shall be to Christ's Hospital within Newgate, and the other half to him that
will sue for the same in any Court of Record within the City, by Bill,
original plaint, or Information, to be commenced or sued in the name of the
Chamberlain of the said City for the time being; wherein none Essoine or wager
of Law for the Defendant, shall be admitted or allowed.

The Abstract of an Act of Common Council, held September 19. in the third and
fourth years of Philip and Mary, for the removing of the Compter Prison out of
Breadstreet into great Woodstreet. To be inserted page 312. or page 395. Col.
1. after Pitiful Prisoners.
BY reason of diverse hindrances, injuries, extremities and displeasures done
unto the poor Prisoners in Breadstreet Compter, by the Keepers of the same,
who hiring the house of the Goldsmiths Company, would not (many times) suffer
the Sheriffs of London (who stand charged with the Prisoners) to use them so
well as they had purposed: whereby the City has been slandered, Law and good
orders broken, and poor Prisoners too much abused. Therefore was the Prison
removed to a house belonging to the City, situate in great Woodstreet, where
the Sheriff and his Officers were to keep their Courts, etc. as they had
before used in Breadstreet. At which time it was also enacted; that the said
Compter in Woodstreet should never hereafter for any cause whatsoever, be
letten out to any other use or person, etc.

The Abstract of an Act of Common Council, the last of February, the second
and third of Philip and Mary, concerning Bridewell. To be inserted Page 436.
Col. 2. after By Queen Mary.
FOr as much as King Edward the sixth had given his house of Bridewell unto the
City, partly for the setting of idle and lewd people to work, and partly for
the lodging and harboring of the poor, sick, weak, and sore people of the
City, and of poor wayfaring people repairing to the same; and had for this
last purpose, given the bedding and furniture of the Savoy to that purpose.
Therefore in consideration that very great charges would be required to the
fitting of the said house, and the buying of Tools and bedding, the money was
ordered to be gotten up among the rich people of the Companies of London, etc.

Leystow by Baynards Castle removed. To be inserted page 405.
AT a Common Council, August 7. the third and fourth of Philip and Mary, it
was agreed at the request of the Earl of Pembroke, that the Cities Leystow
adjoining to his Lordships house, and being noisome to the same, should be
removed. Upon condition, that he should give the City, toward the making of a
new Leystow in another place, 2000. foot of hard stone, to make the Vault and
Wharfe thereof, or else forty Marks in ready Money, to buy the same stone
withal.

Something about Ludgate.
LVdgate Prison, to pay Tithes, Clerks wages, and Church duties, to Saint
Martins Church within Ludgate. Agreed upon by Common Council, March 21. in the
second year of Queen ELIZABETH. Add this to page 372. before these words, The
Monuments here.

Something about Broken wharfe. To be inserted page 403.
AT a Common Council, July 23. the second of Queen Elizabeth, order was
taken, that out of a certain void space of ground at Broken Wharfe, there
should be 33. foot enclosed and laid to the Cities Brewhouse; which was to
have a substantial pale about it, to keep the Cities Fuel, and other goods,
etc.

Of the opening of a Lane in Downegate Ward.
Whereas certain private persons had wrongfully set up a door at the end of
(...) Lane, in Downegate Ward, and had converted it to their private use, it
was order May 28. Anno fourth of Elizabeth, that the City Chamberlain should
take down the door, and leave the Lane common, like other streets in the City.

Something to be inserted page 217. Col. 2. after Royal Exchange.
BEfore the building of the Exchange, it was by diverse Common Counsels, about
the 26. year of Henry the 8. consulted upon, whether there should be a Bursle
or convenient place of meeting, for Merchants to treat of their feat of
Merchandise. The same year, the King sent his Letters to the City, for the
making of a new Bursse at Leaden Hall. Whereupon it being put to hands, whether
the new Bursse should be removed out of Lumbardstreet: it was agreed, that it
should not. So that the Merchants meeting continued there, till the Royal
Exchange was builded.

Something of Queenhith. To be inserted page 402. Col. 2. after Edward the
third.
THese were the impositions, and the occasions of them. This Romeland, being
annoyed with Dung, Filth, etc. so as the Sellers of Corn and Victual there,
could not stand to sell their commodities as formerly they had done: it was
ordered by a Common Council, Anno 41. of King Edward 3. That the place should
forthwith be made clean and paved. And that from thenceforth toward the
perpetual cleansing and reparation thereof, there should be taken for every
quarter of Corn of what kind soever, there sold or coming, a Farthing; for
every quarter of Salt, a Farthing; for every Vessel called a Battle, bringing
Rushes, four pence; for every Vessel called a Shout, bringing Corn or Malt,
two pence; for every Ship bringing other Victual, two pence; and of every
person daying Soil there, two shillings; and the Seller of Rushes to pay for
every boat of Rushes, four pence.

Something concerning the Jurisdiction of the River of Thames. To be inserted
page 26. Col. 2. after these words, And the like Sessions kept there for the
same purpose. To my Honorable Friend Sir HENRY MARTEN, Knight, Judge of the
High Court of the Admiralty.
SIR, his Majesty understanding that there is a second Edition of Stowes Survey
of the City of London, new put to sale, wherein there are some passages
prejudicial to his Majesty's right in his Admiralty and Derogatory to the just
power belonging thereunto. He does therefore require you his Judge in that High
Court to examine the said Book, and to cause the said passages inserted in
prejudice of the Admiral Jurisdiction, and in support of any other pretense
against the same to be left out, or else to prohibit the publishing and sale of
the said Book. And for so doing this signification of his Majesty's pleasure
may be your sufficient Warrant. So I rest

Garlic Hith 21. December, 1633. Your assured Friend to serve you John Coke.
Further execution of the Letter abovementioned could not be made, for that
it came after the impression was finished and published.

Henry Marten.



To the Master and Wardens of the Company of Stationers.
YOu may understand by the contents of the Letter abovementioned, directed
unto me what is required at my hands to perform. I am therefore to require you
upon your receipt hereof, forthwith to cause the Book to be brought unto you,
and to take order that all the words together with the copy of the Letter, and
my answer thereunto, as above made for this impression to be imprinted page
939. Col. prima, verbatim in all the said Books, as well sold as hereafter to
be sold, before any further sale of the said Books be made; and this shall be
your Warrant in this behalf.

Doct. Commons `24. December, 1633. Henry Marten.

FINIS.
The first Table Containing all the Ancient and Memorable places, Charitable
and Noble Acts of Citizens, and most Honorable and Worthy Monuments recorded
in this Book; Alphabetically digested: Wherein the Figures refer to the
Page, the Letters to the Column, and the
A
For false Accusation, a Fuller of Shoresditch hanged and quarted. 474 b
Adelstreet took name of King Adelstanes house, standing there. 308 a Admiralty
Court. 454 a Adultery and Fornication, how punished. 207 b * S. Alban, the
first Martyr in England. 308 a * Abbot of Saint Albans Inn. 187 b *
Aldermanbury street, whence so named. 302 b Aldermanry purchased. 335 a
Aldermen Knighted. 237 a * Seven Aldermen died in less than ten months. 585 a
* Aldersgate. 34 b 320 b Aldersgate street. 321 a * Aldgate. 31 b 121 a Vide
Ealdgate. Alhallowes Church in breadstreet suspended. 92 a The charitable Alms
of the Lord Cromwell, etc. 74 a * Of Thomas Sutton. 481 b Of Baptist, Lord
Hicks, Viscount Combden. 960 Of Christopher Tamworth. 766 a Of Sir Paul Pinder.
767 a Of Henry Smith. 794 a 887 b Of Susanna Powell. 794 b Henry the second fed
10000. poor people, and Henry the third 6000. every day for a certain time, 74
b Vide Actions of worthy Citizens. 86. etc. An Almory at Westminster. 525 a The
Widow Allingtons buildings. 480 b * The Allome house at Wapping, with the
proceeding against it. 462. b Amen lane 371 b Anchor lane, anciently called
Palmers. 256. a An Anchorage by little Saint Bartholomewes. 415 b Anne Queen
of England, Wife to Richard the second, her Monument. 508 b Anne wife to
Richard the third, her Monument. 513 a Anne of Cleve, her Monument. 513 a Anne
Wife to King James, her Monument. 814 Anne Wife to Edward Duke of Sommerset,
her Monument. 513 b Anne Countess of Oxford, her Monument. 514 b Anthonies
Pigs. 65 a 190 b * The Apology of the City of London. 691 Instructions for the
Apprentices of the City of London. 688 An Archbishops See at London. 528 a The
Court of Arches kept in Bow Church. 268 b Three Arch-Flamines in England at
London York Cacrleon 211 a


Coat- Armors, Ar^^es of England supported with Angles. 216 a Arms of the City
of London what they be, with the Sword of Saint Paul in the first quarter. 237
a b 646 Seal and Arms of the Baron of London. 339 b The Arms of the twelve
preceding Companies of London 598 The Arms of the ten Companies of Merchants,
611. and of the other Companies following the twelve. 621 Artilery yard. 175 b
* The Artilery Garden founded, Anno 1622. 764 The Kings Artirce in Limestreet.
161 a Arundell house. 489 b Ave-Mary lane. 371 b Church of S. Augustine in the
wall, now quite lost. 166 b * Of Augustine Friars. 185 b * Their beginning. 930
Church of Saint Mary Axe, whence so called. 166
B
BAiliffes of London. 536 a Bakewell, or Blackwell hall sometimes the mansion
house of the Bassings. 298 a b A Market place for woollen Cloth, 299 a See more
concerning this 934 Rich. Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, his Monument. 790
b * The Banner of S. Paul. 57 b The Banner-bearer of the City of London. 57 b
Banqueting houses, like Bankerouts, bearing great show and little worth. 476 a
Banquetings. 673 a Barbican or Burghkenning. 318 b Barkley house. 407 a *
Barnards Inn. 430 b Barons of London. 359 b 933 The Barons slain at Barnet,
buried. 486 a Barrators. 676 a * Bartholomew lane. 183 a Saint Bartholomewes
Hospital, 415 a b. Suppressed, 417 b The privileges thereof, 936 b Priory,
418. Suppressed, 420 a The Archbishop visits the Priory of S. Bartholomewes
with stripes, 418. Bolton the last Prior there, 419 a Bartholomew Fair, 419 a
423 a How the Lord Mayor goes to it, 651 b * The order of Wrestling on S.
Bartholomewes day. 651 b Bassingborne in Cambridge shire 298 b Basing lane, or
Turnebase lane, 264. or the Backhouse. 393 b Bassings-Hall street. 293 Bathe
place. 427 a * Battle Bridge in Southwarke. 459 a Bay Hall. 293 a * Baynards
Castle, 56. Rob. Fitzwater, Lord thereof, banished by King John, and recalled;
by place Banner-bearer to the City of London, 57 Burnt, 59 a King Edw. 4. and
Rich. 3. crowned there, 60. Henry 7. lodged there, ibid. A Soke or Court
belonging thereto, 405 b The Leystow near to it removed. 938 a The Normans
ware no Beards. 45 a Bearehinder lane. 244 b * Bear lane. 137 b Beauchamps
Inn. 238 b Beauments Inn. 405. A Monument of the Beauments. 877 b Thomas
Becket first a Sheriffs Clerk, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Chancellor of England. 86 a Bedford house, anciently the Bishop of Carliles
Inn. 491 Bedlem, 173 a When founded. 542 a Beech lane, and the Abbot of
Ramseys Inn there. 318 b Belins Vrne of Brass set over Belinsgate. 39 b *
Belinsgate, with the Customs thereof, 225. The Bosse of Belinsgate. 226 b The
great Bells at Westminster, 524 a Bow- Bell, 269 a The best ring of six Bells
in England. 213 a * Bellman when first ordained. 585 a Belzetters lane. 144 a
Benbridges Inn. 161 b Bermondsey street, with the Priory of S. Saviors,
called Bermonds Eye, in Southwarke. 459 a Berwards lane. 175 b * Bevis marks:
See Buries. Sir William Billesby his Monument. 783 a Billitar lane: See
Belzetter. Birchin, or rather Birchovers lane. 215 b Bishopsgate. 33 A
Catalogue of the Bishops of London, 367 a * A lineall succession of them, 528 b
* The Bishop of London his Palace. 412 b Black Friars, the original of them,
375 b * A Parliament holden in the Blackfriars, 374 a The liberties and
privileges of the Blackfriars, 375. A Riot committed therein, ibid. The fatal
Vesper, or fall at Blackfriars, 381. b The names of those that were slain
thereby, 386 b Blackfriars church in Holborne, 487 a Their convocation and
removal. ibid. b Bladder street. 337 b 388 b * Blanch Apleton. 160 a Blodwyte,
what. 919 a Bornes: Oldborne, Langborne, Shareborne. 10 b Bordhalepeney, what.
919 b Bosoms Inn, or Blossoms Inn 282 a * Bosse alley. 226 b Bosse lane.
403 b Bow Bell not suffered to be rung late. 269 a Bow lane: See Cordwainer
street. Bowyer-row, from Paul's to Ludgate. 372 a * Breadstreet. 390 a The Mayor
charged for not looking to the assize of Bread, 542 b The Ordinance for the
Assize and weight of Bread, 740. Bread-carts of Stratford at the Bow. 164 b *
Bretaske lane in Downgate. 933 Brickles lane. 255 a Bridewell, King Henry the
8. his house, 62 a How from a Kings Palace, it came to be an house of
correction. 436. 937 b Bridewell Precinct, 312. The Chapel there. 876 a
Bridges, 27. London Bridge first of Timber, ibid. Men went dry-shod under it,
28 a Founded of stone, 28 b A Subsidy granted for the repair of it, 546 b
Burnt, 28 a 29 a 782 Famous actions done on it, 29 The description of it, 30 a
* The Bridgehouse, 459 a The Seal thereof made new, 936 b Westminster Bridge
524 b Fleet Bridge, Old-borne Bridge, Cow Bridge, Horse-^ho^e Bridge. 30
Brigbote, what. 919 b Britains, the first Inhabitants in London, 1. b. What
their ancient Cities were of old, 2 b * Given to gluttony and drunkenness, 5 a
Invaded by the Scots and Picts, 4 a * by the Saxons. 5 a * Britains Burse. 464
b Briton street. 321 a * 330 b * Broad lane. 255 a Broad street. 183 Broken
wharfe. 403 b 938 b * Brokers in Houndsditch, called Aetatis at ramentum, and
Baptizati Iudaei. 122 b Brooks wharfe. 403 b Sir William Bruce, Henry the 8.
his Physician, his Monument. 784 a Bucks head: See Procession at Paul's. The
Duke of Buckinghams Monument. 116 b 817 b Buckles-bury. 246 a 276 a * Budge
row. 264 a * The cause of Stone Building in London. 209 b Burgbote, what. 919 b
Burgebruch, what. 919 b The Citizens of London first called Burgesses, 535 b
Ancient Burgesses of this City became Friars. 930 Burhkenings, or Watch-towers.
62 b Burley house. 405 a * A Persian buried without Christian Burial. 173 a
780 Whittingtons body thrice Buried. 256 a Buries marks. 144 b 156 b A motion
that Butchers should kill no meat within London, 340 a Butchers-hall lane, or
Stinking lane, or Chicklane. 340 a Buttolph lane, 228 b * The Church of Saint
Buttolph without Aldgate when built 933 a
C
Jack Cade entered the City by London bridge. 29 b When Callice was won from
the French, 552 a When lost. 585 b Master Camden Clarenciaux, his Monument. 774
Camera Dianae, near Doctors Commons. 781 * Candlewicke street, whence so
called. 235 a Henry Carey, Baron of Hunsdon, his Monument. 416 b Val. Carey,
Bishop of Exeter, his Monument. 776 a A Monument of the Lord Carletons. 818 Sir
Nowell Caroone, Ambassador for the States of Holland, his Monument. 790 b
Caruage, what. 619 b Castle, a Shoemaker, called the Cock in Westminster. 344
b The Castle Tavern in Cornehill. 209 b * Catteten street. 282 a Cecill house,
493 a Elizabeth Cecill, her Monument, 514 b The Chair of the Kings of
Scotland, brought in by Edward the first, kept in Westminster. 510 b Chancelar,
or Chancery lane. 435 a 487 a Change of the King in Bucklesbury. 44 b The
Old-Change, 46 a. See Exchange. Charing Cross. 495 b In whose Maioraltie K.
Charles began his reign. 597 a Charles Earl of Lenox his Monument. 513 a *
Ancient Charters concerning the Priory of the holy Trinity. 931 a * The Charter
of London confirmed by diverse Kings. 739 Charterhouse, the first foundation,
477 b The Monuments there, 478 b Afterward bought by M. Sutton, and made an
Hospital. 479, etc. Gessery Chaucer, his Monument. 517 a * The Cheapnesse of
Flesmeat in former times. 206 a 548 a Cheapeside a Market place. 278 b The
Standard in Cheapside, 278. Executions done there, 279 a * The Cross in
Cheapside indicted, and the Images broken, 279 b. Iusts and Tournaments in
Cheape-side, 280 b * A fair paved way found fifteen foot deep in Cheapside,
390 b Goldsmiths Row there, 391 a * Chelsey College, the true reason of the
first foundation, with many worthy m^tives to stir up the charity of good
Christians toward it. 527 Chequer Alley, anciently Bash-lane. 249 a Chewying,
what. 919 b * Chicke lane. 130 b Chicken lane. 420 b (...) Childwyte what. 919
a Christ's Church, anciently the Gray Friars, with the annexion of S.
Bartholomewes Hospital, and the revenues of the Officers: The Mayor of London
Parson thereof. 341 b Christ's Hospital, the erection
thereof, and charity of King Edward the sixth thereto. 342 a Church lane. 138
a 251 a Cities whence so called, 691 a * why built, ib. b * The commodities that
come by them 692 a * Honorable and worthy actions of Citizens of London, 86.
etc. The honor of Citizens, 710 b Their riches, 6. 8 b * Three kinds of
Citizens: 1 Merchants, 2 Handicraftsmen, 3 Laborers. 697 b * Clarkenwell, a
Priory. 484 a Where the Clerks Hall was anciently. 178 a Clements Inn and
Well. 493 a S. Clements lane. 222 a * 235 a * The Church without Templebarre,
why called Clement Danes. 491 a Clergy men forbidden by the King to be
punished of the Laity. 207 a Cliffords Inn. 435 a * The Clinke. 449 b * Clock
house at Westminster. 524 b * Northern Russet Cloth, sold for 4. d. the yard.
71 b * Poor Clothiers relieved by the bounty of Sir Thomas White. 91. Many
others, 93 a M. Kenrick. 199 a Coat-Armorus: See Armorus. Cobhams Inn. 143 a
Sir William Cockaine his Monument. 776 b Cock lane. 415 a * Cold Harbrough.
251 b Coleman street. 293 John Collet Founder of Paul's School, his Monument
made by W. Lily. 363 b Court of Common Pleas. 522 b Common Council men, and
their Oath. 670 a Doctors Comment. 409 a Conduits, 11 b * The water Conduit at
Aldgate, 121 a By Leaden Hall 206 b In Cornehill, 208 a By the Stocks, 244. 933
a By Saint Stephens, 296 b In Grass street 230 a Upon Downegate, 248 a * In
Lothbery 293 a In West Cheap, 278 b At London wall, 296 b In Aldermanbury, 303
a Without Creplegate, and a Bosse, 317 b 935 a By Paul's gate, 388 a By Saint
Nicholas Coleabby, 398 b By Magdalenes Old-fishstreet, 410 a * In Oldborne 425
b In Fleetstreet, 431 a In Forestreet, 476 b Pissing- Conduit. 190 a Court of
Conscience in London: See Request. Constables Oath. 687 Cony-hope lane. 275 b
The incorporation of the Company of Cooks. 330 b * A public place of Cookery,
where all manner of provision might be bought at any time. 711 a * 234 a * A
Monument of the Corbets. 811 b * Cordwainer street. 264 b Corn not to be
brought from beyond Sea, 250 a The custom thereof: See Queenhith and Leaden
Hall. No street called Cornehill before the Conquest, 211 a Vpholders, sellers
of old stuff in Cornhill. 215 b 234 a Cornets Tower in Buckles-bury. 276 a
Cousin lane. 249 b The Counter in the Poultry, 275 a In Woodstreet, 308 a
Formerly in Breadstreet, 394 b * Why and when removed, 937 b In Southwarke. 454
a The cause of decay in the Country. 699 b A remedy to people Country Towns
again. 700 a Ancient Coins and manner of payment used in England, 44 b * The
penny Easterling, 45. Numi and Denarii whence so called, 45 b * Of Halfe-pence
and Farthings, 45 b Groat and half Groat 46 a Rose Nobles, 46 b Coins of Gold
enhanced, allayed, ibidem. Halfe-faced Groats, 47 a. Crowns and half Crowns
of silver Coined, ibid. Leather Money used in France. 47 b * Cowbridge Pens and
Street, so called. 420 b Cow-crosse. 483 b Sir Richard Cox his Monument 774 *
Cradocks lane. 222 b Three Cranes, or painted Tavernes lane. 255 a * The malice
of cruel Creditors. 469 b Creed lane. 371 b Creplegate, a prison for
Trespassers. 34 a A Monument of the Crew's. 818 Crooked lane. 233 a 236 a
Crookehorne Alley. 430 b * Crosbie place. 181 b Old Cross in Cheap, 280 b The
Cross in Cheapside commanded to be repaired, as being an Ensign of
Christianity. 280 a Crossed, or Crowched Friars, 144 b 156 b The Church there
enlarged. 934 b * Crownesilde, a shed or standing in Bow Church for the King,
270 b 280 b 281 b Culver Alley. 144 b Curfew Bell. 83 a * 676 b Curriers Row.
184 a * Cursitors Office in Chancery lane. 487 a Custom House. 142 a Customs
and Orders. 67 Ancient Laws and Customs of London. 668 a Bladers, Ha^^makers,
Sheathmakers, drawn all three into one Fraternity of Cutlers. 158 b
D
A Monument of the Dacres. 786 b The addition of a Dagger in the Arms of the
City of London. 54 a 237 b * Dance of death, called the dance of Paul's. 88 a
Dainegeld, what. 919 b * Bishop of Saint David's house. 436 b If ye call me so,
I will call you Davy, A Proverb whence. 422 a The Deane of Paul's his lodging.
412 b Relief of poor Debtors. 769 Desborne lane. 397 a Distaffe lane, 395.
See Maiden lane. The Town- Ditch about the Wall of the City. 26 * Divine
Service to be read continually at 9 and 3 of the clock. 766 b * Doctors
Commons. 409 a Doe-little lane. 410 a John Done Deane of Paul's his Monument.
776 b Anne Done his wife her Monument. 889 b * Downegate. 248 A Lad of 18
years old drowned in the channel at Downegate. 248 a Drink-water Wharfe. 232 b
Drury lane. 493 a Laurence Ducket hanged in Bow-steeple. 269 a Ducke lane. 418
a Six Children drowned in the Ducking-pond. 782 A Monument of the Dudley's.
813 b Duke Humphrey's servants. 368 b The Dukes place. 146 b * Dulwich College
in the County of Surrey, founded by Edward Alleyne E^quire. 759 A newborn
Child buried in a Dunghill of Sea-coale ashes. ^80 b S. Dunstanes curse
against King Ethelred. 358 a Durham House, a great Feast there, 494 a A row of
Stables there made a Royal Exchange. 494 b * The Dutch Church, anciently Sir
W. Powlets house. 184 a The Duchy Court. 523 a
E
EAldgate, 144. See Aldgate. East-cheap a Cooks Row; The Kings Sons beaten
there 234 a * East-Smithfield a Vineyard 41 a See Smithfield. Ebgate lane. 231
b * Editha Queen of England, her Monument. 501 b * Edward the Confessors
Monument in Westminster. 501 a Edward 1. reigned 34 years; Majors in his time,
545 a * His Monument. 502 a Edward 2. reigned 20. years; Majors in his time.
547 b Edward 3. reigned 50. years; Majors in his time, 549 b His Monument. 504
b Edward the Black Prince his house, now the Black Bell. 233 b Edward 4.
elected in St. John's field, took on him the Crown in Baynards Castle, 59 b *
He reigned 22 years; Majors in his time. 568 a Edward 5. when he began his
reign. 572 a Edward 6 his virtuous and godly Speech to Bishop Ridley,
concerning relief of the poor, 342 344 b * He was chief Founder of the
Hospitals in London, 344 a He reigned 6 years; Majors in his time, 583 b His
picture in the Chapel at Bridewell, 876 a His Monument. 511 a Elbow lane. 246
a Eleanor, Queen of England her Monument. 503 b Elizabeth Daughter to Henry 4
and wife to Henry 7 her Monument 511 a Elizabeth Daughter to Henry 7 her
Monument. 510 a * Queen Elizabeth reigned 44 years; Majors in her time, 385.
Her Monument in 34 Churches, Westminster, 511 b Alhallowes Breadstreet, 821 b
Alhallowes the great 821 b Alhallowes the less, 822 a Alhallowes on the Wall,
823 b Anne Blackfriars, 826 b Bartholomew Exchange, 828 a * Bennet
Grace-Church, 828 b Botolph Belinsgate, 930 a Clements Eastcheape, 832 a *
George Botolph Lane, 836 b John Baptist, 838 a * Katherine Cree-church, 839 b
Laurence Iewry, 843 a * Mary Aldermary, 848 a Mary le Bow, 849 a * Mary Bothaw,
849 b Mary Summerset, 850 b Mary wool-Church, 851 a Martins Orgars, 853 b *
Martins Vintry, 854 a * Maudlins Milkestreet, 854 b * Maudlins Old Fish-street,
855 b * Michael Querne, 858 b Michael Woodstreet, 859 a Mildred Breadstreet,
859 b * Mildred Poultry, 861 b Peter's Paul's wharfe 867 a Stephens
Colemanstreet, 869 b Thomas Apostle, 871 b Bridewell Precinct, 876 b Dunstans
west 881 b Olaves Southwarke 884 b * Saviors Southwarke. 886 b The Erbar. 247
b 249 a * Erkenwald Bishop of London, buried in S. Paul's, An. Dom. 700. 358 a *
367 a Essex house, anciently called Exceter house. 489 a Ethelred King of West
Saxons his Monument in Paul's, whereon is engraven Saint Dunstanes curse against
him. 358 a Everards well street. 476 b Saint Ewins Church now decayed. 389 a
The Duke of Exeters daughter what. 60 a * The Royal Exchange, so called by
Queen Elizabeth, when and where founded, 209 a. b A place of Merchants
meeting. 938 b Cornets Tower in Bucklesbury, anciently the Kings Exchange. 276
a The Old Exchange. 351 a The Office of Kings Exchanger. 46 a Court of
Exchequer. 522 b
F
FAbian, an Alderman, wrote the Chronicle, called Fabians Chronicle. 574 b This
Island received the Christian Faith in the time of K. Lucius. 527 a Faringdon
Ward, whence so called. 335 The Lord Fawconbridge, with his Rebels, set upon
Ealdgate, 32 b When that Insurrection was. 570 a Great Feasts in Westminster
Hall. 520, 521 Sir John Sha kept the first Majors Feast in Guildhall, 283 b The
order at the Majors Feast, 656 b No Majors Feast, by reason of a great plague,
586 b * The Sergeants Feast at Ely house, whereto invited, came Henry the 8.
and Queen Katharine, 426 a Seven hundred mess of meat at one dinner at
Totehill. 527 b Fenchurch street. 144 b 217 a Fewtars, or Fetter lane. 430 b *
Fickets croft, now part of Lincolnes-Inne Fields. 435 b Fifteenes: See the end
of every Ward. Certain Wards discharged of all Fifteenes. 226 a * Finimore, or
Fivefoot lane. 397 a Finkes lane. 183 a 189 b * A Survey of the Manor of
Finsbury (belonging to a Prebend of Paul's.) 911 Finsbury Fields. 472 a * Fire
in Rood-lane, 228 a * At London Stone, 243 a * On London Bridge. 782
Fishwharfe. 233 a Fishers Folly, now the Earl of Devonshires house. 175 a
Antiquity of the Company of Fishmongers, 231 b Six Hall-motes belonging to
them, 400 a A controversy between the Lord Mayor and them. 232 a Old
Fishstreet. 391 a Fitz-Osbert, a seditious Traitor hanged in Smithfield,
renounced his Savior, 268 b * Fitz-Stephen, his birth and parentage, 703. His
description of London. 704 Fledwite, what. 919 a The Fleet, a Jail in Richard
the seconds time. 431 a * Flemenefith, what. 919 a Flistwite, what. 919 a The
Flower-de-luce, an Inn in Southwarke, anciently the Abbot of Battles Inn.
459 a Forrenners, 677. A tumult in London about Forrenners and Strangers. 80 a
Forstat, what. 919 b Foster lane. 338 a * Foul lane. 138 a Petty France. 172 b
525 b * Frances Duchess of Suffolk, her Monument. 515 a Frances Countess of
Hertford, her Monument. 516 a Frances Countess of Sussex, her Monument. 516 b
French King Prisoner in the Tower. 47 b * The French Church, where S. Anthonies
Hospital was. 191 a Freemen non-resident, 678 a Every Freeman his Oath, 689 An
Act concerning them. 690 Friars, Austin, 185. 930 a Crossed or Crowched, 144.
Gray, 340. Black, 373. White, 437 b A Fraternity of begging Friars, 287 b *
Ancient Burgesses of this City turned Friars, 930 b The Friery Cart at Saint
John's. 478 a Furnivals Inn. 427 a *
G
GAlley-Key. 142 a Galley-Row. 138 a Ancient Games: See Sports. A Game at
Westminster on Lammas day, cause of a great tumult. 77 a. b The Garland in
little Eastcheape, 229 b A Garner for Corn, at Leaden Hall, 164 b And
Queenehithe. 403 a * Garter place. 319 a Gates in the Wall of this City, 31 709
b At first but 4. afterward 7. and more, 31 a * The Posternes and Gates as
they now are, be these: 1 Posterne by the Tower. 31 a 2 Ealdgate. 31 b 3
Bishopsgate. 33 a 4 Posterne of Mooregate, 33 b 5 Posterne of Creplegate. 34 a
6 Aldersgate. 34 b 7 Posterne out of Christ's Hospital. 35 a 8 Newgate. 35 * 9
Ludgate. 36 b Many Watergates now turned to wharfes. 38 * Bridge-gate now
destroyed. 39 * Buttolphs gate. 39 a Belinsgate. 39 b The Gatehouse at
Westminster. 524 b Gayspur lane. 304 a * Geld, what. 919 b Saint Georges lane,
an Inn of Chancery there. 427 b The George Inn in Lombard street. 220 b *
Gerards Hall, and the Giant Gerards Staff, forty inches long, and fifteen
inches about, 393 b All the Story of the Giant and his Hall overthrown. 394 a
Saint Giles in the field, anciently an Hospital, 488 b St. Giles his bowl.
488 b * Giltspur street. 415 a * Gisors Hall, corruptly called Gerards. 261 a
394 a * A Glasse-house in Crossed Friars Hall. 157 a * Mount Goddard street.
337 b 388 b * Gold lane. 414. 425 b Golding lane. 318 b * Goldsmiths Row in
Cheap, 391 a The first Mayor and principal men of this City Goldsmiths. 324 a
Sir Arthur Gorges, his Monument. 786 a Earl Goodwin, the mightiest Subject
that ever was in England. 695 a * Goose lane. 265 a Goslins Monument. 908 a
Goswell street. 321 London Governed by Barons, 339 b 933. By a Custos, 544 a By
Majors, 546 b By Portgraves, 535 a * 696 a b By Provosts. 535 b Government of
this City. 695 b Ecclesiastical. 527 Temporal. 535 What kind of Government
therein, 697 a It differs but in ceremony, not substance, from the Laws of
this Realm. 697 a John Gower, his Monument, in Saint Mary Overies Priory. 450
b Granthams lane. 249 a Customs of Grass street Market. 231 Grayes Inn, a
Prebend to Paul's. 486 b Gray Friars, how it became a Friery, by the charity of
well disposed people; their Library, etc. 340, 341 Greengate. 162 a * Greenwich
lane, or Friar lane, 249 a Greenyard of Leaden hall. 161 a Gristes house. 137 b
* Grithbrech, what. 919 a The Pole- Groat (or the GropeGroat) granted to
Richard the second, cause of the Kentish tumult under Wat Tylar, 48 a *
Grub-street. 467 b * The Guild Hall, antiquity thereof, and number of Courts
kept therein, 282 b. The Council Chamber there new builded, 282 b. Verses on
the Images over the gate, 283 a Kitchins by it for the Majors Feasts, ibid. The
Chapel there new built, 283 b Monuments therein, 284 a The Library at Guild
Hall. 284 b * The Lady Jane Guilford, her Monument. 786 a Houses in Crooked
lane blown up with Gunpowder. 238 b * Guthuruns lane. 338 a
H
HAberdashers Almeshouses. 321 a The body of Alice Hackney found incorrupted
more than 150. years after she was buried. 227 a The Customs of the Manor of
Hackney. 715 Halliwell: See Finsbury. Hamsoken, what. 919 a * Hangewyte, what.
919 a * Where the Hanse-Merchants landed their Corn. 38 b * Harp lane. 138 a
Hart-horne Alley. 144 a * Heart lane. 138 a Heart street. 145 a Sir Christopher
Hattons Monument. 365 a * Haverpeney, what. 919 b Little Saint Helens. 178 b
Henry the first, made the first Park in England. 42 a Henry the third reigned
seven and fifty years; Majors in his time, 538 b His Orchard by the Tower, 42
a * His Monument. 501 b Henry the fourth reigned fourteen years; Majors in
his time. 559 a Henry the fifth reigned nine years; Majors in his time, 561 a
His Monument. 506 b * Henry the sixth reigned nine and thirty years; Majors in
his time. 562 b * Henry the seventh reigned four and twenty years; Majors in
his time, 572 b He and the Knights of the Garter rode from the Tower to Paul's
Church, 60 b His Monument. 510 b Henry the eight reigned eight and thirty
years; Majors in his time. 577 a * Henry son of Richard King of Romans, his
Monument. 510 a * Henry son to Henry the eighth, his Monument. 513 a Prince
Henry, son to King James, his Epitaph. 518 b * Haywharfe lane. 251 b * The
Heart of Queen Eleanor and others, buried in Blackfriars. 374 b Heralds. 408
b * Bishop of Herefords Inn. 399 b An Hermitage of Saint James in the wall;
339 b Another in Nightingall lane, 468 b Another with a Chapel of Saint
Katharines. 495 a William Hewit, his Monument. 777 a * The charitable Alms of
Baptist Lord Hicks, Viscount Cambden, as well in his life as at his death, 760
a His Epitaph. 761 b Hidage, what. 919 b The Highest ground of the City of
London. 207 a Holborne: See Oldborne. Holles his Monument. 817 a Hog lane. 120
b Holy-well, anciently the Priory of Saint John Baptist, 470 a * See Finsbury.
Honey lane. 282 a * Hornegeld, what. 919 b * Horners Key. 141 b Horse-market,
what it was ancienty. 711 b Horse-mill in Grass street. 163 Horse-shoo-bridge
street. 246 b 254 b Hosier lane, in Cordwainer street, 264 b In Smithfield. 420
b The Hospital of S. Katharines, 117 a For Lunatikes, 142 b Called the Papey,
156 a * Of Bethelem, 173 a Of Saint Mary Spittle, 175 b * Of Saint Anthonies,
190 a * Of Saint Thomas of Acons, 281 a * 935 a * Called Elsing Spittle, 304 a
* Of the French order, 318 a * Called Christ's Hospital, 342 a * Of Saint
Bartholomewes, 415 a. Of Bridewell, 456 a. In Oldborne, 428 a Of Saint Thomas
in Southwarke, 456 b * Of King James, called Charterhouse, 479 Of Saint Mary
Rouncivall, 495 a Of Saint James, 495 b The beginning and true end of the
several Hospitals now being in the City of London. 343 b Hucksters of Ale and
Beer, 671 b * Huggen lane. 311 a Duke Humphrey not buried in Paul's. 368 b *
Hundred, what. 919 b Liberty of Hunting confirmed to the City of London, 539 b
The ancient Court of Hustings in London. 767
I
THe confession of Jack Straw, to the Lord Mayor of London. 54 b James the
fourth, King of Scots, slain at Flodden field, his head buried in Saint
Michaels Church in Woodstreet. 311 b King James reigned two and twenty years;
Majors in his time, 593 a * In whose Maioralty he was borne, 586 b His Picture
in Mary Mounthaw Church. 850 b Saint James's Fair, S. James's his Park. 495 b
* Lady Jane Seymor, her Monument. 515 b Jesus Commons. 249 a Jews of Norwitch
hanged for Circumcising a Christian Child, 35 b 289 a. Jews houses spoiled,
37 a The Jews Synagogue, now the Windmill Tavern, 287 b 296 b Where they
inhabited, and what Kings favored, what punished and banished them, 288, 289.
Their burying place, 318 a. The house of converted Jews, now the Rolls. 435 b
The old Iewrie. 287 b 288 a The Kings Palace there, 291 b The poor Iewrie. 258
a * The Enclosure of common grounds. 475 b Infangtheof, what. 919 a * The
Incorporation of the company of Inne-holders. 249 a * 670 b Innes of Court and
Chancery, their names and situation. 66 * Chesters Inn, or Strand Inn, where
Summerset house new stands. 66 a John of Gaunts Tomb in Paul's. 360 a * John of
Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, and son to Edward the second, his Monument. 515 a
* Priory of Saint John of Jerusalem, with the Monuments. 483 a King John
reigned seventeene years; Majors in his time. 537 a * A Monument of the
Saint-Iohns 795 a * Ipres Inn. 260 a Ironmonger lane. 282 a Ivy lane. 388 a
Ivy bridge. 491 b * The coming of Julius Caesar into England, and his
conquest over the Britons. 1 b Jury men. 672 b False Jurors, their course and
punishment. 208 Courts of Justice kept in Westminster Hall. 522 a Iustings or
Tournaments; In Cheapside, 280 b * In Smithfield, with the manner how. 420 b
Iusting-Feast at Durham house. 494 a
K
SAint Katharines Hospital, 117 a The circuit thereof, 925 a Monuments
therein. 117 a 901 a Katharine Knowles, her Monument. 415 b * Katharine Valois,
Queen of England, that married Owen Tudor, her Monument. 507 a Master John
Kendricks Will. 193 b * Kerion lane. 255 a 261 a * Kery lane 338 a * When the
King of England was first called Supreme head. 580 b Kings of this Realm have
sat on the Kings Bench in Westminster Hall. 522 b Kings Alley. 293 a Prior of
Okebornes house, now Kings College. 405 a Bishop Kings Monument. 775 Order of
making a Knight for service in the field. 237 a Knighten-Guild, 115 a * 925 b *
Given to the Priory of the holy Trinity within Aldgate. 930 * Knight-riders
street. 254, 258 b * Knights Templers: See Temple.
L
LAd or Ladle lane. 308 a * Alice Perrers rode from the Tower to Smithfield, as
Lady of the Sun. 421 Chapel of our Lady in the Piew, at Westminster. 524 a
Lambs Chapel proved to have anciently been of the Parish of Saint Olaves in
Silverstreet. 924 b Lamborne hill. 397 b Liberties of the Duchy of Lancaster,
489. Government thereof. 492 b When Lanthorne^ with lights began to be hung
out in Winter, and by whom. 561 b * Saint Laurence lane. 252 a 282 a * A
monstrous Shanke-bone of a man reserved for a monument in the Church of Saint
Lawrence Iewrie. 285 a Leaden Porch, 162 a In Crooked lane. 236 a Leaden Hall,
at first a Manor, 162 b A Chapel therein, 163 a * Burnt, 164 a First used as
a Garner, 164 b Meant to have been made a Burse for Merchants, 166 a A
Flesh-market there, 206 a The necessary uses thereof. 935 b Love to Learning.
86, etc. Lectures in London; Of Surgery, Of Mathematikes, Of the seven
Liberal Sciences, founded by Sir Thomas Gresham, Anno Dom. 1596. 65 b *
Legates Inn. 405 a The Duke of Lennox, his Monument. 816 The Earl of Lennox,
his Monument. 513 a * The Archdeacon of London, Parson of S. Leonard
Shoreditch. 471 a A Bishop of London died of a Leprosy. 530 a Lesteage, what.
919 b * Letherwyte, what. 919 a Library at Sion College 304 b At Guild Hall,
284 b * At Paul's. 354 a William Lily, his Monument. 370 a Limehouse. 469 a
Limestreet. 161 Linacer, his Monument. 369 b * Lincolnes Inn. 488 a * Lion
Key. 225 b Lions, where kept at first. 42 a Lions Inn of Chancery. 493 a
Lither lane. 427 a * The Liveries of the Majors and Sheriffs. 652 a Lodgers.
670 b The Lok a Lazarhouse in Southwarke. 460 b Lollards Tower, the last
Prisoner there. 410 b Lollesworth field. 177 a Lombard street. 217 b * LONDON,
the Original, etc. 1 a. Thought founded by Brute, 1. a b. a * Repaired and
increased by King Lud, 2 b. Called Trinobantum, 3 a How by ancient Writers, the
old Britains, Strangers, and Inhabitants, 5 b Famous for Merchants, 3 a
Walled, 3 b Situation, 6 a 693 b * 709 a * Antiquity, 6 a 694 a * Martial
Services done by it, 695. How watered, 8 a How divided, 113. Happy in
temperatenesse of Air, Religion, Strength, 709. Happy in Gardens, Pasture and
Tillage, Wells, Honor of Citizens, Matrons, Schools, 710. Affairs well
disposed, 711. Exercise and Pastimes, 712. The Charter of London confirmed by
diverse Kings, 739. The description of London (both in Latin and English)
written by Fitz-Stephen, in the Reign of Henry the second, 704. The cause of
increase of Inhabitants in it, 699 b Freed from imputation of decaying other
Cities and Markets in this Realm, 699 b Of London the quantity or
populousness, 696 b Quality or profession, 697. Power, consisting in her
Riches, and warlike furniture, 698. Benefits and honor that comes to the
Realm by it, 700 a It was never the Author of any Rebellion, 697 a 701.
Liberties confirmed by Edward the third, 549 b Why at any time seized by the
Prince, 701. Officers, 648, 649. Manner of electing Knights and Burgesses, 659
a * An Archbishop of London, 528. Two Plagues of London, Quassing and casualty
by Fire, 69 b * Barons of London, 359 b A song called, London-licke-peny, made
by Lidgate the Monk, 234 b * London. Stone. 243 a Long lane. 420 b Long ditch
at Westminster. 496 Lothbury. 187 b 287 a Love lane. 293 a 308 a * See Lucas.
Lovels Inn. 388 b Lucas lane, or Rope lane. 228 b * Ludgate, 36 b. A free
Prison, or for Freemen, 37 a To pay Tithes, etc. to S. Martins. 938 b Lord
Lumleyes house. 157 b An Hospital for Lunatike persons. 142 b The Monument of
the Lushers at Putney. 784 b
M
THE principal Magistrates of London, were Noble persons Inhabitants, 298 a
Called Barons of London. 339 b 933 a * Maiden lane or Distar lane. 312 a 395 b *
Mother Mampudding. 142 b * Saint Margarets Church on the H^ll in Southwarke,
made a Court of Justice. 454 a Margaret, Daughter to Edward the fourth, her
Monument. 509 Margaret Countess of Richmond, her Monument. 512 a * Margaret,
Countess of Lennox her Monument. 512 b The Laws of the Market. 664
Marriage-Money for poor Maids. 94 a 95 b A Mart at Westminster. 499 a Mart
lane. 137 a * Martins lane. 233 a S. Martin Orgars lane. 238 b College of S.
Martins le grand, 327 a Privilege of Sanctuary there, 330. Several Charters of
Kings, etc. concerning the ancient Liberties, Bounds, and Privileges thereof,
917 Surrendered 330 a The first Martyr, See Alban. S. Mary lane. 226 b S. Mary
street. 144 b Parish Church of Saint Mary the Virgin, Saint Vrsula, and 11000.
Virgins, commonly called S. Mary Axe. 166 b The Antiquity of St. Mary le Bow
Church, together with the fall of the Steeple, and overturning the roof of the
Church, 268. The Church interdicted and encroached upon. 269 a * The Bishop of
Hereford Patron of Saint Mary Mounthaw. 400 a * S. Mary Church in the Strand,
either lost, 489 b Or changed to the Savoy. 909 Queen Mary reigned 6. years;
Majors in her time, 584. Her Monument. 511 a Mary Queen of Scots, her Monument.
517 b Bennet a Monk brought Masons first into this Land. 5 a Matilda Queen of
England, her Monument. 501 b Evil May Day. 81 a May-games. 79 b * The first
Lord Mayor, Henry Fitz-Alwine; when obtained, continued from the first of
Richard the 1. to the 15. of King John, 536 b Where buried, 247 a 538 a Liberty
granted by King John to choose a Mayor, 538 a A Mayor denied to be admitted by
the King, 541 a * The Barons of the Exchequer to admit him, 542 b The first
Lord Mayor that went by water, 567 a * The first Bachelor Mayor, 573 b. When
the Majors began to be Knighted by the courtesy of the King, 579 a A Mayor
made of the Privy Council to two Kings, 567 a 581 b * Three Majors in a year
572 b Two sons of one man Majors, each after other, 583 b An order for the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen their meeting, 652 b The Lord Majors Election, 652 b *
The Officers of the Lord Mayor, 649. An Order of all things on (Simon and Jude,
or) the Lord Majors day, 656. The manner of Lord Majors going to Paul's on
solemn Festivals, 657. The Lord Majors attendance and attire at the Kings
Coronation, 659 b * A Mayor feasted four Kings in one day, 255, 553 b The
Maioralty shunned always because Onus, 696 b * The City governed by a Custes in
Henry 3. his time. 544 a Measures sealing. 672 a * 679 a * Mercers Chapel
sometimes an Hospital of S. Thomas of Acon, 281 a Monuments therein, 281 a That
Company incorporated. 281 b * Noblemen of this Realm (of old as well as of
later years) have dealt in Merchandise, 222 a The commodity of Merchandise to
this Realm, 698 b * Three sorts of Merchandise, Navigation, Invection,
Negotiation. 697 b * Merchants of all Nations traded in this City, 68 a. 69 a
712 a * Of Italy, 142 b Of the Han^e-Townes, 38 b * Of Almaine, 249 b * Their
privileges, 250 a * Of Bordeaux. 254 a Staple Merchants the most ancientest in
this Realm. 497 a The Arms and Names of the ten Companies of the Merchants.
611, etc. Beggarly Merchants hurt a Kingdom. 700 b * Merchant-Taylors Company,
188 b Their School. 252 b The Mewes by Charing-crosse. 493 b A Pulpit-crosse
in the Churchyard of S. Michaels in Cornhill. 215 b James the fourth King of
Scots, his head buried in S. Michaels Woodstreet. 311 b A passage through St.
Michaels at the Que^ne. 388 a Midsummer day meeting of the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen. 650 b The Antiquity of St. Mildred the Virgins Church, with the
Church yard and Parsonage house. 273 Milford lane. 489 b Molkestreet. 306 a A
Mill by Baynards Castle. 405 b Corn Mills on the Thames, set betwixt a Lighter
and a Barge. 403 a * When Millers had but an half penny for grinding a quarter
of Wheat. 546 a * Mincheon lane. 137 a The Minories, anciently the Abbey of S.
Clare Nuns. 118 a * Mint in the Tower, 44 b In Southwarke, 454 b Other Mints
in England. 46 a The body of King Edmund the Martyr, brought through Creplegate,
wrought Miracles. 34 a Miskennyng what. 919 b Monkeswell-street. 312 a 340 a A
Monument of Sir Thomas Moore. 787 b Moore-fields a mere marish ground. 33 b
301 a 475 Mooregate. 33 b A great famine and Mortality of people. 548 b * Mount
Calvary, now a Windmill. 477 a Mountfiquit Tower. 61 a A widow Murdered. 469
b
N
NEedlers lane. 264 b Ill News quickly spreds 48 b Newgate first builded, and
the cause why. 35 a b Newgate Market. 388 b New Inn the Original of it. 727 b
493 a The New River brought from Chadwell and Amwell to the City of London, by
Sir Hugh Middleton. 12 b Nicholas Cold-Abbey, why so called. 398 a A Prison for
Night-walkers. 207 a Nightingall lane in Wapping, 468 b A Stagge hunted thither
by King Charles. 462 a No-mans Land. 477 b William Norman Bishop of London his
Monument in Paul's. 358 b Why the Mayor and Aldermen walk about his Tomb on
solemn days 359 a Northumber land-house. 158 a 330 b
O
THE Offerings of Parishes to the Curates in London. 747 Old-Bayly, 427 a The
Chamberlain of London kept Court there. 427 a Oldborne, 10 b The Conduit by
Oldborne-crosse, 425 b Oldborne Hall. 428 a Sir John Oldcastle's rebellion and
overthrow. 361 a * Ormond place in S. Thomas Apostles. 261 a The Orphans Court,
with an Act Common Council concerning them. 660 b * 678 a * A Monument of
Hippocrates de Ott^en, a famous Physician. 890 a * S. Mary Overies a Priory.
450 a The scalpes of Oxen dug up by Paul's. 367 b * Oxford Place near
London-stone. 242 b
P
Robert Parkenton slain with a Gun going to Mass. 277 b Panyer Alley. 388 a
The Papey, 156 a * Church of S. Augustine Papey in Limestreet. 166 b * Pardon
Churchyard. 477 b The first Park in England made by Henry the first. 42 a
Parliaments kept in Westminster Hall, 522 a The black Parliament, 374 a
Parliament House. 524 a Passekes Wharfe. 141 b Paternoster lane, 256 a Pater
noster Row, so called of Pater noster makers. 371 b * Cathedral Church of S.
Paul founded by Aethelbert Mauricius, 352. The Church burnt, 113 b 352 b *
Fired by lightning, 353 a The steeple built repaired with a Weathercocke, 353.
The steeple burnt and repaired, 357 b * The height and length of both Church
and steeple 353 b Governors of the Church, 353. The great Cloystry, Dance, and
Library, 354. Chapels, in Pardon Church yard, at the North door of the Holy
Ghost of Jesus, 354. The Charnell house and School 356 b The Bell-house and
Pulpit-crosse, 357 a The Gates of the Church, 410 b * The Monuments, 358 a *
725. Contribution to the repair of Paul's Church, 198 b Master Parkers gift to
the glazing of the windows 371 b The Quire beautified and adorned by Sir Paul
Pinder, 767 a An Act against abuses offered to the Cathedral Church of Saint
Paul, against carriage through, etc. 937 a Paul's thought to have been the
Temple of Jupiter, 367 b * A Buckes head borne before the Procession at Paul's,
368 a Paul's Pigeons, 65 a * Paul's Wharfe. 405 a The Earl of Pembrokes
Monument. 361 a * Peneritch street. 276 b The Penny Easterling. 44, 45
Pentecost lane. 340 a * Penthouses. 678 a Pepper alley in Southwark, 454 a *
Pepperers in Sopers lane. 278 b * Coia Shawsware, a Persian, his Monument. 780
* King Lucius founded St. Peter's Church in Cornehill. 210 Peter's hill lane, and
Peter's Key. 408 Petty Wales. 142 a Philip Queen of England, her Monument. 505
b Philosophy Schools in London. 63 a. 710 b Philpot lane. 222 a * A
counterfeit Physician had his head set on the Tower of London. 55 a Pickering
house. 156 a * Piepowders Court. 419 a Master Suttons gift to the Charter
house, the greatest gift was ever given to Pious uses. 481 a The Company of
Pinners now decayed. 510 b The Plantagents Monument in Paul's. 360 a Perilous
Pond. 11 a Nine kinds or degrees of Poor people, 343 b * Relief of the Poor,
86, 87, etc. See the Benefactors to every Parish in London. Pope lane. 325 b
The name of Pope blotted out in all old Books, why. 936 b * Pope's Head Tavern
in Cornehill, sometime a Kings house. 216 a * The Populousness of this City.
696. etc. Porters lane, or Porters Key. 142 a The Governors of the City of
London, called Portgraves, 535 a * Or Portreeves. 696 a * Portpoole lane. 486 b
Portsoken, whence. 115 Pot, a Brewer. 251 b * Poultney lane. 253 a The
Powlehead Tavern, anciently Paul's Brewhouse. 408 b A remarkable punishment of
Pride in high buildings. 161 b Printing of Books at Westminster, the first in
England. 525 a The Priory of the Trinity without Aldgate, 116. 145. Of S. John's
of Jerusalem, 483 a Of S. Bartholomewes, 418. Of Clarkenwell, 484 a Of S. Mary
Overies. 450 a Relief of poor Prisoners, 94 a etc. See the Benefactors to
every Parish Church, and Master Kendricks Will, 197 a 428 a The Prisoners going
to be executed at Teyborne, were presented with a great Bowl of Ale, thereof
to drink as their last refreshing in this life. 488 b Pophams, builders of
Saint Sepulchers Church. 423 Prisons; the Tun on Cornehill, now changed, 207 a
At Ludgate, 37 a At Newgate, 35. The Counters in the Poultrey, 275 a In
Woodstreet, 308 a In Southwarke, 454 a Lollards Tower, 410 b The Fleet, 431 a *
The Clink, 449 b * The white Lion, 455 a The Kings Bench, 455 a The Marshalsea,
455 b * The Gatehouse at Westminster. 524 b The Keepers of Prisons indicted for
using their Prisoners hardly. 395 a Procession of Paul's. 367 b Provosts
Governors of London. 535 b Pudding lane. 229 a Puddle wharse. 405 a
Pulpit-Crosse at Paul's, 357 a At Michael Cornehill, 215 b At Spittle. 176
Punishments of Sabbath-breaking, 394 a Of Adultery, 207 b * Of Slander, 232 a
The Pillory for Bakers, Millers, etc. 208 a Sir Stephen, an haire-brain'd
Puritan. 151 a Pyel lane. 400 b *
Q
BEatrix, Sister to Peter of Savoy, Mother to five Queens. 490 b Queen hithe,
or Edreds hithe, the antiquity, liberties, and customs thereof, 401. etc. When
let to Farm to the City of London, 542 a An Act of Common Council concerning
it. 939 a
R
THe Rack in the Tower called the Duke of Exceters Daughter. 60 a * Radcliffe.
469 a Thomas Raymond, Archdeacon of Saint Albans, his Monument. 778 a Ambition
and Covetousness, the two causes of English Rebellions. 696 b * London never
the Author of any Rebellion. 701 The Rebellion of the Commons under Wat Tylar,
48 a * Of Sir John Oldcastle, 561 a * Of Lord Fawconbridge, 32 b An Alderman
made Recorder of London. 547 b * Red^rosse street. 318 a * 476 b Reding, why so
called. 15 a Redriffe: See Roderith. Redrose, or Rother lane. 229 a Ree, or
The, what it signifies. 15 a Regrators. 678 b Repair of Churches: See the
Churches. Court of Request, or Conscience, in London, for relief of poor
Debtors. 769 When three men had their hands cut off for Rescuing a Prisoner
arrested by a Sergeant. 546 b Retayling, an handmaid to Merchandise. 699 a
Richard the first reigned ten years; Majors in his time. 336 b Richard the
second reigned 22. years; Majors in his time, 556 a He in danger by the Rebels
of Kent, 49 b He lodged in Tower-Royall, 258 a * His Monument, 508 a Richard
the third reigned three years; Majors in his time, 572 a He took on him the
Crown at Baynards Castle: See Baynards Castle. Ringed Hall in Saint Thomas
Apostles. 261 a Three principal Rivers in this Kingdom to build a Royal City
on, 693 a Navigable Rivers are as Via Regia, 25 b The new River, 12 b The River
of Thames. 14 * 693 a Robin Hood and his men shot before the King. 79 b
Rochester house. 449 b The Rolls in Chancery lane. 435 b Rood lane. 228 a Ralph
Rookeby, his charitable bounty. 428 a Fair Rosamond, where kept by Henry the
second. 781 Rotten Row, or Russell Row. 470 b
S
THe names of Saints given to Churches, not for superstition, but for
distinction sake. 273 a Salisbury Court, anciently the Bishop of Salisburies
house. 437 b * Sak, what. 919 a Salt wharfe. 403 a A Sanctuary for offenders at
S. Martins, with the privileges and articles thereto belonging, 327. etc. 917.
A Sanctuary at Westminster. 519 a Sandy house. 403 b The Savoy lands given unto
Christ's Hospital, 344 b The Savoy built by Peter Earl of Savoy and Richmond,
490 a Burnt by the Rebels and built again for an Hospital. 491 a * Scalding
Alley. 183 a 204 b 272 b Scavengers, 670 b Their Oath 688. Schools of
Philosophy in London, 63 a. 710 b Every Cathedral Church had a School, 63 b.
A free School at Saint Paul's, 63 b * 356 b Westminster, 63 b Saint Anthonies,
190 a * S. Peter's on Cornehill, 211 a * In Bow Church yard, 269 b In the
Hospital of S. Thomas of Acons, now Mercers Chapel, 281 a Christ's Church, 64
b S. Saviors, 64 a Merchant-Taylors, 64 b * 252 b Meetings of Schoolmasters,
and disputations of Scholars. 64 b * Scoggans Ballad sent to King Henry the
fourth his sons. 256 a Robert Scot, Quarter Master General to the King of
Swedens Army, his Monument. 791 a Scot, what. 919 b Scotland yard. 495 b
Scroopes Inn, sometimes Sergeants Inn in Oldborne. 425 b S^acole lane, 427 b
When Seacoles were forbidden in London. 547 b * Sebba King of the East Saxons,
his Monument in Paul's. 358 a He became a Monk of Paul's. 529 a * Sebert King
of East Saxons, his Monument. 500 b Sentlegers house in Southwarke. 458 b
Sergeants Inn, 435 a 438 b The Sergeants Feast, and manner of it, with the
provision. 426 a Sermon lane, or rather Sheremoniers. 410 a Sessions Hall. 427
a A Shankebone of a man 25. inches long, 285 a Another 28. inches and an half
long. 302 b Shareborne, or South-borne lane. 217 a * Shere lane. 435 b The
Sheriffe-wicke granted to the City, 537 a The first Sheriffs, or Bailiffes
thereof, when obtained, 536 a The Sheriffs election, 650 b Their Officers, 649
b Their swearing on Michaelmas day, 652, 655. Sheriffs in London in Henry the
first his time, almost 100. years before our Chronicles set down, 768 b The
Sheriffs of London Prisoners in the Tower. 36 a Shoo-lane. 428 a Long piked
Shoes tied to the knees, in use amongst English men. 395 b A penalty on
Shoomakers, for Shooing men on the Sunday. 394 a The Shops under Saint Peter's
in Cheap. 338 a Tom Shorthose, his Monument. 310 a * Margaret Countess of
Shrewsbury, her Monument. 369 a Side-Saddles first in use. 70 a Sir Philip
Sidney, his Monument. 363 a Silver street. 312 a Saint Sithes lane, 264 b Saint
Sithes Church: See Bennet Sherehog. Simpsons lane, or Emperors head lane. 255
a Single women that played the Whores in the Stews were forbidden the rights of
the Church, and therefore had a Churchyard proper to them for burial. 449 b
The Six-Clerkes office, anciently a Brewhouse. 435 b The Incorporation of the
Company of Skinners, 248 b Six Kings brethren of that Company. 248 b Slander
punished in a Fine of 1000. Marks. 232 a William Foxley Slept in the Tower of
London 14. days and more, without waking. 55 b Smarts Key. 225 a * Sir Thomas
Smith, Master of Requests, his Monument. 783 b
Captain John Smith, his Monument. 779 b East- Smithfield, 41 a First builded
upon, 931 a Sometimes a Monastery called New Abbey, 117 a An ancient record
concerning it. 925 b West Smithfield; the Pond there and Elmes, a place of
Execution, 420 b Horse-market there, 420 b 711 b Iustings there, 421 a Paved.
423 a Snore hill. 425 b * Sojourners. 670 b Sok, what. 918 b Inner Soken. 931
Summers Key. 225 b Sommerset house. 490 a Gray Soap made in London, dearer than
bought from Bristow. 265 a Sopers lane. 264 b Sophia daughter to King James,
her Monument. 512 a Southampton house, sometimes the Bishop of Lincolnes Inn.
486 b The Borough of Southwarke, how it became one of the 26. Wards in London,
442 a * Sir John Ayliffe, the first Alderman there, 446 a * The Lord Majors
coming thither to our Lady fair. 652 a * John Speed his Monument. 778 b
Edmond Speneer, his Monument. 517 b * 774 b Chapel of S. Spirit, now lost.
489 b The Spittle, 175 b When founded, 537 b The Pulpit-Crosse there, and
anci-custome of Sermons at Easter, 176. Three Brethren preached there, on
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday in Easter week, 1632. 781 Sports and Pastimes
used in this City, 75. Stage Plays, Tennis-play, running at Quinten. 76. etc.
712 b * Sprinkle Alley. 144 a A Monument of the Staffords. 808 a * Stallage,
what. 919 b * Staple Inn. 431 a Starling money whence so called 45 b The
Starr-chamber Court. 523 b Stationers Hall, sometimes the Duke of Britains
house. 372 a Stayning lane. 321 a Customs, Privileges, etc. of the Manor of
Stebunheath, or Stepney, and Hackney, etc. 715 The Steel-yard a place for
Merchants of Almaine. 249 b * S. Stephens Alley in Westminster. 496 a * S.
Stephens Chapel in Westminster. 523 b Stew lane. 403 a The Stews on the
Bank side kept only by the Froes of Flanders, 449 a * Put down 449 b
Constitutions to be observed by the keepers of them. 448 b Master Stock his
Monument. 821 a Stocke-fishmonger row. 231 b * Stocks Market, the midst of the
City, 113 a The antiquity and beginning thereof. 243 b Stodies lane. 255 a A
Monument of the Stotevils. 818 b * Strand Inn an Inn of Chancery, 490. Strand
Bridge and Stone-crosse there. 490 The number of Strangers misliked in London,
80 a 226 b * Strangers borne. 872 a The Statutes of the Streets of London
against annoyances 665, etc. 672 b Studenes in the Common Law, their
preferment. 66, 67 The Suburbs without the City of London and liberties thereof.
461 Simon Sudbury, Archbishop of Canturbury, slain by Wat Tylar and the
Kentish Rebels. 50 a * Suffolk house in Southwarke. 454 b Suffolk lane. 252 b
Summers Hithe, now Queen Hithe. 400 b Thomas Suttons Will, together with the
erection of the Charter house, 479 b * His Monument. 482 b Old Swan 231 b * See
Ebgate lane. 256 a Sweating sicknesses; the first 572 b the second, 584 a the
third. 588 b Sydon lane. 134 b Fyon College for the Clergy of London built by
Doctor White together with the Library, and Benefactors thereto. 304, 305
T
THe Tabard, an Inn in Southwarke, 456 a Atwods Wife played so long at Tables,
that she bore a man, the Priest, who was justly punished for his letchery. 207
b The pious and memorable charity of Christopher Tamworth of Grayes Inn,
Esquire. 766 a A Popes head Tavern in Cornhill; a pint of wine was sold for a
penny, 216 a Cardinals Hat Tavern in Lombard street. 216 b A grievous Tax and
Tallage granted to King Richard the second, cause of a great rebellion. 47 b
Tazell Close. 175 * Tem what. 919 a Tempests of lightning and thunder, 79 b A
Tempest drove all the people from Divine Service at Paul's, but Roger surnamed
Niger, Bishop of London, 359 b 530 b The Spire of Alhallowes Steeple
Thunder-stricken 392 a S. Michaels Steeple fired in a Tempest. 213 a * The new
Temple; the original of the Knights Templers, their Profession, Seal, and
dissolution, 438. etc. Their house granted to the Students of the Common Law,
440 b Monuments in their Church 762 a 763 a Why the Images of Knights buried in
the Temple, are laid crosselegged, 440 b * The old Temple in Holborne. 486 b
Four Terms or times of pleading: Hilary. Easter. Trinity. Michaelmas. 522 b.

Thames street. 231 b * Thames River, 14 * 675 b The head of it, 14 b The
course, 15 a. Commodities, Length, Plenty of Fish, 16. Constant Tides, 17 a
number of Boats and Watermen, 18 a. Jurisdiction of the Lord Mayor over it, 18
* 20, 21. etc. Acts for the conservation thereof, 683. 685. An Engine to
enforce Thames water. 403 b * Thavies Inn. 430 b Theeving lane in Southwarke,
456 b * In Westminster. 497 b Saint Thomas of Acons Hospital. 281 a * 935
Thomas of Woodstock, his Monument. 510 a Three-needle street. 183 a
Throckmorton street. 183 a * 187 a Tiltyard at Westminster. 495 b Timber hithe.
403 a Tinckermen in the River of Thames. 18 b The Popes Bull, for the offerings
of the Parishes to the Curates in London by way of Tithes, 747. The ancient
composition for them. 749 b Toll, what. 919 a Tom Shorthose, his Epitaph. 310 a
* Totehill street and Fields. 525 b The Tower of London, first built by William
the Conqueror, 40. Constables thereof, 41 a Compassed with a Wall and Ditch, 41
a 926. Lions kept in it, 42 a Scaffold first set on Tower hill, 42 b Gates of
the Tower, 42. See Gates. Famous actions done there, 43 a Mint there, 44 b *
Use of the Tower to defend the City, 56 a. Liberties thereof, 125 b The
controversy betwixt the Lord Mayor and the Lieutenant of the Tower about
privileges. 126. 932 Two Towers on London Bridge. 56 Tower hill. 117 b 125 a *
Tower street. 130 b Tower-Royall, 62 b The antiquity and honor thereof, 257 b
* King Richard the second lodged there, 258 a * King Stephen lodged there. 260
a Townesend lane. 401 Men of Trades in distant places, 67 a Change of place and
Tradesmen, 68 b. Tradesmen lived of their own Trades, without meddling with
others. 254 a Trigge lane. 403 b Trinity Priory in the Dukes place, 145 a The
first founding thereof, 930 * Ancient Charters of diverse Kings concerning it,
931. Monuments therein. 145 b Trinity lane. 397 a * Triumphs and shows, as
Mummeries, Maskings, Lord of Mis-rule, May-games. 78 a * Tun in Cornehill, a
Prison. 207 a Turne-againe lane. 414 b 427 b Turne-mill street, now called
Turne-bold street. 483 b
V
VAgrants. 672 b * Vanners lane. 255 a * The fatal Vesper, at the
Blackfriars. 381 b All manner of Victuals to be bought anciently at all times
in a certain place called the Cookery. 711 a * The Incorporation of the
Company of Vintners. 255 a The Vintrie, 225 a * King Henry the fourth his
sons supped there. 256 a Virginity (by Matilda the fair) defended with the
loss of life. 57 Usurers. 677 a Usury forbidden by King Edward the first. 289
b * Vtfangtheof, what. 919 a *
W
WAll about the City of London, 4 a. When and why the Wall of the City was
broken through Saint Bartholomewes Hospital. 936 b The Brook called Walbrooke,
10 a * 113 b * Walbrooke street, 243 b Vaulted over and paved with stone, 30 b
Barges towed up Walbrooke into Bucklesbury. 276 a * Lodgings for the Prince of
Wales. 142 a The Walnut-tree, an Inn in Southwarke. 458 a Sir Frances
Walsinghams Monument. 362 a Walworth, Lord Mayor, did not slay Jack Straw, 232
b 236 b * His Monument defaced in St. Michael Crooked lane, and since
falsified. 237 a * Wapping, 461 b The new Chapel there. 462 a The names of
their Aldermen, as they are this year, 1633. 647 Court of Wards. 523 b * An
Act for reformation of abuses in the Wardmote Inquest. 669, 673 a The Kings
Wardrobe. 408 a Warwick, or Eldnese lane. 388 b * Wardwyte, what. 919 b Wat
Tylars outrageous rebellion, 48, etc. His demand of the King, 51. Slain by
William Walworth. 53 a. 236 b * Watches, the original and manner, 83. etc.
King Henry the eighth came to the Kingshead in Cheap, to behold the Watch. 270
b Watergate. 141 b Water lane. 437 b * Watheling street. 391 a * The
Incorporation of the Company of Weavers. 297 a Wels River, decay thereof, 9 a *
Holy-Well, Clements Well, 10 b 710 a Clerks Well 11 a 710 a Skinners Well, Fags
Well 11 a * A Well called Dame Annis the Clear, 11. A Well of great depth at
Aldersgate, 34 b A Well under the East end of St. Olaves Church in the Iewry.
290 a Weights; the Kings beam upon Corne-hill, 209 a Tronage of Wools at
Customehouse, 141 b Tronage of Wool at St. Mary Wooll-Church. 244 a Wenefrid,
Marchioness of Winchester, her Monument. 514 a The City of Westminster, 493.
Foundation of the Abbey, 497 b The burning thereof 499 a King Henry the seventh
his Chapel the miracle of the World, 498 a * A Bishop of Westminster, 498 a
500 a The first Deane there, 498 b Monuments 500 b 763, 774, 814. The Palace,
519 b * The great Hall, 519 b The use thereof, to feed poor people; a Feast
there, and Wherries rowing, 560. Parliaments kept there, and Courts of Justice,
522. Government of the City of Westminster. 525 When Wheat was sold for 16. and
12. pence a quarter. 546 A Widow in White-chappell murdered by a French man
whom she brought up, 469 b The Parson of Stepney Patron of White-chappell, 469
b * White-crosse street. 318 a 476 b White Friars the antiquity thereof with the
Monuments. 437 b White Hall heretofore called York-Place. 487 b 496 a The White
Lion in Southwark a Jail for the County of Surrey. 455 a Whittington College.
256 b Whores, 673 a 676 b. See Stews. All known Whores were to wear striped
colored cloth on their heads by an Act of Parliament. 553 a Wildgoose, or
Windgoose lane. 250 b * William of Windsor, son of Edward the third, his
Monument. 515 a * Winchester house, 449 b Bishops of Winchester, Wickam, and
Andrews, their Monuments. 452 Samuel, Thomas, and John Wincope, three
Brethren. 781 A Pint of Wine sold for a penny, and Bread given into the
bargain, 216 a * 551 b * Malmsey Wine sold for three half pence a pint, 255 b
Rumney Sack sold for Medicines only. ibid. Reyne Wolf, Stationer, collected
Holensheads Chronicle. 303 Sir John Wolley, his Monument. 777 b Famous and
honorable Women. 107 b Woodroffe lane. 156 b * Woodstreet. 307 b Wooll-wharfe,
141 b Woollstaple at Westminster, 496 a See Weights. Wolseyes lane. 251 b
Worster house. 256 a Wrestlings, and other exercises used on Bartholomew day,
now left, and worse taken up. 85 b Wringwren lane. 258 b *
Y
Young beginners, provision for them. 91 b 94 b 95 a See Kendricks Will. York
place, now Whitehall. 487 b York house. 495 a *
Z
ALlen dela Zouch, Custos of the City of London, slain in Westminster Hall, by
John Warren Earl of Surrey. 544 a
The end of the first Table.
The second Table Containing the Sirnames of all those, whom Honorable
Dignities, Memorable Benefactions, Remarkable Actions, and Venerable
Monuments, have made worthy to be recorded in this Work; Alphabetically
digested: Wherein the Figures refer to the Page, the Letters to the Column,
and the
A
ABbot. 134 b * 285 a 534 a B. 563 a 597 a Abdy. 391 b * 598 a Abingdon. 548 b
M. Abraham. 566 a Acheley. 193 a 245 a 576 a 577 b * M. Acton. 265 b 346 b *
598 b * Adams. 804 b * Ade. 872 b Aderley. 563 b 565 b M. Adrian. 543 a M.
Adys. 322 a Agmondesham. 285 a * Ailofe. 199 a 583 b Albany. 391 b Albert. 285
a * Alderban. 191 a Aldersey. 96 b 869 a * Aldworth. 429 a Alison. 284 b Allen
or Alley. 90 b 170 b 281 b 285 a * 311 a 350 a 561 a * M. 578 b 580 a M. 581 b
* M. 583 a 586 a 852 b 566 b 587 b. M. Allot. 106 b * 395 b * 589 a 59^ a M.
Altham. 580 b 585 a Alwine, or Alewine. 270 a 574 b 575 a M. Amades. 223 b *
Amcotes. 283 b * 58^ b 583 b M. Anderson. 105 a 291 a 592 b Andrew, or
Andrews. 554 a * M. 132 b 452 a Anger. 544 a Anthony. 873 b Antiloche. 537 a *
Antrobus. 373 b Apleyard. 351 b Appleton. 346 a Archer. 244 a Arderne. 335 a
Armenter. 547 a * Armorer. 131 b 134 a Arneway. 808 b * Arnold. 293 b 563 a *
893 b Arundell. 186 a * 346 a 791 b * Ascham. 558 b * M. Ascough. 484 b *
Ascue. 145 b 395 a * 579 b 581 a M. Ashburnham. 763 a * Ashcombe. 308 b
Ashehill. 274 a Ashfield. 145 b Ashwy. 540 b M. Askham. 211 b Asseldey. 157 a
Astly. 834 a Astry. 261 b * 572 b * Atcourt. 186 a * Atkins. 337 b * Atkinson.
96 a 285 a Atwell. 312 b Atwood. 207 b Aubry. 345 b 546 b 551 a M. Audley. 146
a 460 a * Avenon. 286 a * 337 b 586 a * 587 b * M. Avesey. 146 a Avinger. 395 a
* Austen. 406 b 452 b 453 a 557 b Aunsham. 189 b Air. 296 a Aylesbrough. 241 a
Aylesham. 551 a Aylmer. 153 b * 573 b
B
BAbalius. 135 b Babham. 355 b Baby. 338 a Backehouse. 588 b 597 b Bacon. 133 a
* 364 b 571 b 226 b 138 b * 139 b 587 a Bainham. 108 a * Baker. 285 a * 411 b
Bakhurst. 299 b * Balamer. 548 b Baldocke. 365 b 531 b B. Baldry. 269 b * 281 b
578 b * 570 b * M. Baldwin. 346 a Balgay. 120 a Balthorp. 416 a Bambrough. 311
a Banne. 87 b 228 b * 556 b 557 b M. Bancroft. 534 a * B. 790 b * Band. 186 b *
Bane. 431 b Banester. 324 b Banks. 270 a 388 a * 586 b 857 b Banning, or
Bayning. 101 a * 105 a * 305 a 591 b 863 a Bardolph. 145 b Barentine. 186 b 322
b 558 a M. Barker. 843 a 898 b Barkham. 594 b 596 a M. Barkley. 425 a 484 b
Barnard. 398 a 407 a Barn, or Barnes. 87 a 191 a 220 b 242 a 258 b 299 b 583 a
* 395 a 532 b B. 553 b M. 584 b 588 b * 590 a M. 898 a Barneham. 105 a * 235 a
587 b * 591 a * Barners. 158 b Barnocke. 257 a * Barnwell. 392 b * 564 a
Barons. 145 b Barradaile. 189 b Bar. 238 a * Barret. 325 b * 556 b Barry. 138
b Bartholomew. 340 b 537 b Bartlet. 285 a * 432 a * Barton 285 a * 312 b * 356
b * 372 a 561 b * M. 560 a Bartram. 345 b Barwis. 411 a Bas. 552 a * Basford.
578 a Baskervile. 281 b 366 b * 586 a * Basset. 391 b * 531 a B. 568 b 571 a M.
Bassing. 178 b 298 a 538 b 542 b M. Bat. 540 a M. Bate. 538 a Bateman. 150 a
Batencourt. 545 a Bath. 330 b Bathurst. 246 b Battle. 351 a * Batte. 193 a *
Baude. 368 a * Bailey. 257 a 415 b 578 a 579 b M. 792 a Beale. 183 b * Beam.
530 a * B. Beard. 151 a Beastby. 415 b Bean. 537 a * Beauchampe. 368 b
Beaumond, or Beamont, 292 a 349 a 391 b 763 b 565 b 820 b 830 a 877 b Becket.
86 a 292 a * Beckingham. 136 a Bedingfield. 485 b Bedoe or Bedow. 150 a 891 a
907 a * Beecher. 193 a 587 a Bell. 186 b 484 b 546 b * Belengham. 273 b *
Belgrave. 230 b * Belknape. 406 a * Bellesdon. 351 b 570 b * Bellow. 316 b
Belwase. 372 a Belwin. 290 a Bembow. 801 a * Ben. 363 a * Benalias. 133 a
Benam. 222 b Benneson. 215 a Bennet. 148 b 561 b 593 a M. 796 a Bennington. 285
b * Benolt. 179 a Benson. 457 b Berching. 308 a Beringham. 146 a Berry. 554 a
Berryman. 100 b * Besaunt. 597 a Bestbitch. 899 a Beswike. 239 b Betaine. 546 a
Betwell. 545 b Bieus. 428 b Bifield. 571 a Bildington. 415 b Bill. 826 b
Billesby. 783 a Billet. 547 b * Billesdon. 572 b M. Billing. 519 b Billingsley.
139 b 158 a 159 b 590 a M. Bilsington. 330 b Bingham. 452 a Bintworth. 531 b B.
Birch. 897 b Bishop. 96 b Blackney. 548 a Blake. 799 b Blakynbury. 326 b
Blanch. 230 b * Blanke. 227 a 588 a 589 b M. Blankwell. 186 a * Blankworth. 848
b * Bledlow. 138 b * 579 a Blighton. 316 a Blitheman. 399 b Blondell, or
Blundell. 95 b * 186 a 285 a * 537 b Blonket. 460 a * Blound, or Bland. 230 a
538 a * Blount, or Blunt. 267 a * 311 a 346 a * 484 a 537 a * 540 b 547 a M.
803 a Bloxley. 369 b Bluntivers. 538 b Boaley, or Bodeleigh. 416 b * 548 b *
Bohun. 186 a Bois. 274 b * Bokerell. 539 a M. Bold. 239 a Bolen, or Boleyne.
313 a 285 b * Bolles. 595 b * M. 870 b Bond. 121 a 218 a * 179 b 132 b * 281 b
341 a 587 a * 589 a 590 b M. 784 a 810 b * Bongey. 540 a Bonham 778 b Bonnet.
533 a B. Bonpfant. 285 a Boron. 313 b Borresby. 193 a * Borwet. 908 b Boseham.
556 a Bostock. 222 b Boswell. 841 b Bovel. 262 b Bourne. 901 a Bourser. 186 a *
Bowden. 451 a Bowler. 191 b * Bows. 157 a 223 b * 460 a * 582 a 583 a Bowyer.
105 b 211 b * 223 a 581 b * 583 a M. 588 b 865 b Box. 546 a 587 b * Boxhull.
369 b Boil. 805 a * Bradbery. 293 b 346 a * 575 a * 577 a M. Bradburge. 398 b
Brade. 398 b Bradmote. 330 b Brainforth. 472 b Brame. 250 b * Brampton. 211 b
230 b 238 a * Bramre. 346 b Bramston. 558 a Branch. 235 b 334 a 587 b 589 a M.
Brandon. 451 a * 553 a Brapson. 552 a * Brawne. 792 b Bray. 395 a Breakspeare.
290 a * 321 b Brembar. 345 b * 555 b M. Bremisgrave. 132 a Bret 330 b 351 b *
Brewer. 367 b Brewes. 451 a Brewster. 424 b * Breybrook. 367 b 532 a * B.
Brian. 397 b 561 b Briar. 189 b Brice. 223 a 569 a * 573 a M. Bricket. 170 a
Brickles. 251 a b Bridges. 223 a 894 a Brigs. 847 a Brime. 908 b Bristow. 123 b
* Britain, or Breton. 146 a 218 a * 267 a * 341 a 546 a * M. 549 b * M. 572 b
* 579 a Broke. 193 a * 259 a * Broke-it-well. 327 b Brokle. 563 a M. Brom. 138
b Bromer. 262 b Bromfield. 597 a * Bromflit. 299 b Bromley. 843 b * Broud. 527
b 575 a. Brook. 505 a 416 a 573 b * 560 a * 591 a Brooker. 454 a * Brosked. 157
a Browke. 433 b Brown. 88 b * 103 a 131 a 239 b 281 b 303 a 306 a * 338 a *
451 a * 537 b * 563 b M. 569 a * 571 b M. 576 b M. 578 a M. 558 b M. Browning.
543 a Brudge. 238 b * Bruges. 578 a 579 a * M. Brune. 86 b 175 b 537 a *
Bubwith. 532 a * Bucke. 303 a Buckland. 886 a Buckle. 227 a 589 b * 591 b * M.
Buckmote. 536 b Budd. 316 b Budge. 392 b * Bugge. 218 a Buke. 270 a *
Bukysworth. 554 b Bulbeck. 907 a Bullen, or Bullein. 89 a 313 b 566 a 567 b M.
Bunce. 773 a Burder. 345 b Burel. 237 b Burgan, or Burgaine. 285 a 416 b Buris.
553 b Burley. 161 b 277 b 360 b Burnell. 133 a 135 a 345 b Bursted. 351 b
Burton. 152 b 154 a 299 a 472 b 850 b * 907 b Burwash. 346 a * Bury. 376 b
Busby. 313 a 315 b 316 a Butler. 100 b 179 a 241 a 281 a b 337 b * 346 a 407 b
484 b 547 b 562 a 576 b 578 a M. Byng. 153 a Byrch. 135 b Byry. 416 b Bywater.
562 b
C
CAge. 350 b 779 a Caldset. 416 a Caldwell. 97 a * 215 b 326 a 372 b * 795 a
856 a Calfe. 398 a Callet. 547 a Calthrop. 184 b 344 b * 589 a * 590 b * M.
Calton. 579 b Calverley. 87 a Cambell. 107 a 291 a 592 b * 394 a 597 b M.
Cambery. 346 a Cambridge. 227 a * 561 a M. Camden. 774 a Camp. 102 a Candish,
or Cavendish. 281 a 553 b M. Canning. 566 a M. Cantilow. 306 a Capell. 191 a
573 b * 576 a * M. Caponig. 136 b Cappe. 101 a * 296 a Carew, or Carey. 149 b *
776 a 898 a * Carleshull. 557 b Caroon. 790 b Carpenter. 88 a Carre. 98 b
Carter. 154 b 454 a Cartwright. 153 b * 899 a Castle. 344 b Castleton. 261 a
Caston. 548 b * Castor. 346 a Catcher. 185 a 590 b Catworth. 308 a 564 b M.
Causton. 258 b Cawood. 244 b 331 a Cawson. 547 b * Caxton. 241 a Cayfi. 132 a
Cely. 134 b Chadwell. 406 a * Chadworth. 393 a 557 b 559 b M. Chalons. 345 b
Chalton. 564 a * 566 b M. Chamber. 397 b Chamberlain. 101 a 290 a 537 b * 586
a 874 a * Champion. 106 a 139 a * 191 a 346 b 580 b 585 b * 586 b M. Champnies.
137 b * 547 a 579 b 581 a M. Chape. 346 a Chapman. 98 b 221 b * 263 a 432 a 564
b * Chapone. 135 a Chartam. 146 a Charles. 186 b * Charleton. 822 b Chartney.
235 a Chartsey. 285 a * 563 a * 583 b * Chatesteshunt. 360 b Chaunticlere. 549
b * Chaury. 391 b * 571 b 574 b * M. Chawcer. 267 a Chaworth. 907 a Chayhee.
285 a Cheek. 309 a * 803 a * Cherry. 133 a Cheshull, or Chishull. 360 b 531 b
B. Chester. 118 b 178 b * 220 b 281 b 344 b * 572 b * 584 b 586 a * M. Cheyney.
153 b * 179 b 346 a * 406 a * Chibary. 186 b * Chichester. 555 a * M. Chickley.
88 b 244 b * 263 a 562 b M. 559 b * Chickwell, or Chigwell. 360 b 545 b 548 b
M. Chirwide. 145 b Chitcroft. 149 b Chitting. 799 a Cholmley. 372 a 433 a *
Choppin. 313 a Chornet. 186 b * Christopherson. 274 a * Church. 101 a 138 a 192
a Churchman. 87 b 187 b 557 a Churchyard. 346 b Clapham. 831 b Clare. 341 a *
Clarell. 312 b Clarke. 120 a 123 b 230 b 398 b 472 b 551 a 592 b 788 a * 852 a
Clavering. 193 a Clay. 134 b Clear. 790 a 791 b Clifford. 186 b 532 a B.
Clifton. 346 a Clixston. 284 b Clitherow. 187 b 597 a Clivelod. 393 a Clopton.
89 a 292 a * 552 a 564 a 573 a 574 a M. 801 b Clun. 100 a Cobham. 346 b * 540 b
* Cocham. 540 a Cockain, or Cocken. 148 b 179 a 185 a * 364 b 595 a M. 776 b
Cocks. 120 a Codras. 540 b Cogger. 226 a Coggeshall. 231 a 398 a Coke. or
Cook. 186 b 299 a 372 b 412 b 415 b 429 a 560 b * M. 567 a 763 a * 802 a 909 a
Colborne. 435 a Coldock. 153 a Cole. 239 a 807 a Coleman. 292 a * 410 a Collet.
89 b 265 b 306 a 308 a 571 a * 573 a 787 b Collingborne. 186 b Collins. 218 b *
392 b Colsell. 293 b Columbars. 261 a Colwich. 571 a Combarton. 246 b * 303 a *
Combs. 228 b 238 b * 565 a Combmartin. 547 b Comerton. 213 b * Comin, alias
Chilcot. 96 a Coningston. 431 b Constable. 108 b Constantine. 549 a * 569 a
Coolby. 189 b Cooper, or Cowper. 149 a 215 a 230 b * 548 a 584 a Cootes, or
Cotes. 245 a * 338 a * 573 b 581 a 582 b Cope. 397 b Copinger. 393 a * 576 b *
577 b M. Copland. 269 b Coppin. 906 a Corbet. 429 a * 811 b * Cordell. 432 a
Cornhill. 536 b 543 a Cornewallis. 261 a 556 a Cornish. 322 a Costin, or
Coston. 222 a 331 b 877 a Cosyn. 239 a 249 b Cotlow. 566 a Cotton. 148 b 425 a
* 560 b 597 a * 853 a * Covel. 134 b 346 a 820 b Coventry. 270 a * 543 a 561 b
M. Coverdale. 191 b Coult. 874 b Courtney. 186 a 532 a B. 810 a Cowch. 99 a
Cowdorow. 157 a Coxe. 352 a * 774 b * Cradock. 186 a * Crane. 551 a Cranmer.
598 a * Crashaw. 904 a * Cravon. 592 a 594 b M. Crayhag. 293 b Creke. 371 a
Cresacre. 281 b Creswell. 334 b Crew. 818 a Criche. 848 b Crisp. 219 b * 597 a
856 b Criswick. 149 b Crofts. 370 b 485 a Croke. 149 b 305 a Croles. 119 b 123
b * 131 b Cromar, Cromer, or Crowmer. 238 b 560 a 561 a * M. Cromwell. 187 a *
Crosby. 179 a 181 b 469 b Croshaw. 827 b Cross. 546 a Crow. 805 b Crowch. 434
b Crowley. 313 a Crowner. 238 b Croydon. 552 a Crud. 332 a Culverwell. 96 b *
Cure. 96 a 451 b Curteis. 218 a * 551 a 583 a Curzon. 762 b * Cushen. 231 a
Cuthing. 186 b * Cutting. 901 a *
D
DAcres. 786 b Dalling. 549 a Dallison. 484 b * Dalton. 434 b 893 a Dalusse.
261 b Dancer. 191 b Dane. 150 a 395 a 587 b Daniel. 294 a * 395 b * 571 b
Danne. 108 a Danson. 908 a * Danvers. 416 a Darby. 218 a 565 b 569 a Darcy. 117
b 118 b 119 a 324 a 549 b M. Darling. 132 a Darlington. 398 a Darr. 295 b *
Davies. 881 a Dauntesey. 295 b 580 b Davy. 304 a Dawbeney. 176 b 186 b * Dawes.
578 a Dawtrey. 186 b 788 a Day. 315 a 316 b Deane. 105 b 136 a * 146 a 597 b *
M. Dear, or Dear. 351 b 566 b Deddam. 145 b Delakere. 229 a Delamere. 545 b *
Denham. 131 a 581 a Dennie. 152 a Dennis. 131 a 133 b 554 a Dennison. 151 a
Densill. 898 a Dent. 191 b Deoly. 244 a Depham. 241 a Deskie. 186 b Dethick.
371 a 406 a * 409 b 788 b Devereux. 131 a 345 b Dewes. 290 a Deyncourt. 346 b *
Dickman. 290 a 554 b Dickson. 214 a * Digby. 830 a Digges. 303 a Dimock. 292 b
* Dinham. 346 a * Dixie. 106 a * 139 b 299 b * 588 b 590 a * M. Dobber. 395 a
582 b 584 a M. Dockwray. 355 a Dodmere. 579 b * 580 b * M. Dogget. 231 a * 395
a * 556 b 577 a Dolseby. 552 a M. Dolssell. 553 a Done, or Dunn^. 137 b * 269
a 776 b Dormer. 285 a 580 b 582 b * M. 787 b * Dorset. 537 b Dove. 102 a 119 b
* 878 a Downer. 309 b Downs, or Downis. 331 a * 800 b Downham. 103 b Draper.
106 a 139 a 152 a 311 a 586 a 587 a M. 831 a Drayton. 274 b * 763 b Drew. 193 a
* 349 b 828 a * Drifield. 187 a Drope. 213 b * 569 b * 570 b M. Drury. 547 b
Dryland. 228 b Ducy. 149 a 598 a M. Ducke. 560 a 877 a * Ducket. 106 a 537 a *
586 b * 588 a Dudley. 242 a 813 a Dudson. 886 a Duffehouse. 563 a Duffield. 123
b * Duke. 431 b 536 b * 540 a M. Dummer. 100 a Duncell. 451 a Dunstable. 245 a
b 547 a Dunster. 821 a Dunthorne. 308 b Durant. 537 a * Duresme. 541 a Durham.
542 b * Durrem. 183 b * Dutcon. 802 a Dyker. 564 b *
E
EAstfield. 88 b * 303 a * 387 b 562 b * M. Ebot. 559 a Edgecombe. 766 a
Edisbury. 805 b Edlyn. 773 b * Edmonds. 347 a Edwards. 157 a 186 b 220 a * 567
a 570 a * M. 824 a Eeles. 905 a Egeock, or Egioke. 430 a 812 b Eliot. 321 b
Elkenton. 346 b Elkin. 104 b 388 a Ellis. 558 b 907 a Elmer. 98 a * 366 b 473 a
534 a B. Elrington. 211 b * 451 a 471 a Elsing. 86 b Elwes. 105 b * 107 a 594 a
Emerson. 452 b Emfield. 347 a Empson. 242 a English. 579 b 808 b Eomans. 473 a
Erington. 858 a Esgastone. 398 a Essex. 293 b 419 b * 424 a * Eston. 458 a *
Evans. 454 b 793 a Evenger. 131 b Everard. 561 a Every. 215 a Evington. 100 b
Eure. 360 a Ewin. 238 b * 340 b * Exmew 306 a * 577 a 518 b * M. Exton. 227 a *
557 a M. Eyland. 538 a Air. 89 a 163 a * 223 b 564 a 566 a M.
F
FAbian. 89 a 214 a 574 a Fairford. 238 a * 458 a Falckins. 188 a Falconer. 88
a 561 a M. 559 b * Falleron. 187 b Falstaff. 557 a Faringdon. 105 b 335 a *
337 b * 545 b * M Farnford. 398 b Farrer. 277 a Farrington. 594 a * Fastolph.
179 b Fauconbridge. 179 b 366 b 530 b * M. Fauset. 145 b Featly. 837 a Felcham.
340 b Felding. 285 b Fen. 419 b * 597 a * Fenkell, or Finkill. 238 b * 573 a
Fenrother. 577 b Fenton. 245 a 805 a Ferrers. 429 a 582 a 789 b Fetherstone.
435 a 880 b * Fetiplace. 292 a * Ffoy. 260 a * Field. 567 a Fielding. 565 b 567
a M. Fikeldon. 311 a * Filpot. 87 a Fines. 345 b * Finke. 186 b * Fingrith. 547
a * Fished. 555 b * Fisher. 96 b 97 a Fitz-Alwine. 146 a * 245 a 536 b * M.
Fitz-Arnold. 537 a Fitzhugh. 532 b B. Fitz-Iames. 370 a 532 b B. Fitz-Isabel.
537 a Fitz-Mary. 86 b * 544 a Fitz-Richard. 543 b M. Fitz-Roger. 542 a M.
Fitz-Water. 416 b Fitz-William. 89 b 184 b 308 b. etc. Flemming. 149 a 285 a *
568 a * Fletcher. 366 b 534 a B. Floid. 908 b Foliot. 530 a B. Ford. 393 a
Forman. 108 a * 228 b 581 a 582 a * M. Forest. 290 a Forster, or Foster. 226 b
107 b * 311 a * 541 b * 567 a M. Fortescue. 285 a * 424 a Forth. 411 b *
Fowler. 397 b 800 b 867 a Fox. 101 a 288 b 313 a b * 545 b * Foxton. 211 b
Frances. 146 a 179 a * 322 b 550 a M. 557 b 559 a M. Franckland. 325 b Frank.
123 b * 239 a * Fray. 191 a Freemen. 596 b * 846 a * Fremingham. 559 b French.
230 b 557 a Friar. 398 a * Freshwater. 874 a Friole. 290 a Frosham. 551 a
Frostling. 553 b Frowike. 346 b 542 a 562 a M. Froyshe. 558 b Fuller. 97 b 269
b 472 a Furneis. 548 b
G
GAbeter. 262 b * Gainsford. 239 a Galder. 338 a Gale. 99 b Gamage. 350 a 588 a
Ganon. 281 a Garaway. 185 a 597 a 868 a Gardener. 211 b * 462 a 569 b * 571 b
M. Garinsers. 186 a * Garland. 152 a * 274 b * 538 a Garman. 214 a * Garme. 293
b Garrard, or Gerrard. 148 b 152 a 230 b 330 b 584 b 585 a * 591 a 593 a M. 818
b 844 b 886 a * Garth. 281 b Garton. 548 a Gayle. 228 b Gedney. 561 b M.
Gelson. 228 a Gennings. 89 b Gest 372 a Gibs. 296 a * Gibson. 107 b 309 b * 582
a 788 b Gifford. 186 b 313 b * Gilbert. 107 131 a Gilborne. 150 a * Gillet. 877
a * Gips. 474 a * Girdler. 554 b Gisors. 255 a * 261 a 345 b 541 a M.
Gloucester. 406 a 546 b Glover. 105 a 228 a 293 b * 314 b Goad. 249 b Goare, or
Gore. 148 b 246 a * 306 b 595 a 596 b Goddard. 105 a * 592 a Godfrey. 303 a
Godney. 193 a Golding. 294 b * 419 b 773 b Goldsmith. 831 a Gonnel. 305
Goodcheape. 546 a Goodman. 293 b Goodrick. 883 b Goodwin. 146 a 333 b Gorges.
786 a Goslin, or Gosling, or Gosseline. 227 a * 562 a 908 a Govere. 313 a *
Gower. 179 a 237 b Grace. 213 b Gramstone. 238 b * Granado. 138 b * Grantham.
265 b 346 b 549 a M. Grass. 538 a * Gravesend. 531 b * B. Gray. 261 a 400 b
552 a B. 578 a Greek. 333 b Green. 331 b Greenough. 305 a Greenway. 138 b *
Greenwood. 322 a Gregory. 326 b 564 b 566 b M. Gresham. 90 b * 92 b * 179 b 182
a 184 b * 285 b 299 b 303 a 580 b 581 b 582 a M. 583 b * M. 787 b Greswold. 152
a * Gretsim. 239 a Grevill. 451 a * Gray. 313 a Griffith. 157 a * 230 b *
Grimeston. 798 b * Grindall. 533 b B. Grove. 576 b * Guilford. 360 b 786 b
Gunter. 214 a Gurden. 548 a Gurney. 104 b 238 b 590 b
H
HAcket. 148 b 179 a 595 a 597 a 854 a * Hackney. 227 a Haddon. 135 a 326 a *
349 a 574 b 576 b * M. Hadley. 337 b * 555 b M. Haines. 134 a * Hales. 148 b
564 b * Hall. 92 a 100 b 276 b 346 b 392 b 862 b Halsey. 585 b Halstock. 419 b
Hallyday. 299 b * 591 b 842 b * Halton. 180 b 308 b 560 a Halye. 398 b *
Hamber. 313 a * Hamersley. 595 b 597 b M. Hammond. 550 b * M. Hamney. 293 b
Hampson, or Hampton. 105 a 193 a * 227 b 568 b 570 b 592 a Hanbury. 152 b 154 b
* 316 a Hanford. 148 b 244 a 596 b Hansard. 550 b * Hansby. 473 b Harbeck. 293
b Harby. 215 a Hardell. 154 b 538 b M. Harding. 230 b 231 a 239 b 571 a 587 a
Hardy. 580 a * Hardley. 558 a M. Hare. 371 a 880 a Harington. 370 b * 434 b
Hariot. 138 b * 569 b 572 a 831 b Harlingridge. 274 b * Harper. 92 b * 585 a
586 a * M. 845 b Harp^field. 179 a Harrison. 430 a Heart. 106 b 117 b 241 b 346
b 589 a * 590 b Hartford. 252 a * Hartshorne. 331 a Harvey. 218 a * 311 a * 545
a M. 588 a * 589 b M. 595 b M. 868 a 903 a Harvist. 103 a 315 a 316 b * Hary.
338 a Hasken. 223 b Hastings. 345 b Hatcliffe. 804 a * Hatfield. 244 a 555 a
Havelock. 290 a Haverell. 536 b * 537 b Havering. 245 b Haughton, or Hawton.
549 b 591 b 809 b Having. 257 a * Hawes. 150 a 235 b 269 b * 308 a 310 b 575 b
586 b 588 a M. 773 a Hawkins. 139 b 805 b * 862 a Hawlen. 392 b Hawteine. 546 a
Hay, or Hayes. 187 b 593 b M. 595 a * M. 847 b * Haydon. 95 a 257 a 584 b *
Hayman. 886 a Heardson. 139 a Hearn. 149 a 595 b Head. 575 b Heila. 183 b
Heilin. 596 b Heliland, or Holiland. 537 b 341 a Helisdon. 556 b Hemenhall. 552
a Hend. 241 a Henneage. 179 b 366 a * Henningham. 145 b Henshaw. 306 b *
Herbert. 349 b Hereford. 546 a Hereick. 812 Herenden. 326 b Heriot. 411 a
Heretagh. 310 a * Herlion. 536 b * Heron. 801 b * Hertelepole. 547 b *
Heselrigg. 893 a Hetton. 803 b * Hewet, or Hewyt. 219 a 322 a * 364 a 777 a *
Heyban. 238 a * Heyford. 220 b 569 a 571 a Heyward. 226 b 305 b 586 b M. 587 b
M. 591 a M. Heywood. 170 a Hicks. 760 a Hide. 155 a 559 a * Higham. 563 a *
High-lord. 136 b Hildie. 274 b * Hill or Hills. 89 a 90 b 92 b 155 b * 192 a *
245 a * 281 b 309 a 532 b * B. 570 b 572 b * M. 582 b 584 a * M. 806 a
Hilliard. 451 a * Hiltoft. 554 Hilton. 101 a 223 b * 406 a Hinchlade. 309 a
Hind. 88 a 265 a 267 a * 337 b 544 a 556 b M. a * Hobby. 171 a * Hobson. 274 a
* Hodge, or Hodges. 148 b 472 a 596 a 558 a M. Hodgson, or Hodson. 261 a 306 a
Holbech. 554 a Holdernesse. 577 b * Holdich. 555 a Holgrave, or Holigrave. 123
b 460 a Holland. 265 a 267 a * 563 b Holliday. 149 a 593 b * M. Hollis. 179 b
580 a 582 a M. Holmedon. 592 a Holmes. 96 a Holstocke. 227 a Holt. 222 b * 351
b Hondon. 235 b Hone. 416 b Hopton. 346 a Horn. 245 a 571 a * 573 a M.
Hosepoole. 219 b * 431 b Horton. 432 a Hothersall. 150 a Houghton, or Howton.
214 a b 346 a 880 a * 892 b House. 391 b 590 a. Howard. 131 a 790 b How. 899 a
* Howpill. 153 a Huberthorne. 211 b 212 a 582 b 583 b M. Huddy. 346 b Huit. 238
b Hulin. 566 a 568 468 a * M. Hulit. 454 a Hull. 865 a Hulson, or Hulton. 387 b
392 a * Humble. 452 a Hunnes. 905 b Hungate. 281 a Hungerford. 346 b 787 a
Hunt. 107 a 108 a Huntington. 179 a Huntlow. 582 a Hurstwaight. 392 b Husband.
550 b Huse, Husse, or Hussie. 146 a 349 b 372 a 795 b Huysh. 278 a Huytley. 246
b
I
IAckman. 245 a * 586 b * Jacob. 99 b 789 b * 891 b * Iaie. 221 b 595 a James.
132 b * 138 b 226 a 562 b * 568 b 571 b * M. 825 a Iarveis. 583 a Iawdrell. 235
b Ienkins. 101 a Ienner. 430 b Iennings. 95 b * 152 a * 303 a 346 b 575 a * 577
a M. 579 b Iermin. 845 a Iken. 274 a Ilam. 89 a * 281 b 571 a * Illingworth.
308 a Ingham. 417 a Ioceline. 241 a 567 b 569 a M. Johnson. 149 a 191 a 350 a
576 b * 595 b * Iolles. 593 b * 595 a M. Jones. 103 a 105 b 593 b 596 a * 883 a
Jorden. 118 b 123 b Iosue. 537 a 538 a * Ioyner. 340 b 541 a M. Ireland. 100 b
393 a 554 b * 568 a Ironside. 834 a Isaac. 138 b 573 b Isham. 415 b Islip. 138
a Iud. 90 b 179 b 182 b 583 a * 584 a * M. Ive. 311 a *
K
KAyor. 186 b Keble. 89 b * 276 a 575 b 577 b M. Kelsey. 306 a * Kempe. 145 b
370 a 532 a B. 798 b 908 b Kempton. 588 b * Kendall. 274 b * Kendricke. 193 b *
Kenly. 186 b * Kennington. 138 a Kenuda. 186 b Kerkby, or Kirby. 152 a * 245 b
290 a * 576 b Kerveyn, or Kervin. 180 b 837 a * Keston. 274 a Kettle. 235 b
Keynell. 801 b Keyton. 322 a Kiligreie. 259 b Killingbery. 557 b M. King. 293 b
534 a B. 564 a * 775 Kingston. 211 a 550 b * Kinnon. 437 a Kirketon. 346 b *
Kirkman. 262 a * Kirton. 454 b Kiryoll, or Kyriell. 138 a 156 b Kitriell. 138 a
Kitson. 581 a Knape. 431 b Knesworth. 182 a * 284 a 574 b * 576 b M Knight. 416
b Knighthode. 556 b Knowles. 87 b * 86 a 265 a 266 b 558 a M. Kyme. 257 a * 579
a * Kyrton. 152 a
L
LAcy. 186 a 367 b * 398 a Laken. 281 b Lambard, or Lambert. 92 b 223 a 311 a
270 a * 537 a 568 a * 580 a 581 a Lamb. 93 a * 355 b Lambin. 548 a Lancaster.
419 b * Land. 136 b 186 a * Lane. 275 a * Langford. 546 b Langham. 392 b
Langly. 188 a 284 b 315 a 545 b * 587 a 588 b * M. Langthrop. 179 a Langton.
179 a * 423 b. Large. 88 b 290 b 563 b * 565 a M. Latimer. 797 b * Laud. 534 b
B. Laund. 555 b Laurence. 787 a Law. 211 a 560 a Laxton. 90 b * 267 a 268 a *
582 a 583 a * Lazar. 550 a * Lee, Legh, or Leigh. 106 b 150 a 245 a * 274 b *
281 b 292 b 433 b 407 a 434 b 566 b 568 a * M. 569 b 585 a b * M. 591 a * 593 a
* M. 472 a * 474 a 790 a 813 b Leg. 551 b Legget, or Leggy. 217 a 551 a M. 552
a M. Lekhimpton. 326 a Lemman. 148 b 593 b 595 b M. 856 b Lepington. 191 a
Lessieur. 834 b * Levison. 152 a * 581 a Lewen. 399 b 581 b 861 a Jews. 428 b
Lewknor. 451 a Leyland. 387 b Liade. 179 b Lichfield. 321 b * 251 a *
Lichterveld. 331 a Lily. 370 a 906 b Linacer. 369 b * Lindericle. 186 a Lions.
105 b 250 b * 262 b * 555 b * 584 a * 585 a Lisle. 341 a * 345 a Little. 553 a
Littlesbury. 258 b Littleton. 235 b 762 a Liveley. 474 b Lloyd. 406 b * Lock.
270 a 281 b 568 a 583 b 581 b Lodge. 268 a 585 b 586 a M. Lofken, or Loveken.
87 a * 236 b 551 b * M. Lok. 804 a Long. 235 b 407 b 580 a Lonyson. 338 a Love.
557 a * Loveday. 909 a * Lovel. 157 a 274 a 359 b * 531 b B. 907 a Lovenham.
560 b Lover. 308 b 873 a. Louth. 419 b * 559 b Low. 148 b 185 a 230 b 591 b 593
b M. Lowen. 221 b Lucas. 185 a 551 a Lucy. 345 b 346 b * 888 b * Ludlow. 419 b
* Lumley. 148 b 134 a 595 a * M. Lupton. 257 b Lusher. 784 b Lutkin. 584 a Lie.
417 b *
M
MAbbe. 350 a Machel. 306 a * 585 a * Mackley. 416 b Mackman. 257 a * Mafield.
558 a Mainard. 584 b Malifant. 415 b Malin. 212 b Malledge. 457 b Malmaynas.
346 b * Malory. 281 b 336 a 585 a 586 b * M Malpas. 88 b 152 a 162 a * 564 b
565 a Malton. 331 a Malwen. 146 a Man. 152 b * 295 b Mancer. 311 a Mandevile.
146 a * Manhall. 211 a Manners. 186 a. 471 a. Manning. 101 a * 242 a
Manningham. 186 b Manny. 186 b Manthrop. 145 b Marbeler. 551 a * March. 237 b
Markby. 415 b Marlow. 400 b 561 b M. 559 b M. Marpor. 228 b * Marrow. 331, 566
a 567 b M. Marsh. 311 a 338 b. Marshall. 149 b 179 a * 286 a 454 a * 532 b * B.
564 b Martin. 105 b * 193 a 259 a * 265 b 299 b 406 a * 572 a 574 a * M. 581 a
585 b 587 a * M. 589 b Mascall. 99 a Masham. 104 b * 589 b Mason. 211 a 314 b
316 b 331 a 361 b 899 a * Master. 218 a * Matthew. 238 b 572 a 573 b M.
Maunsell. 897 b * S. Maure. 285 a May. 98 b * 185 b * 391 b Medham. 567 b
Medly. 311 a Medlycote. 412 a * Melchborne. 187 b Melford 361 a Mellington. 156
b Mellishe. 392 a * Melrith. 285 a * Merick. 186 a Mess. 212 a Metcalfe. 891 b
Meteren. 219 b Metwood. 548 a Mewes. 186 a Michael. 223 b 330 b 372 a 561 a
Michell. 230 b * 290 a 562 b M. Micell. 261 b * Middleton. 148 b 303 a 566 b *
593 a * M. Milborne. 90 a 157 a * 220 b 339 a * 577 a 579 a M. Mildmay. 420 a *
Milford. 306 a * Mill. 332 a Milred. 563 a Mils. 146 a * 587 b Milsam. 331 a *
Minors. 235 b Mirfin. 356 b * 397 b 451 a * 577 b * 578 b M. Mirley. 308 b
Moager. 223 b Mocking. 550 a Mollington. 157 a Moncaster. 351 b Mond, or Mund.
337 b 355 a Monden. 360 b Monmouth. 131 a 581 b Monox. 90 a 577 a 578 a M.
Montague. 846 b Monyns. 884 a Mordant. 227 a * Mordaske. 186. b. Mordon. 237 b
549 b M. Morens. 186 b * More, or Moore. 155 a 263 a 346 b * 556 b 557 a * 558
b * M. 592 a * 787 b 857 a * Morgan. 230 b * Morley. 135 a 186 a 333 a Morris.
206 b 211 b 551 a Mortain. 346 b Mortimer. 145 b 345 a Morsted. 273 b * 290 a *
308 a 339 b * 564 b Morton. 825 b Mosley. 591 a M. 892 a * Motte. 238 a *
Mountfort. 228 b 307 a 510 a * Mountgomery. 346 b Moyle. 346 b Monday, or
Mundy. 578 a * 579 b M. 869 a Mullert. 150 a Mulshew. 257 a * Multon. 149 b
Mun. 222 b Murray. 905 b Muschamp. 306 a * 568 b Mustell. 261 a Mutas. 162 a
N
NAle. 152 b * Nash. 311 a Naylor. 187 b Neale, or Nele. 258 b * 333 b 530 a B.
551 a Nedham. 416 b * Nelson. 98 a * Neve. 241 a Nevel. 186 a * 336 b * 345 b *
369 b * 788 b * Newbery. 98 a Newenton, or Newington. 186 a 558 a Newland. 538
b 572 a Newley. 536 b Newman. 98 b Newport. 360 b 399 a 531 b B. 555 b Newton.
123 b 387 b Nicholas. 93 a 312 b 392 b 398 b 587 a 588 b M. Nicols. 355 b *
Nicolson. 236 a 407 b Niger. 530 b B. Nives. 573 b Norbery, or Norborow. 157 a
346 b * 367 b Nordon. 432 a 565 b Norford. 192 b Norlong. 285 a * Norland. 281
b Norman. 282 a 548 b 565 b * 567 a M. Norris. 186 a * 303 b North. 285 b 433 b
Northampton. 542 b M. 556 b Northbroke. 532 a B. Norton. 96 b * 281 a Norwich.
138 b Notte. 552 b * M. Nottingham. 553 a Nouncy. 398 a Nowell. 361 b * 889 a
O
OFfley. 94 b 96 b 105 a 152 b 153 a * 154 a 584 b * 585 a M. 590 b * 843 b *
847 b Oldgrave. 567 b 569 a M. Oldhall. 257 a * Oleph. 587 a Olney. 237 b 306 a
* 564 a 566 a * M. Olyffe. 239 b Organ. 136 a * 290 a 557 a Orme. 874 b *
Orrell. 179 a 180 b Orwell. 530 a B. Osborne. 218 a * b 588 b 589 b M. Ostrich.
308 b 574 a M. Otely. 563 a M. Otwell. 543 a Overton. 155 b Overye. 235 a Owen.
245 a * 798 a Owfield. 100 b
P
PAckenton. 277 b 332 a Paddesley. 564 a 565 a * Paget. 218 a * 333 b * Pain.
892 a Palin. 101 b 124 a 472 b Palmer. 337 b * 392 b * 485 a * 548 a 762 b 779
a Par. 407 a Pargitar. 391 b * 579 a 580 b M. Paris. 545 a Parker. 100 a 101 a
320 b 371 b 558 b * Parkhurst. 305 a 596 b Parkinson. 428 a Parnell. 392 b
Parrie. 135 b * 810 a Parsall. 346 b * Partrich. 228 b 579 Parveffe. 561 b M
Paskim. 295 a Pats. 346 b Patten. 92 b * Pattesly. 238 a * Paulet. 346 b
Payton. 185 b Peach. 223 a 552 b M Peacocke. 372 a 580 a 581 a * M. Peake, or
Peke. 311 a 472 b Pelham. 888 a Pemberton. 107 a 187 b 322 b * 326 b 573 b 593
a * M. Pen. 560 b * Pepper. 138 b Percers. 186 b * Percivall. 89 a 193 a *
223 b 573 a 575 a * M. Perry. 87 a Pert. 350 b Peter. 88 a Peterson. 218 a *
Peyntwin. 790 b Philip, or Philips. 227 a * 458 a * 566 b 568 b M. 823 b 130 b
* Philpot. 345 b 555 b M Picard. 87 a 255 a * 542 b 552 a M. Pickering. 179 b *
285 a 852 b * Picking. 169 b Piel. 555 a M. Pierson. 270 a Pigot. 547 b Pike.
131 b 191 a * 550 b 560 b * Pikehurst. 308 b Pikeman. 226 556 a * Pikeworth 460
a * Pinchenon. 581 a Pinder. 171 a 767 a Pipe. 588 a 589 a. M Piriton. 369 b
Plat. 263 a 762 b Plesseis. 369 b Plumbe. 787 b * Plummer. 242 a 568 a
Pointell. 549 a Pole. 350 a Pontfract. 560 a Poole. 559 b * 597 a Pope. 245 a *
b Porter. 103 a 134 b 340 b 346 b Portman. 433 b Poster. 275 a Potter. 544 b
Poulsted. 132 b Poultney. 86 b 239 a 252 a * 360 b 550 a M Pourt. 547 b Powel,
or Powle. 186 b * 432 b 793 a 794 b Powlet. 184 a * 82 b Poynes. 346 b
Prannell. 104 387 b 590 a Prat. 598 a Prescot. 339 a 594 b Preston. 549 a M.
Price. 170 b * 831 b 893 b 901 a Pricot. 211 a Priest. 581 a Prince. 313 a
Prior. 548 b Proby. 148 b 595 a * 596 b M. Prodham. 549 a * Provost. 460 a
Prust. 890 b Pullison. 588 a * 590 a * M. Purchase. 574 a * 575 a M. Purchat.
285 a Purde. 331 b * Purfet. 325 b Purpoint. 237 b Puty. 274 a Pie. 348 b Pyel.
594 a 842 a
Q
QVarles. 100 a * 185 a b
R
RAdcliffe. 135 a 239 a 812 b Radwell. 237 b Rainsford. 148 q Rainton. 596 a
528 b M. Rainwell. 88 b 226 a 563 a * M. 560 b. Ramsey. 106 a * 155 a * 223 b *
224 a 348 a 587 a 588 b M. Randall. 101 a 103 a * 400 b * Randulph. 94 b * 322
a 409 a Ratcliffe. 590 a * Rave. 290 a * Raven. 351 b Ravis. 370 b 534 a B.
Rawson. 89 a * 306 a * 133 b 391 b * Raymond. 778 a Read, or Read. 186 b 321 b
351 a 561 a 575 a 576 a M. Redman. 167 b 411 a * Rosham. 547 a M. Reinere. 536
b Reive. 171 b Remington. 227 a 573 a Renger. 539 a M. Rennington. 575 b M.
Rest. 577 a 578 b M. Revell. 227 a 573 b Reynell. 883 a * Reyner. 567 b
Reynolds. 581 a 806 a 811 a Rich. 89 b 281 b 285 a * 565 a Richards. 544 a *
Richardson. 907 a Ricroft. 138 b 175 a Ricthorne. 799 a * Rider. 591 a * M.
Ridge. 94 b Ridley. 533 a * B. Ripton. 123 b * Rishby. 397 b River. 346 b * 586
b 588 a M. Roberts. 133 b * 150 b 293 b Robinson. 131 b 133 b 180 a * Robsart.
346 a Roch. 184 b 223 b 579 b 582 b M. Rochester. 179 a Rochford. 313 a *
Rodlegete. 186 a * Roc. 299 b 878 b * Rogerbrooke. 416 a Rogers. 97 a 124 a 242
b * 347 b 412 b 312 b * Rois. 221 b * Roiston. 419 b * Rokeby. 331 a * 428 a
429 b 966 b * Rokesby. 306 a 340 b 345 b 543 b M. Rallingcourt. 186 b Roman,
Roman, or Romany. 118 b 258 b 267 a * 546 b * 548 a M. Roose. 146 a Roper.
315 b Roston. 346 b Roswell. 257 a * Rotham. 269 a * Rocheley. 346 b Rotherham.
594 b Rothing. 549 a * Row. 92 b 98 a 106 b 107 a 188 b 285 b 586 a 587 b M.
589 b * 591 a M. 594 a 796 a 798 a * Rowse. 153 b 337 b * 451 a Rudston. 215 a
579 b 580 b M. Rumney. 105 b 107 a 305 a 593 a Rus. 213 b * 563 b Russell. 99 b
* 133 b 221 b 387 b 472 b M. 546 b 806 a
S
SAckford. 486 a * Sackvile. 346 b * 484 a Saint Albane. 892 b Saint John. 228
b * Salter. 134 a Saltonstall. 215 a 590 b * 592 a * M. Sampson. 453 b Sampull.
908 b * Sandhill. 398 b Sanderford. 179 b Sandwich. 347 a 531 b B. 546 a * M.
Sandys. 412 a 534 a B. Sarich. 300 b Saris. 829 b Savage. 455 a 532 b B. 273 b
851 a. Savill. 415 b Saunders. 297 a Saxton. 274 b Scarlet. 419 b Schrader. 135
a Scot. 99 a 244 b 566 a M. 791 a Scriven. 472 b Scroop. 186 b * Scudamore. 124
a 170 b 296 a 473 a 593 b * 900 b Seamer. 179 a * Segrave. 531 b B. Seinturer.
538 b Seliock. 274 b * Sely. 547 a 556 b 562 b Seman. 321 b Sentleger. 423 b
Seringe. 811 a Serle. 409 b 538 b * M. Sevenock. 88 a * 372 a 561 b M. 558 b
Seyle. 594 a Seymer. 472 a 578 b 580 a M. 813 b * Sha, or Shaw. 89 a 281 b 283
b 337 b * 570 b 572 a * M. 575 b Shandoys. 355 a * Sharborough. 308 b Sheldon,
or Shelton. 259 a 577 b * 904 b Shelley. 138 b 310 a 570 a * Shepley. 417 a *
Sheppard. 800 a * Shere. 192 b Sherington. 192 b 218 a * Seerland. 873 a
Shirley. 416 a Shore. 244 a 274 a 576 b. Shorthose. 310 a * Shrow. 238 a Shute.
221 b Simonds. 392 b 453 a 578 b * Skales. 138 b Skevington. 157 a * 297 b 579
a * Skidmore. 99 a Skinner. 106 b 306 a 590 b 592 a M. Skip. 400 a * Skoowith.
908 a * Slany. 106 b * 241 a 590 a M. Smales. 473 b Smalpace. 419 b 877 a
Smithes. 105 b 321 b 594 b Smith. 99 a * 134 a * 150 a 213 b * 214 a * 291 b
296 b 316 b * 349 b 398 b 406 a 453 b 473 a * 569 b * 597 b 779 b 783 b 794 a
829 a Snelling. 424 a Snow. 794 a Sokeling. 293 b Some. 590 b 592 a M. Summer.
179 a 574 b * Sotherton. 332 a Southlee. 346 b * Southwell. 245 a Southworth.
179 a Spear. 308 b Spence. 472 b Spencer. 180 a 186 a * 228 b 341 a * 578 b
580 a 589 b 591 b * M. 774 b 825 b Spendelew. 883 a Spert. 789 a Spicer. 186 b
539 a * Spilman. 400 a 559 b Stafford. 345 b 471 a * 808 a * Staham. 262 b *
Stalbrook. 569 b Standelfe. 338 a Standhurst. 451 a Stanes. 395 a 546 a.
Stanhope. 369 b Stanley. 262 b 832 b Staper. 188 b Staple. 555 a M. Stapleton.
770 b Starkey. 152 b Startute. 788 a Steed. 230 b * 575 b Steward. 211 a 551 b
789 a 906 b Style. 98 a 105 b 131 a 246 a 292 b Stiward. 222 b 567 b * Stock.
821 a Stocker. 228 b 568 a 570 b Stoddard. 100 a 135 a Stoder. 99 a Stody. 87 a
553 b. M Stokes. 152 a 486 a * Stokesby. 261 b 367 b 533 a B. Stonard. 262 b
Stondon. 557 a * M. Stone. 107 a 222 b 246 b * 306 a 568 b Storyt 471 b
Stotevil. 818 a * Stotley. 552 b Stow. 152 b 214 a * Strange. 314 a Stratford
157 a *531 b B. Street. 265 b Strelley. 322 a * 838 b Studinham. 131 a
Sturgeon. 231 a 417 a Sturges. 399 a Suckley. 392 a 582 b Sudbery. 532 a B.
Sugar. 409 a Summerset. 907 b Suthes. 792 b Sutton. 153 a 193 a * 322 b 479 a
561 a Swan. 171 a 572 b Swandland. 550 a * M. Swetenham. 308 b Swift. 331 b
Swinflat. 179 a * Swinnerton. 107 a * 793 a * 594 b M. Sydnam. 428 a
T
TAbinham. 239 a Talbat. 313 a * 531 b B. 881 a Talmage. 186 a Tame. 554 a
Tamworth. 333 a * 766 Tatam. 212 a Tatarsali. 562 b * Tate. 90 a * 138 b 190 b
222 b 568 b 570 b * M. 574 b Taverner. 311 a 372 a Tailor. 105 a * 119 a 190 b
214 b 267 a * 294 b 543 b 567 a 569 b * M. 591 a Tempest. 220 b Terry. 296 a
Test. 222 b Them. 391 a Thin. 131 a 132 a Thirlewall. 419 b * Toulouse. 582
b Thomas. 308 a 458 a Thompson. 212 a * Thoresby. 796 b Thorn. 90 a 193 a
Thorney. 100 b 429 b 551 a Thornhill. 285 b 295 a Thernix. 132 b Thornton. 472
a 898 b Throckmorton. 149 a b * Throwstone, or Thurston 338 a * 578 b
Thunderley. 547 b * Tiligham. 262 b Tilne, or Tilney. 281 b 573 b Tipper. 428 b
* Tirrell. 124 a * 145 b 186 b Tirres. 156 b Tolason. 540 b * M. Tolderney. 219
a Tolus. 214 a * Tomes. 303 a Tomkins. 810 a * Tony. 541 a M. Topham. 429 b *
873 Torald. 419 b * Torkington. 221 b * Towerson. 292 b Townley. 351 b Traps.
325 b Travers. 218 a * 278 a 538 b Tredway. 349 b Trehearne. 451 b Treszawall.
347 a Trever. 875 a Trindle. 214 a * Trisilian. 345 b * Trist. 338 a * Trotter.
309 a Trusbut. 281 b Trussell 437 a * Tryon. 193 b Tudnam. 186 a * Tuke. 292 a
Tunstall. 533 a B. Turk. 145 b 230 b 398 a 550 b * M. 584 a Turner. 135 b 153
a 274 b * 311 a 392 b 825 a Turngold. 554 b Tusser. 274 b Twiford. 322 a 350 b
556 a * 557 b M Twiselton. 350 a Tylar. 48 a * Tilling. 132 a *
V
VAle. 132 a * Valens. 432 a Vamere. 557 b. Vancke. 419 b Vandun. 809 b Varnam.
808 b Varney. 569 a * M Vavasor. 471 b Vaughan. 135 a 370 a 534 a * B. Vennar,
or Venor. 179 a * 261 a 263 a ^57 a M. Vere. 186 a * Verney. 567 b * Vernon.
102 b 214 b. Vev^^n. 907 b Vine. 330 b Vivent. 557 b Vnd^ll. 451 a * Voyle. 541
a Vpton. 550 b Vrswyke. 796 b Vyrby. 131 b
W
WAddington. 349 b Waddis. 150 b Wade. 546 a 559 a Wadson. 868 b * Wai^^. 539 a
* Wakefield. 149 b Wakering. 415 b * Wake^. 559 a Walbrooke. 543 b Walcot. 102
b 270 a 557 b * 559 b. M. Walden. 419 b 532 a * B. 567 a Walderne. 562 b * M.
559 a * M. Walgrave. 537 b Walker. 220 b Waller. 310 b * Walls, or Wallis. 86
b 146 a 340 b 544 b M. Walmond. 543 a Walpole. 391 b Walraven. 544 a
Walsingham. 134 a Walter. 95 b 419 b 540 a * Walthall. 105 a * 212 a 503 b
Waltham. 211 a 285 a Watton. 228 b * Walworth. 87 b 232 b 236 b * 555 b * M.
Ward. 554 b * M. 569 b 804 b Warden. 212 b * Workham. 532 b B. Warley. 337 b
578 a. Warner. 352 a 416 a 574 b Warren. 277 a 311 b 580 a 581 b. M. Warton, or
Wharton. 419 b 566 b Wase. 338 b Waters. 138 b Watford. 419 b * 562 b. Wats.
106 b 139 b 576 a 592 a M. Watson. 221 b 880 b. Weaver. 569 a 900 a Web. 106
b * 158 a 589 b 591 a * M. Welbeck. 574 a Weld. 106 b 153 a * 290 b 592 b 594 a
* M. Welinhale. 567 a * Wels. 88 b 146 a * 193 a * 284 a 399 b 429 b 562 a M.
Wengham. 367 a Wentworth. 290 a West. 186 a 228 a * 246 b 306 a * (...) 314 a *
Westfaling. 773 a Weston. 562 a Westwick. 417 b Westwray, or Westrow. 597 a 867
a Wheatly. 303 a Whitby. 211 a White. 91 a 160 a 241 a 274 b * 295 b 394 b *
309 a 484 a 572 a 573 b M. 583 b * 584 b * M. 586 a * M. Whirgift. 355 b
Whithall. 103 a Whitley. 538 a * Whitmore. 96 b * 596 a M. Whitney. 779 a
Whittington. 88 a * 244 b 256 b 915 b 561 b * M. 558 a * M. Whorwood. 259 a 550
a * Wiat. 351 b Which, or Which. 218 a 292 a * 565 b 568 b 833 a * Wic^am. 452
a Wicksteed. 879 a Widnell. 399 b * Wiking. 571 b Wilford, or Wyfold. 191 a 228
b 548 a 565 b * 566 b * M. 583 a 558 b * Wilhall. 540 b Wild. 553 a *
Wilkinson. 233 b 134 a 473 a 579 a 582 a Williams. 179 a 830 b Williamson. 123
b Wilson. 277 b 309 a. Wimbledon. 539 a * 542 a Wimborne. 542 b * M. Wimondham.
554 b Winchcombe. 235 b * 303 a * 556 b Windany. 186 b Windent. 265 b
Winderhall. 419 b Windsor. 324 a Winford. 257 a * Wingar. 244 a 574 a 576 a
Wingfield. 186 a * 460 a * Wingham. 531 a B. Wingrave. 548 b M. Witchcote. 433
a Witchingham. 551 b M. Withypoll. 239 b * Wokendon. 360 b Wolley, or Woolley.
102 b * 363 a 777 b * Wood. 123 b 169 b * 230 b 238 a 307 a 337 b * 485 a 574 a
806 b Woodcock. 303 b 308 a 387 b 558 b 560 a M. 589 a Woodhouse. 333 b 415 b
555 b * Woodroffe. 152 a b 153 b 187 b 409 a 584 b 588 a 589 a * M. Woodstock.
87 a Woodward. 218 b Woolaston. 102 b VVorsley. 801 a Wotton. 550 b M. 560 a *
Wright. 160 a 597 b VVrithesley. 313 a 428 a Wroth. 262 b 552 b M. VVrotsley.
346 a
Y
YAle. 412 a * Yaxley. 215 b * Yeardley. 373 Yerford. 299 b * 578 a * 579 a *
M. Yevcle. 230 a Young. 257 a * 346 a 451 a 567 b 569 a M. York. 245 a * 584 a
You. 191 a * ^64 b *
Z
ZAmbon. 131 ^ * Zouch. 135 a 544 a M.
FINIS.

