THE ANATOMY OF MORTALITY: Divided into these eight heads: viz. 1 The
Certainty of Death. 2 The Meditation on Death. 3 The Preparation for Death. 4
The right behavior in Death. 5 The Comfort at our own Death. 6 The Comfort
against the death of friends. 7 The Cases wherein it is unlawful, and wherein
lawful to desire Death. 8 The glorious estate of the Saints after this life.


Written by GEORGE STRODE Vtter-barister of the middle Temple, for his own
private comfort: and now published at the request of his friends for the use of
others.

MATTHEW. 13.52. Every Scribe which is taught unto the kingdom of heaven, is
like unto an householder, which brings forth out of his treasure, things both
new and old.

Vita mihi Christus, mors lucrum, patria coelum. LONDON, Printed by William
Jones, and are to be sold by EDMUND WEAVER, dwelling at the great North-doore
of Saint Paul's. 1618.

TO THE HONORABLE SOCIETY OF THE MIDDLE TEMPLE, ALL HEALTH AND PROSPERITY.
WHen it came near my turn to read, and that I had entered into the choice of
my Statute, even then my body (wasted with long sickness and disease) called
upon me to consider rather of my death; and that so withdrew my mind from the
positive Law I had in hand, as that it settled my thoughts upon that eternal
law of God, whereby Statutum est h^minibus etc. It is appointed unto men that
they shall once dye, and afterward come to judgment; and when I had spent some
time thereon, it did not only dissuade me from mine intended enterprise to
read, and persuade me to give way to a more fit Reader, but gave me also such
comfort and content, as that thereout, I straight way affected to impart it
unto you, to whom I shall ever wish as your Foster-brother, all satisfaction in
the things of best use, toward your prosperity in this life, and glorious
estate in the life to come; excuse I pray you the form it comes to you in,
as issuing from a mind affected at that instant, with the order of a Temple
reading, and therefore could receive no other impression then of the same
kind; which nevertheless as it is, I do not presume to address unto you for
your instruction, but for your incoragement and incitation, that you (knowing
me to be heavy and slow by nature, and little bettered by any art, and yet to
have by constant and diligent hearing of godly sermons, and that only at our
appointed hours, and by addition of some things (sorting with the matter)
collected out of my readings, gathered such store of Divine notes, as that
thereout, I may present you with such a common place as this) might from thence
consider, what excellent things may be compassed by you, who as well for your
natural endowments, as your liberal bringing up, do far exceed not only
my self, but many other every way before me; and this also you may perform
without the least prejudice to your prescribed studies; for if your endeavors
this way be but accompanied with delight, the one will be a recreation, yea, a
very apt help to the other; For what maxim of the Common Law of this kingdom
can you cite, whereby our infinite, and those most variable points and
questions are decided, that is not grounded, or originally derived from the
eternal law of God, either by direct precept, or by consequent implication:
What I have done in this my poor and simple labors is a part of my
negotiation with that one Talent I have received from the Lord, which I am
desirous to put to the uttermost profit. And although perhaps for my self to
be seen in the press in a matter of this kind, will be to some as great a
wonder as Saul among the Prophets, yet had I rather by doing of some good this
way, lay open my infirmities to the censure of men, then with the idle servant
to hide my Talent in the earth; Accept therefore I pray you this my present,
with that kind affection I do intend it, and then I hope it shall either
profit you in the reading, as it has done me in the compiling, or at least,
stir you up to correct and amend it by your own endeauours, for your better
use and comfort: And so wishing to you as to my self, I rest ever at your
service,

GEORGE STRODE.

The eight Divisions.
1 The certainty of Death. page 1 2 The meditation on Death. 61 3 The
preparation for Death. 90 4 The right behavior in Death. 130 5 The comfort at
our own Death. 176 6 The comfort against the Death of friends. 228 7 The cases
wherein it is unlawful, and wherein lawful to desire death. 241 8 The
glorious estate of Gods children after Death. 276
THE ANATOMY OF MORTALITY.
THE Statute which I have chosen to read upon, wants neither time to settle,
authority to bind, nor notice to avoid excuse. For in time it precedeth all
time; for it was, and is from all eternity; in authority of the Lawmakers it
exceeds all that ever were, for all the three Estates in that Parliament,
were, now are, and ever shall be infinite in power, glory, wisdom, foresight,
mercy and Justice, and has been proclaimed to the World by many means;
first in Paradise, then by the Prophets, and lastly by this holy Author to the
Hebrews, where it is thus written, Heb 9.27.

THE STATVTE.

It is appointed unto men that they shall once die, and afterward comes the
Judgment.

MY reading upon this Statute, may for the better apprehension of the
Lawmakers meaning, be aptly put into these eight Divisions following. viz. 1
The certainty of death. 2 The meditation on death. 3 The preparation for
death. 4 The right behavior in death. 5 The comfort at our own death. 6 The
comfort against death of friends. 7 The causes wherein it is unlawful, and
wherein lawful to desire death. 8 The glorious estate of the children of God
after death.


THE FIRST DIVISION, OF THE certainty of Death.
THis first Division containing the certainty of death, is properly subdivided
into three parts: The first is into the death (which is natural) of the body:
the second is the spiritual death of the soul in sin: and the third is the
eternal death of both body and soul in hell.

To these three deaths are opposed three lives, the life of Nature, of Grace,
and of Glory.

Natural or bodily death, which is called the first, (because in respect of
time, it goes before the third in our understanding) is a dissolution or
separation of the soul from the body for a time, namely until the
resurrection.

The spiritual death which is termed the second, is a perpetual separation of
the soul principally, but consequently of body and soul from God; of which,
Sin is the mother, the Devil is the father, and Damnation is the daughter;
and this is when men die not to sin, but in sin.

Eternal death is the hire and wages of the second, and this ever follows the
reprobate after the first.

Both these latter are a separation of the whole man, body and soul from the
fellowship of God: The first is an entrance to death, the second and third are
the accomplishment of it. The first is temporary, the second and third are
spiritual and eternal. The first is of the body only, the second and third
are of both body and soul. The first is common to all men, the second and
third are proper only to the Reprobates. But touching the natural and bodily
death, which is the proper subject of this Division, it is (as we have said
before) the separation of the soul from the body, with the dissolution of the
body until the resurrection, as a punishment ordained of God, and imposed on
man for sin, though to the godly the nature of it is changed. For when God
had settled Adam in Paradise, a place of pleasure, giving him such liberty, as
these words import, Thou shall eat freely of every tree of the garden; Genesis
2.16.17.
yet left he should presumptuously equal himself with his Creator, he gave
him this bridle to champe on, But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil
thou shall not eat, for in that day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the
death. Adam had soon forgotten this saying (thou shall die) and harkened unto
that lying speech of the Serpent, Ye shall not die. Matthew. 15.14.
The man gave ear to the woman, the woman to the Serpent, they eat of the
forbidden tree; so the blind led the blind, and both fell into the ditch. But
now when Father Adam has tasted of that forbidden fruit, O, how was he
bewitched? He was once in the state of grace, but now of disgrace, he was once
the child of God, but now in danger (for ought he knows) to be the slave of
the Serpent. God did once care altogether for him, but now he must care and
shift for himself: he was warm without apparel, naked without shame,
satisfied without labor or pain, his meat was put into his mouth. But now it
is come out of his nostrels, and is loathsome unto him. Numb. 11.20.
And now he must be pinched with cold, and scorched with heat, Genesis 31.40.
he must travel hard, and in the sweat of his brows must eat his bread. Genesis
3.19.
While he kept himself within his compass he was a happy man (for which he
was to thank God) and now being in misery, he is accursed and unhappy, for
which he may thank himself. A lamentable fall, a pitiful case, the wrath of
God ouerrunneth the whole world, as a gangrene through all Adams posterity,
for his disobedience: his treason has attainted all his children, his whole
blood is corrupted, his fall redoundeth to all of us that came of him. Alas,
then how shall we do? Adam is dust, hated of God, and ashamed of himself, he
is accursed, he is sick with sin, he is dead, twice dead, subject to
mortality, and subject to eternal damnation; his children be in the same
case. Woe therefore be unto us, we are so benumbed with our sins, that we
feel not the sting of death fixed therein, the impostume of sin lies hidden
in our hearts, so pleasingly to our carnal sense, as that we think our selves
whole and sound, as if we presumed we should never die. The incredulous and
rebellious brood of Adam, will not acknowledge their corruption and
mortality, such and so great is their self-love and pride of heart.

Adam the Father of all Nations was once a freeman, a blessed man, the child
of God; the mercy of God embraced him on every side. In the earth there were
blessings for him engraven, as it were, in the herbs, flowers and fruits; yea
in the heavens and in the waters, he saw innumerable tokens of Gods love
toward him: But alas, wretch that he was, when he was in honor he forgot
himself, he denied God his service, yea he obeyed his Enemy; and therefore
became accursed, and debarred of all his former blessings. He became a bondsman,
a cursed creature, the servant of sin and Satan, ashamed of his nakedness,
and trembled at Gods voice. So that death and the grave have obtained the
victory; for Adam and his wife are become a cursed couple; yea, not only
they, but all their posterity; they be the root, we be the branches. If the
root be bitter, the branches must be so also: they be the Fountain, we be
springs; if the fountain be filthy, so must the springs be. Sin and
corruption be the riches that we bequeath to our children; Rebellion is the
inheritance that we have purchased for them: Death is the wages that we have
procured unto them; such as the father is* such be the children. For we are
all of the same nature, and have eaten the same sour grape. Ezec. 18.2.
The fathers have eaten sour grapes and the childrens teeth are set on edge.
By one man sin entered into the world, Romans 5.12.
and death by sin, and so death went over all men, in whom all men have
sinned. In sinning with Adam, we must all die with Adam; and this is the only
difference betwixt him and us, that he did it before us, and for us. For if
any of us had been in Adams stead, we had done that which Adam did, if not
more, to procure death. And we receiving from Adam the infection of our flesh,
we received from him also the corruption of our flesh. And this is the chiefest
and most principal cause why all must die. As the goodness of God has lent
us life, so our own deserts have wrought our death.

It is a true, and a heavy sentence spoken to every man, Thou must die:
verified not in one, in few, in many, but in all; and universal is this saying
in respect of the elementarie creatures, All must die. A short clause of a long
extent, containing in it the estate of all mortal creatures whatsoever. As
there are certain common principles which do run through all Arts, so this
is a general rule that concerns every man, All must die. The truth thereof is
daily to be seen, and all of us hereafter shall prove (the Lord knows how
soon) by his own experience.

Therefore it is said in the second book of Esdras. Esd. 2. v. 3.4.5.6.7.
O Lord who bear rule, thou spakest at the beginning when thou did plant
the earth (and that thy self alone) and commandedst the people, and gave a
body unto Adam without soul, which was the workmanship of thine hands, and
did breath into him the breath of life, and he was made living before thee,
and thou leddest him into Paradise, which thy right hand had planted, before
the earth came forward, and unto him thou gave commandment to love thy way;
which he transgressed, and immediately thou appointedst death to him and his
generation; of whom came Nations, Tribes, and Kindreds out of number. And in
another place of that book it is said, And when Adam transgressed my Statutes,
Esd. 2. v. 7.11.12.
then was decreed that now is done. Then were the entrances of this world made
narrow, full of sorrow and travel, they are but few and evil, full of perils
and very painful. But as a man cannot so well judge of a sum, when it lies
in the heap, as when it is told and numbered out: so if this united and
contracted presentation of miseries, be not so palpable enough in your
conceits, behold to your full satisfaction I come to particulars. The whole
denominates the parts. And doubtless when we come to this precise
d^stribution, and narrow scrutinie, to the singling out of miseries and
mortality, you will bless your selves that there are so few Bedlam-houses,
and yet so many out of their wits, that cannot perceive and discern the same.
And therefore let us rippe up the whole condition and state of mankind; and
then you shall perceive the frailties and miseries thereof, since the fall of
our first Parents. And this principally consists upon the words of the holy
man Job, in the beginning of his fourteenth Chapter, Job 14.1.2:
where he says, Man that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and
full of miseries. He shoots forth as a flower, and is cut down, he
vanishes also as a shadow, and continues not. To the end we might want
nothing in the description of humane calamities, it seems his purpose and
drift was to begin with the very matter it self, of the which man was made.
For he is called Homo ab humo, because he was made and created of the earth;
neither was he made of the best of the earth, but of the slime (as the
Scripture does testify) being the most filthy and abject part of the earth;
amongst all bodies the most vile element, amongst all elements the earth is the
basest, amongst all parts of the earth, none is more filthy and abject then the
slime.

Wherefore man was made of that matter, then the which nothing is more vile and
base. And whereas he says that he was borne of woman, he has in few words
comprehended many miseries of humane condition. For first of all our very
fashioning and breeding in the womb, is so vnpure and unclean, that it is not
for chaste ears to hear, but to be passed over in silence.

Furthermore, after that man is once conceived, does he not endure great
calamities in his mothers womb, as it were in a filthy and unclean prison,
where every moment he is in peril of his life? At the last he is borne naked,
weak, ignorant, destitute of all help and counsel, not able to go, to
speak, nor to help himself; and all that he can do, is to cry, and that is
to set forth his miseries. For he is borne to labor, a banished man from his
country, in possibility to live a few days and those full of misery and
peril, deuoid of all quietness and rest.

Behold then the very beginning from whence man has his first original and
breeding.

In the next place the short time comes to be considered, and for that Job
says further, that man is of short continuance, and herein you may behold some
other calamities of man's body, the building being scarce finished is ready to
totter, and sure ere long to fall. Man is scarce entered into the world, when as
he was admonished to remember his departure out of the same again. Man (says
holy Job) being borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and full of
miseries. Every word has a great emphasis, He is full of miseries even from
the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there is no soundness in it,
Esaias 1.6.
but wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores. Not only the body, but the mind
also, so long as it is captiued in the prison of the body; Thus no place is
left empty and free from miseries. Man's miseries are many and great, there is
no member, no sense, no one faculty in man, so long as he is here upon earth,
which suffers not his hell; nay all the elements, all living creatures, all
the Devils, yea the Angels, and God himself do also bend and band themselves
against man for sin.

To begin with the sense of feeling: with how many kinds of Feauers,
Impostumes, Ulcers, Sores, is the body afflicted?

The volumes of Physic are full of diseases, and of the discovery of the
probable remedies for the same, and yet for all this, there are daily new
diseases, and new (yet but coniectured remedies) found out for many of them;
and Physicians know not what to make of some of them. In Plinies time
Physicians had found out above three hundred diseases, and yet all were not
then known. And every age (a token of Gods wrath for the new and monstrous
sins of men) brings forth new and strange malad^es and diseases, which our
forefathers never knew. For remedies of some of which, the Physicians had need
to go to school again to learn; All which do lie lurking and lingering for
ou life. And amongst the remedies themselves, it were to be wished, that there
were one to be found, that were no more vehement to vex the sick, then the
disease it self. Long fasting and extreme hunger is a bitter medicine, the
incision of wounds and sores, the cutting off of members, the searing of the
flesh and sinews, the pulling out of teeth, are remedies for diseases and
griefs, but yet such, as many had rather choose to die then to use them.

Furthermore, immoderate heat, exceeding cold, one while too much drought,
another while too much moisture, do offend and hurt the very sense of feeling.
The sense of tasting is most of al troubled with hunger and thirst, and many
times medicines and meats that are bitter, sharp, salt and unsavory do
distemper it. The sense of smelling is compelled to endure many times all
manner of stinckes and noisome smells, ill vapors and fogges. As touching the
sense of hearing, what ill tidings to make even the ears to tingle, 1. Sam.
3.11.
how many cursed speeches, blaspemous oaths and injuries does it hear, which
like sharp swords do pierce the heart? Touching the sense of seeing, how many
things does it behold, which it would not, and not see, which it desires. As
for thoughts, how many horrible and fearful things does it imagine and feign.
Psalm. 94.11. Genesis 6.5.
The Lord knows the hearts of men that they are but vain. And so it is
recorded, that God saw that every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart was
only evil continually.

Psalm. 19.12.
What shall we say of the understanding, to what an innumerable sort of errors
it is subject; Who can understand his errors? So as it seems, to be like to
a little child, to whom a uery intricate and very hard knot is delivered to be
dissolved, and he endeavors to do what he can unto it, and when the knot
begins in one part to be opened, he shows it, and rejoices, and sees
not that the knot in the other part is more fast shut. So in the like manner
God has made this generaltie of all things, and has set the same before man's
mind to be considered, and says, Seek and search out the reasons and causes
of all these things if thou can: when as indeed the truth of the thing is
more secret and profound, then the understanding of man, being placed in this
prison of the body, can reach and diue into. Neither is the man of meanest
capacity, and least understanding, free from miseries.

We are all like unto sick men, which turmoile and toss from one side of the
bed unto the other, Ioh. 7.4.
and yet never find rest, till we come to our eternal rest, of which also the
sinful lusts of the flesh seem to deprive us.

As touching the will, it is unable (till it be changed by grace) to move it
self toward God, and to will any good thing pleasing unto him. To will evil
things is of nature, but to will well is of grace, or to will, being free, in
respect of sinful acts, but bound in respect of good works, Ioh. 5.36.
till it be set free by Christ. If he therefore shall make you free, you shall
be free indeed; For without me, says our Savior Christ, Ioh. 15.3.
ye can do nothing.

As for the memory, Job 13.12.
Your remembrances (says Job) are like unto ashes; memory enough for evil,
but not for good, Heb. 2.1.
to let God slip out of mind, his word and benefits, (whereof follows
disobedience, neglect of Gods worship, and wicked contempt of God) is a fruit,
and consequently of such forgetfulness. Judge. 3.7. Ier. 2.32.
And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and forgate the
Lord their God. My people have forgotten me (says the Lord) days without
number. Thus men forget God, the wicked wholly, the godly in part.

Touching the earth, which is the mother of us all, how many does she swallow
up, with her downefa ls, gulfes, and graves? Pro. 13.15.16.
There are three things (says the Wiseman) that are never satisfied, yea four
say it is not enough, The grave and the barren womb, the earth that is not
filled with water, and the fire that says, it is not enough.

And what do the Seas? How many do they devour? Exodus 14.23. Act. 27.9.10. 2
Cor. 11.25.26.
they have so many Rocks, so many Flats and Sands, so many Caribdes, so many
Reaches and perilous places, that it is a most hard thing of all other to
escape the danger of Shiprack Thrice (says the Apostle) I suffered shipwreck,
a night and a day I have been in the depth, in perils of waters, in perils in
the sea. And they which are most safe in the sh^p, have but the thickness of a
plancke between them and death. Anacharsis the Scithian speaking of those that
sailed by sea, and hearing that a ship was but four fingers thick, Then are
there (says he) but four fingers between them and death.

And at another time he being demanded, who were more in number the living or
the dead, tell me first (quoth he) among whether of them you reckon them that
travel by sea. His meaning was that howsoever they seem to live, to move, and
to have a being, yet they might with good congruitie be accounted even for
dead. For nothing is so full of casualties as the sea, and that in the turning
of a hand. They (says the Psalmist) that go down to the sea in ships, Psalm.
107.23.24.25.26.27.
that do business in great waters. These see the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deep. For he commands and raises the stormy winds, which
lift up the waves thereof. They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to
the depths, their soul is melted because of trouble. They reele to and fro,
and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end. So as every one of
these that passes to the sea, may say as David said to Jonathan concerning
Saul, 1. Sam. 20.3.
There is but a step between me and death.

That same clear brightness which we call the Sun, which is a Captain
general, father to all living things Psalm. 19.5.6.
(which is as a Bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices as a
strong man to run a race. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and
his circuit unto the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat
thereof) does sometime so scorch with his beams, that all things are parched
and burnt up with the heat thereof; and at another time he takes his course so
far from us, that all things die with cold.

And what shall we say of the air? Is it not many times corrupted, and does
it not ingend^r and gather clouds, thick mists, pestilent sicknesses and
diseases, the forerunners or rather the instruments of death?

As for brute beasts, they yield no reverence to man their Prince. And not
only the Lions, Bears, Tigers, Dragons and other great wild beasts, but the
very Flies also, Gnats, Snakes, Adders, and others of the smallest sort of
living creatures do wonderfully vex, disquiet and annoy man, even to death,
as appears by the ten plagues of Egypt.

And what means so much armor, as Pikes, Bores, Bills, Swords and Gunnes,
with diverse other instruments of man's malice? Do not these destroy and consume
many times in as great measure as do sicknesses and diseases? Histories report
that by Julius Caesar (who is said to have been a most courteous and gentle
Emperor) there were slain in several battles eleven hundred thousand men:
And if a man of mild and meek spirit did this, what shall we expect at the
hands of most cruel men, Whose mercies (says the Wiseman) Prou. 10.12.
are cruel.

Neither lands nor seas, nor desert places, nor the woods (for in that battle
in the wood of Ephraim, where Absolon was slain, it is said, 2. Sam. 18.8.
That the wood devoured more people that day, then the sword) nor private
houses, nor open streets are safe from Ambushments, conspiracies, thieves,
pirates and slaughterers. Are there not vexations innumerable, persecutions
infinite, spoiling of fields, sacking of Towns, preying on men^ goods, firing
of houses, imprisonments, captiuities, gally-slaueries, many and infinite
torments enforced, besides death it self, which men do daily suffer at the
hands of cruel men? And this is that civil and sociable creature which is
called humane, which is borne without claws or horns in token of peace and
love, which he ought to embrace.

Also friends, and maintainers of peace and Justice, are necessary instruments
of the death of man. O man the very storehouse of calamities* and yet thou
can not be humble to think on these things. Neither have we only those
foresaid corporal enemies, which we may see and shun, if we cannot make our
part good enough with them, but (which is more perilous) we have also ghostly
enemies which see us, and we see not them. For the Devils which are most
crafty, most cruel, mighty, and innumerable, practice nothing else but our
destruction. Be sober, be vigilant (says the Apostle) 1. Pet. 5.8.
because your adversary the devil as a roaring Lion walks about seeeking whom
he may devour.

Genesis 19.1.
The holy Angels do also many times fight against sinful men; for who burnt
Sodom and Gomorrah, with the inhabitants thereof, with fire and brimstone? The
Angels. Who slew an hundred fourscore and five thousand in the host of
Senacherib? 2. King. 19.35.
The Angels. Who afflicted the Egyptians, with all those ten plagues mentioned
in the book of Exodus. The Angels. Who assisted Joshua the Lords Captain, Ios.
5.13.
against the Cananites and Iebusites? The Angels. Who smote Herod, that he was
eaten up with worms, Act. 12.23.
because he gave not God the glory? The Angels, and not only the Angels, but
God himself more immediately; which caused that holy man Job to say, Why do
thou hide away thy face, Job 13.24.
and take me for thy enemy.

What means this, O Lord God? Thou which wast wont to be my Father and
keeper, have now bidden battle against me. Psalm. 77.7.8.9.10.
And this caused also the Prophet David to say, Will the Lord cast us off for
ever, and will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone from me,
does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious, has
he in anger shut up his tender mercies? And I said, this is mine infirmity.
And so says, it is an infirmity and weakness indeed for the child of God
to have any such thoughts and passions.

Moreover and besides all these things, there is yet an internal war, which
man has within his own bowels continually: For what man is he, which feels
not the striuings, struglings, and contentions of his own affection, will,
sense, and reason? In so much that man himself does afflict himself, and
understands it not. Yea he is a greater enemy to himself, then any other can
be. For who does greater harm to thee then thou do to thy self? Who more
then thy self lets thee, and turns thee away from thy felicity? Who then
sees not that man is set in the very Center of the Spheres, that miseries may
fall upon him from every part; and as the white in a butte, Lam. 3.12.
that the arrows and darts of all miseries and kinds of death may be directed
unto him? Walk thou in the streets? the tiles above thy head threaten thy
downfall: In the fields, the air is ready to convey infection into thy lungs,
the earth groans under thee, as loath to bear so unprofitable a burden. At
last comes death with his napkin on his sleeue, Romans 8.22.23.
and his trencher-knife in his hand, and with his voider takes all away.

But let us see what follows. Job tells thee, that man shoots forth as a
flower, and is cut down, whereby he teaches that man's life is frail and
transitory. A flower verily is a comely and a beautiful thing; and yet for
all that it is nothing, because there is nothing found more fading and
vanishing. Even so man, during the time of his fading and flourishing youth,
seems to be of a wonderful comeliness; but this beauty is of small price,
because it is more britle then the grass, seeing that man carries always the
cause of his own death in his veins and bowels. For man's fading away is such,
and so sudden oftentimes, that there can be no reason given of his death; for
many have gone to bed well in the evening that in the morning are found dead
in their beds; and many that have bin well at their vprising, have been dead
before the evening; and many very suddenly have dropped down in the streets
and highways, as they have walked about their affairs: And this is no
wonder, if we consider well the substance of man's body, which being a building
compact of sl mie clay, is easily overthrown with a small thing.

And how comes it to pass (I pray you) that clockes are so easily stopped
from their course? Is it not because they are made with so many wheels, that
if one be stayed, all the rest be let. If this befall clockes that have
wheels of Iron and steel, how much more easily may it come to pass in the
humane clock of man's body, the wheels and engines whereof are not of Iron,
neither part of iron, and part of clay, Dan. 2.33.
like the feet of Nebuchadnezzars Image, but all of clay. And behold as the
clay is in the Potters hand, so are ye in mine hand, Ier. 18.6.
O house of Israel, says the Lord by his Prophet.

Therefore let us not wonder at the frailty of man's body, but at the
foolishness of man's mind, who upon so frail a foundation is wont to erect
and build such lofty towers.

Furthermore, there is another misery which is signified unto us by the
comparison of flower, as namely the deceitfulnes of man's life; the which indeed
is the greatest misery. For as fained virtue is double iniquity, so
counterfeit happiness is a twofold misery and calamity. If this present
life would show it self to be such as it is indeed, the misery thereof should
not greatly hurt us; but as it is, it does greatly damnifie us, because it is
false and deceitful, and being foul, it makes a very fair and glorious
show; being ever mutable, it will seem to be stable and constant, being most
short, it bears us in hand that it is continual; that so men (being
deceived) may believe that they shall have time to fulfill all their lusts, and
yet time and space enough to repent. Holy Job concludes this sentence thus, He
vanishes also as a shadow, and never continues at one stay. To make this more
plain, behold and consider the several ages of man, and thou shall evidently
perceive the miserable alterations of humane life. Childhood is weak, as well
in mind as in body; flourishing youth is weak in mind, but strong in body;
ripe and manly age strong both in mind and body, old age strong in mind, and
weak in body; crooked old doting age, is in this twice a child, weak both in
mind and body: therefore man flies as a shadow, and never continues at one
stay.

Besides this, he is now wise, now foolish, now merry, now sad, now in health,
anon sick, now strong, anon weak, now rich, anon poor, now he loves anon he
hates, now he hops, by and by he fears, one while he laugheth, another
while he weepeth, now he will, anon he will not. To conclude, the Moon, or
any other thing that is changeable, shows not so many changes to us, as do
the daily and most sudden alterations of men. And yet for all this they live as
men in a frenzy, which know not their own miseries. Yet if it were possible,
they would make the place of their exile and banishment, their country and
inheritance. But in vain they desire this, for death comes ere they are
aware, shutting up and finishing the life it self.

So the miseries incident to the several ages of man, are from the first
coming up upon the stage of this world, to the last act of going down,
Eccles. 1.14.
in all parts of the life full of vanity and vexation of spirit.

For the first entrance is our infancy, when we are in our nurses arms: and
does not that begin with tears and fears? And is not all that time unhappy?
saving that we want reason, that is, the use thereof to apprehend that
happiness. When we come out of our nurses arms, to go in their hands, or to
go by our selves, in our next age do we not weep long under the rod, falling
into the subjection of a teacher? Amongst the ancient Romans this was their
manner and custom for their youth, They let their children suck until they
were two years old, till they were four years old, they let them play, till
six they taught them to read, till eight to write, till ten they learn the
Grammar. When a boy was once ten years old, he was set straight way to some
good trade and occupation, or else sent to the wars, which was a thing the
Romans gloried in most, to be good soldiers. In all which ages they
sustained great miseries, being all this time under Tutors and Governors.

When we come out of the prison of boys and girls, and are set at some more
liberty in a young man's life, are we not tossed, as upon a sea of
unquietness, sailing between reason and passion, as between two contrary
waters and cross winds. Then comes perfect age or man's age, and what have
we here but blastes and storms of greater unrest then in any age before?
From one travail we pass to another, never ending but changing our miseries.
And when we come to old age, and have lived so long that we are come to dotage:
is there any thing in these ages exempt from misery and travail, that is
under the Sun?

Surely our infirmities do then come upon us in multitudes, yea so load us
with their weight and number, that they make us to bow and go double under
them unto the earth. And can there be any comfort in these diseases (as I may
call them) and days of evil, wherein do meet and flock together so many
vultures of life, the weakness of infancy, the servitude of childehood, the
sickness of youth, the cares of man's age? All which come again, and come all
together, as many storms, upon one poor old ruinous house, that is sore
shaken already, by death violently to overthrow it for ever. Here the excess
and riot of youth is exercised with gouts, palsies, and sundry fearful
aches; the watching and cares of manhood are punished with loss of sight, of
hearing, and of sense, except the sense of pain.

There is no part of man, which death in that age of years, does not take, in
hope to be assured of him, as of a bad play master which greatly fears, and
would gladly put off his days of payment. And therefore it brings him low in
all parts, that he may have power in none to avoid his Creditor, and end so
near.

And touching the miseries incident to the several ages of man, the Prophet
Jeremy cries out, How is it that I came out of the womb to see labor and
sorrow, Ier. 20.18.
that my days should be consumed with shame? How much more cause have we
miserable creatures, to cry out of our calamities and miseries, who were
conceived and borne in sin, seeing the Prophet complained so much, 51.5. Ier.
1.5.
being sanctified in his mothers womb.

O vain, miserable, and unhappy men, before we sin, we are strait fastened
to sin, and before we can offend, we are fast bound with offense.

Consider, O man, from whence thou came, blush whither thou go, and fear
where thou live. We are begotten in uncleanness, brought forth with pains
and throws, and nourished in darkness. We begin our tragedy with nakedness
and weeping, we continue with pain and vexation, and take our farewell with
sorrow and misery. Our beginning is lamentable, our continuance wretched, and
our departure grievous. The whole life of man is beset and incountred with
three capital enemies, Pain, Care, and Sorrow: Pain pincheth us, Care
consumes us, and Sorrow ends us. There is no age of man free from
affliction, calamity and misery. And to begin again with the miseries of
infancy; behold in his birth, intolerable is his mothers pain, and infinite
are the infants calamities, who comes into the world crying and weeping,
poor and naked, weak and miserable, without speech, without knowledge or
strength, no sooner is the babe borne, but straight is he bound hand and
foot, and cast into a cradle, as into a prison, prefiguring the servitude he
is to suffer.

In his childhood he begins to war with the lack of reason, and to fight
against his own folly, not knowing what he is, where he is, whence nor for
what he came into the world.

Now must he be kept under the fear of the rod, and learn some Liberal
Science, or some Mechanical Art or Trade, whereby to maintain his frail
life hereafter, if he continue it.

Then comes youth, rash, headstrong, voluptuous, ventrous, foolish,
prodigal, passionate. In this age he comes into great dangers, fighting
against the desires of the flesh, against fond affections, and vain
imaginations, which cause the mind to waver, and be inconstant, and to be
carried away with sundry fantasies. In this age he becomes a drunkard, a
gamester, a quarreller, a loose liver, and oftentimes to be cast into prison,
to be hanged, and to lose all that he has, and to be a great grief unto his
parents, Genesis 42.38.
in causing them thereby to end their days in sorrow; in the sense and feeling
whereof, the Prophet cries unto God, saying, Psalm. 25.7.
Remember not the sins of my youth.

Afterward, as he has to encounter with manhood, to which age is incident, the
charge of wife and children, the maintenance of family and care of posterity.
He that is married (says the Apostle) cares for the things that are of the
world, 1. Cor. 7.33.
how he may please his wife. Sometimes he is besieged with a desire and carking
care and covetousness, sometime with fear to lose his goods, and other
infinite such vanities and afflictions.

Then lastly comes old age stealing on unperceived, yea gray hairs (says
the Prophet) are here and there upon him, Hos. 7.9. Joel 1.2.
yet he knows it not. In this age man receives many incurable wounds, as
baldness, bleared eyes, deaf cares, wrinckled brows, stinking breath,
trembling hands, faint spirits, lean cheeks, corruption of stomach, with
like miseries innumerable, which never leave to wound the body, disquiet the
mind, and torment the conscience. And thus are we tossed all the days of our
life with grief, compassed with cares, and overwhelmed with miseries and
calamities. And therefore Plato well observed that a man is Arbor inuersa, a
tree turned upward, his hair of his head the root, the arms the branches, and
so of the rest.

So that our infancy is but a dream, our childhood but folly, our youth
madness, our manhood a combat, our age a sickness, our life misery, and our
death sorrow. How weak is infancy, how ignorant is childhood, how light and
inconstant adolescencie, how intractable and confident be young men, how
grievous and irksome is old age? What is a young boy but as a brute beast,
having the form only and shape of a man? What is a flourishing yonker, but as
an untamed horse, what is an old man, but a receptacle of all maladies and
diseases? And this age is a degree nearer to death, by common course, then the
former ages; for these years take all pleasures from our life, wherein
affliction follows affliction, as the clouds return after the rain, Eccles.
12.2. 2. Sam. 19,34,35.
and in these stooping years every step is in death, and they may say with
Barzilla, How long have I to live? when their houses are turned into their
prisons, and they have no taste in that they eat or drink. And they having
thus the marks of age in their face, and upon their heads, yet (as they that
would still be young) they consider not that they draw near to their grave, and
have tokens upon the^ of a blasted life, in which age they can neither put off
nor put on their own clothes.

Young men (says Seneca) have death behind them, old men have death before
them, and all men have death not far from them. Experience plainly teaches,
and all ages approve, that God^ plague threatens, sickness calls, and old
age warns, death sudden^ takes, and the earth finally deuoureth.

Death most commonly has three harbengers, that make way against he come, viz.
Casualtie, Sickness, and Old Age. Casualtie tells me death is at my back,
Sickness tells me she is at my heels, and Old Age tells me she is
before my face. Sickness is reckoned by Hugo amongst the messengers of death,
of which there are three, Casus, Infirmitas, Senectus, Casus nunciat mortem
latentem, Infirmitas apparentem, Senectus praesentem. Casualties show us death
lurking for us, Sickness, appearing unto us, Old Age says death is present
and ready to fetch us.

The aged man holds his life as an Eele by the tail, which he would feign
hold fast, but cannot, because it is so slipperie and slideth from him.

Many times death takes for a gage one part or other of our body, as an arm,
or eye, or leg, or hand, finger or tooth, or some of our senses, or such
like, for an advertisement, that he will very shortly fetch away the rest. If
any man be long a dying and paying Deaths debt, Nature (like a rigorous
creditor, that will be paid at the just day) sueth out an execution against her
debtor, taking from one his sight, from another his hearing, and both from
some, and he that tarieth longest in the world, she foundereth, maineth, and
utterly disableth in his limbs. So that as man, in respect of himself, is
vain and miserable, so also is he much more in regard of the quality and
condition of his life and calling. For there is no kind of life (meaning
whereby life is maintained) but it is mingled with frailetie and many
grieuances. If thou live abroad (to wit, in Offices) there are strifes, if at
home, there are cares, in the field, labors, in the sea, fear, in iourneying,
if it be void of ieopardie, yet it is painful and tedious. If thou art
married, then can thou not be without cares, if not married, then is thy life
wearisome: Have thou children? then shall thou have sorrow. Have thou none?
then is thy life unpleasant. Thy youth is wild and foolish, thy age weak and
frail, and infinite are the dangers that depend thereon. For one bewaileth his
losses, another weepeth for lack of health, liberty and necessary living. The
workman maymeth himself with his own tool, while he earnestly plyeth his
business; the idle person is pined with famine; the gambler breaks his
limbs with gaming; the adulterer consumes himself with botches and leprosy;
the dicer suddenly stabbed with a dagger; and the Student continually wrung
with the gout, besides infinite more miseries incident to man's life, too long
here to rehearse. For there is no calling, state or degree exempt or free from
vanity, misery, and death. All are vain, all are vexed, all are tormented
with worldly tempests, all do suffer the doleful blasts of misery and
calamity.

To begin with the strongest Champion, the mightiest Monarch, the greatest
Emperor or Prince that ever lived on the earth, and to come down to the
poorest wretch and meanest miser in the world, you shall find that all of all
sorts, poor and rich, master and servant, married and unmarried, subject and
Prince: to conclude, the bad and the good are tormented with temptations,
tossed with tempests, disquieted with adversities, and therefore are most
frail, most miserable, yea and nothing but misery.

The poor man he is grieved with famine and thirst, suppressed with sorrow and
heaviness, and oppressed with cold and nakedness, he is despised and
contemned, buffeted and scorned, Luke 16.19.
he lies grouelling at the rich man's feet, and dying at their heels, as they
go in the street, or at the gates, and yet unregarded, Prou. 14.20.
he is shunned of his brethren, loathed of his friends, Iam. 2.3.
and hated of his neighbor. And (as the Apostle says) he is set under the
rich man's footstool, so that none account is ma^e of him. Luke 16.3.
To ask for Gods sake he is oftentimes ashamed, and if he will not ask, he is
pi^d, and therefore mere necessity constrains him to beg. He accuses God
of unrighteousness and partiality, because he divided not the goods of the
world equally. He blames his neighbor of unmercifulness and cruelty, Matthew.
20.11.
because he releeueth not his necessity. He fretteth and fumeth, he
murmureth, repineth, and curses. Whereupon it was truly said. Eccle. 40.28.30
My son lead not a beggars life, for better it is to die then to beg.
Begging is sweet in the mouth of the shameless, but in his belly there shall
burn a fire. Again, on the otherside, Psalm. 49.6.
the rich man himself is overthrown in his abundance, he is puffed up with
vainglory, he puts his trust and confidence in his wealth and substance,
whereupon he braggeth and boasts. Ezech. 28.5.
They trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their
riches, he swells with pride and disdain. Their heart is lifted up (says
the Prophet) because of their riches. Prou. 22.7.
The rich (says the Wiseman) rules over the poor, and the borrower is
servant to the lender. Yet labor in getting, fear in possessing, and sorrow
in losing, does ever trouble and disquiet his mind. And so (as says the
Apostle) they that will be rich, fall into temptations and snares, 1. Tim.
6.9.10.
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction. For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some
coueted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows.

But these thy riches and treasures which thou have scraped together by all
injury and unjust means, fraudulent to thy friends, deceitful to thy
companions, injurious to thy neighbors, violent to strangers, cruel to the
poor, impious to thy parents, behold Death approaching, Death, I say, the
Conqueror of all flesh, the Emperor of graves, the forerunner of judgment;
the gate of heaven or hell is ready at hand to arrest and bring thee unto
judgment for all these things; against which, Eccle. 12.14.
this thy wealth cannot defend thee, nor plead delay one minute of an hour
with Death. Oh how can it be that we can be so blind and inconsiderate, that
even seeing, nay feeling death with our fingers, that we must forsake the
world, we are yet so plunged in the world, as if we should live for ever.

Deuteronomy. 28.30. Psalm. 49.11.
We build stately houses, which perchance strangers shall inhabit; perchance
our enemies. We place the hope of our name in our children, which to our great
sorrow shall perhaps die before us.

All the riches and abundance in the world (having a man's life for a stay and
foundation) can certainly no longer endure, then the same life abides; nay,
but riches, honors, and such like, of which men here on earth have a great
regard, do many times forsake a man, he being yet alive. For riches (says
the Wiseman) certainly make themselves wings, Prou. 23.5. Prou. 27.24.
they fly away, as an Eagle, toward heaven; for riches are not for ever, and
at the most they do never continue longer with him then to the grave, which is
but for a very short time. For heap thou together so much wealth as thou
can, rauin and devour other men's goods, suck the blood of the poor, hide
thy bags, lock thy chestes, bury thy wealth under ground, yet shall thou
carry nothing away; naked wast thou borne, and naked shall thou stand before
the fearful tribunal seat of Christ.

We read that the great Soladine of Babylon, and Conqueror of all, confessed
(though too late (that dying in the City of Ascalon, he commanded that his
shirt should be carried about the City on a spear, with this proclamation,
Behold, the great King of all the East is dead, and of all his great riches,
this is all he carries with him away. Which if this wretched man had well
considered, he would not have been such an insatiable Hellno of kingdoms. For
what is gold or silver? nothing else but concocted earth, subject to
inconstancy, gotten with pain, labor, and toil, kept with great care, and
lost, not without intolerable sorrow; which by fire, thieves shipwreck, war
and such like means, may be taken away. And riches are but run awayes, ever
posting from one to another, and only constant in inconstancy. And suppose a
stranger to come into the Palace of some great Prince, and there to behold
stately furniture, cups of pure gold, chains, jewels, and such like; but the
next morning he is to depart, and is permitted to carry away nothing with him;
would he (if he were wise) greatly admire at these things, or suppose thou were
in the City, or in the Camp, where thou may buy at a low price many rich
preyes taken from the enemy; but at the gate stands a soldier, who will not
suffer thee to take away any of these things, would a man (think you) give one
penny for all this. What is this world but an Inn, a common City, a Camp?
What is our life but a peregrination, a warfare? What is man but a guest, a
traveler, a soldier upon earth? and Death is the Porter, he stands at the
gate, and stays all the riches which we have gotten and scraped together, he
wills and constrains us to leave all behind, and sends us out as we came
into the world, naked, poor, and beggarly, only with our winding-sheete about
us, at the most. Next let us descend to the condition of a Servant or a
bondman: Is he not laden with labor, wearied with watchings, and worn out
with slavery, he is beaten with stripes, spoiled of his substance, and burdened
with sorrow: the masters offense is the servants pain, and the servants fault
is the masters prey. If he have wealth, he must spend it at his masters
pleasure, if he have naught, then must his pains make a painful purchase.
Then comes the master in his turn, who ever lives in fear lest his
servants treachery should shorten his days. If he be gentle, then is he
contemned, if severe, hated; for courtesy brings contempt, and cruelty
breeds hatred. And ungodly and unthrifty servants are also the miseries of
their masters.

Also the unmarried man fights against fond desires, and fleshly lusts; for
that unquiet Iebusite will hardly be restrained. All men cannot receive the
gifts of continency, Matthew. 19.11.
save they to whom it is given. Satan kindles the fire of nature in them with
the blast of frail suggestion, whereby the feeble and weak mind is secretly
sauced with auaritious desires, and the body made prone to perdition.

Now this married man is at his wits end, burning with jealousy: Number. 5.14.
fear of losing his goods does vex him, loss of riches makes him tremble,
and the charge of household does divide him diversely. He labors to provide for
wife and children, 2. Cor. 7.33.28
and to pay his servants hire. He that is married (says the Apostle) cares for
the things of the world, how he may please his wife. Such shall have trouble in
the flesh; but I spare you (says the same Apostle) But if any (says he)
provide not for his own, 1. Tim. 5.8.
and specially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith, 1. Cor.
6.14.
and is worse then an Infidel. And therefore the burden of wedlock is
grievous and miserable, especially, if they be unequally yoaked together.

The subject also depends upon his Prince, and must be careful to obey. If
his Sovereign frown, he must stoop, and crouch: Prou. 16.14.
For the wrath of a King (says the Wiseman) is as a messenger of death. He
must employ his goods and his life also in defense of his Prince: 1. Sam. 8.11.
yea he must become a martial man, and live in a miserable mood, making his
only felicity of other men's misery.

Finally, the King himself lives in fear of the treachery of traitors; he is
set upon a hill, as it were a mark: A small wart deformeth a Princes face, and
in a King an error is desperate. He eats the bread of affliction, and his
drink is care and sorrow. Whereupon an Heathen Historiographer makes mention
of a King, to whom the Crown and Scepter were offered: who, before he wore it,
took the Crown in his hand, and beholding it a while, cried out, saying, O
thou golden Diadem, if man knew the miseries and griefs thou bring with
thee, there is none would stoop so low as to take thee up from the ground.
Showing thereby, that the life of Kings is more unhappy, then the life of a
private man. He is subject to claw-backes and flatterers: It coming to pass
oftentimes (says an ancient Father) that Courtiers are found flatterers, and
he is seldom without mendicant and begging Friars about him, Prou. 30.15.
which are like the Horseleaches two daughters always crying, Give, give.

As it is true that Saint Cyprian speaks, Gods ordinance is not the midwife of
iniquity so is it most certain that men in authority, by reason of flesh and
blood, do travel in infirmity, and bring forth escapes. And verily, as the
sins of Princes are never small, so their great sins require a great and high
degree of repentance. They may do wrong, punish the good, and favor the bad,
non voluntate nocendi (says Saint Augustine) sed necessitate nesciendi, not
with purpose to do wrong, but because they cannot come to the knowledge of the
right. Who could better see with his own eyes, and hear with his own ears
then David, yet affections sometimes dazeled his eyes, and wrong intelligence
his ears. The wisest Governors, that in speculation of justice are admirable,
in their practice may be quite transported. They that in the Thesis are
sharp, in the application are often very dull and greatest men have greatest by
asses to draw them awry. Give me leave to produce an instance from foreign
histories. Upon a time, when the Bithynians, before Claudius the Emperor,
cried against one Iunius Clio (their late President) desiring, that now his
time was come, he of all men might no more obtain that place. The Emperor
not understanding their desire, nor hearing distinctly their words for the
confused noise of the multitude, demanded of those next him what the people
said, to whom Narcissus, a familier, or rather an auricular buzze of the
Emperors* answered like a false Echo, that the people gave his Excellency
great thanks for their last President (which was nothing so) and requested to
have him appointed over them again, which was wholly contrary to their suite:
The Emperor meaning well, but ill informed (to gratify them, as he thought)
assigned them their old President again. And thus was the Emperor abused,
and the people continued under an Oppressor still, whereas they had been
eased, but for a crooked Interpreter. And this aduertiseth what circumspect
care the greatest men should have to pass no matters of great importance
rashly, as also to cleanse their trains and houses (as David vowed, Psalm. 101.
but hardly could perform) from all privy slanderers, deceitful persons and
liars.

Now as for wicked men they always live in misery, There is no peace (says
the Lord) unto the wicked, the worm of conscience shall never die, Esaias 48.22.
and the light of reason shall never be darkened, as they have forsaken God, so
has God forsaken them, Romans 1.28. Jude 1.13. Job 15.20. Isai. 57.20. Prou.
13.21. Jude 14.15.
and delivered them up into a reprobate sense, that they might do such things
as be not convenient, for whom the blackness of darkness is reserved. The
wicked man (says Job) trauaileth with pain all his days. The wicked (says
the Prophet) are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast
up mire and dirt. Evil (says the Wiseman) pursues sinners.

And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold the
Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon all, and
to convince all that are ungodly amongst them, of all their ungodly deeds,
which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

But are good men exempted in this life from misery? No verily, they are as it
were in a continual furnace, by reason of crosses and persecutions; they
sustain mocks and taunts, fetters and imprisoments. Who is weak, and they are
not weak? 2. Cor. 11.29. Act. 14.22.
Who is offended, and they burn not? We must (says Paul and Barnabas)
through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 15.19.
Therefore the same Apostle says, If in this life only we have hope in
Christ, we are of all men most miserable.

To conclude with the saying of the Preacher, Therefore the misery of man is
great upon him. Eccle. 8.6. Ier. 20.18. Job 5.6.7.
And that holy man Job says from his own experience, Although affliction
comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground,
yet man is borne unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward. And Jesus the son
of Syrach says, Great travel is created for every man, Eccle. 40.1.2.3.4.
and a heavy yoke is upon the sons of Adam, from the day that they go out
of their mothers womb, till the day that they return to the mother of all
things: Their imagination of things to come, and the day of death trouble their
thoughts, and cause fear of heart from him that sits on a Throne of glory,
unto him that is humbled in earth and ashes; from him that wears Purple, and
a Crown, unto him that is clothed with a linen frocke.

Behold the miseries of mortal man, behold their vanity. Thought consumes
them, heaviness harmeth them, pensiveness possesses them, terror turmoiles
them, fear puts them out of comfort, horror does afflict them, affliction
does trouble them, trouble does make them sad and heavy, misery does humble
them, and at the last death does end them. How many have died with a surfeit of
sorrow? By the sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken. A sorrowful mind
dries the bones. Therefore Jacob says to his sons, Prou. 15.13. Prou.
17.22. Genesis 43.38.
If mischief befall Benjamin in the way which ye go, then shall ye bring
down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave. How many have died with overmuch
fear? And for fear of him the keepers (says the Evangelist) did shake,
Matthew. 28.4.
and became as dead men. Sophocles, Dyonisius, Diagoras, and Chilo the
Lacedemonian, died with immoderate joy. O man very mortal, whom joy it self
cannot secure from death, joy being the very friend to life. For a merry heart
(says the Wiseman) makes a cheerful countenance, Prou. 15.13. Prou. 17.22.
a joyful heart causes a good health.

There is but one way, and that very narrow, by which we came into life, but
there be infinite, and those broad ways which lie open for Death to invade us;
through every member of the body, yea through every joint of the body Death
has found out a way to take away our life.

We that are in the last part and end of the world, 1. Cor. 10.11. 1. John
2.18.
Upon whom (as the Apostle says) the ends of the world are come, and which is
the last time and hour (as says Saint John) we are less in our mariage-bed
then our fathers were in the cradle. The world left being a world, when Adam
left being obedient. It was never beautiful and cheerful, since it waxed old
in youth through manifold attaxes and disorders, and at this day lies bedrid,
waiting for the coming of the Son of God. And we full well know, and are
taught by the reading of the Scripture, and also by experience that men are not
so long lived, nor of that goodly tall proportion or strong constitution of
body, as in former ages. For the world (as a voice out of a bush tells
Esdras) 2. Esdr. 14.14.
has lost his youth, and the times begin to wax old, and we are borne
weaker and more feeble then all creatures; and had we not some body to receive
us, when we come into the world, woe were it with us, we might make a short
and woeful stay or tragedy, to be borne, to weep, to die. We have no cause
to persuade us that this is the golden age; but rather that according to the
dream of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2. The golden head, the silver breasts, the
brazen thighs, are long since past, and we now live in the time of the Iron
legs, the feet whereof, are partly iron, partly clay.

In the fortunate Islands beyond the Atlantic seas in the uttermost borders of
Ethiopia, where the people that live there are called Macrobij for their long
life: a man perhaps may live a long life; but what country may be found,
where a man may avoid the sickle of Death. Hence it was that Hormisda did
answer the Emperor Constantine, demanding him of the beauty of Rome, stately
buildings, goodly Statues, and sumptuous Temples, if he thought that in all the
world were any such City. Surely, says Hormisda, there is indeed none
comparable unto it, yet has it one thing (says he) common to all other
Cities, for men die here, as they die in all other places. And what does it
profit to live long and wickedly, and die at length. It were better like
Cadmus progeny, to die the same hour we were borne. What Duellum is this
between death and nature. And if God should not suffer us to die, alas what a
miserable life would this be, when we come to be old, and full of sorrows,
Eccle. 11.1.
aches, sicknesses, diseases and griefs? When our senses are gone, and we have
no pleasure in any thing. And when (as the Psalmist says) Psalm. 90.10.
our life is but a labor and a sorrow.

In which age we had need (if we have our senses then) to pray heartily to the
Lord. Psalm. 71.9.18.
Cast me not off in the time of old age, forsake me not when my strength
fails me: And also, When I am old and gray headed, O God forsake me not. And
alas, if we should not then die, we would wish to die, and say it were better a
thousand times to die then to live. For death (says Jesus the son of Syrach)
is better then a better life, Eccle. 30.17.
or continual sickness. And therefore we read of a certain Isl^nd, where
they live so long, that they are feign to be carried out thence, that they
might die.

And God has provided wondrous well for mankind, that whereas any man may
take our life from us, yet there is none that can take Death from us; who can
stop the wind that it blow not? Who can hinder death that it come not?

If Jacob counted his time but short, Genesis 47.9.
having already lived an hundred and thirty years, what reckoning may we make
of our time, which is far shorter? Genesis 5.5.27.
In the time before the Flood, the age of man was great: Adam lived nine
hundred and thirty years, Noah nine hundred and fifty, Genesis 9.29.
Methusalem nine hundred sixty nine years, but after the Flood in Terahs
days, who was father to Abraham, Genesis 11.32. Genesis 25.7. Deuteronomy. 34.7. Josh.
24.29.
the age of man was a great deal shortened, and from nine hundred brought down
to two hundred and twenty and under: For Terah lived two hundred and five
years: Abraham his son not so long, one hundred seventy five years. Jacob
in his time brought it to a shorter account, one hundred and thirty, Moses 120.
and Joshua, one hundred and ten years.

And yet are we not truly said to live any one of these years, unless it be
religiously and holily in Christ, as a certain worthy soldier serving in the
wars a long time under Adrian the Emperor, yet in the end returned to his
house, and lived Christ's soldier, where and in which manner (after he had
lived seven years) he departed this life, and being ready to die, commanded
that it should be written on his tomb, Here lies Similis (for so was his
name) who was a man many years, and lived but seven, accounting that he lived
no longer then he lived a Christian.

How many spend their days in war, after the flesh, under the Emperor of the
Air (not under Adrian) who yet I cannot say for seven years, I would I could
truly say seven days or seven hours before their death, cast away these
weapons of sin, that it might be written upon their grauestone, for their
Epitaph, that seven days, or seven hours before their last hour, they not
only had a being, but a life in the world, and not only were, but also lived?

Therefore it is our duty to live well, that at the day of death we may
speed well, and to live well should be the delight and sweet perfume of every
Christian. Thus live well, that thou may die well, and after death,
eternally speed well. Psalm. 90.12.
Yea, So teach us to number our days (says the Prophet) that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom. Where we are to observe that he speaks here, not of
weeks, or months, or years, but of days, noting thereby the shortness of
our life, in this word, Days.

And the same phrase is used of all the holy men of God, upon the like
occasion. Jacob being asked by Pharaoh, how old he was, Genesis 47.8.9.
told him, That few and evil were the days of his pilgrimage, speaking of
the time, to note the shortness of the time, or of his life; he names not
years but days, and speaking of the toils and troubles of life, he calls it
a pilgrimage, as to be every day hastily iourneying toward our end. Job
9.25.26. Job 14.14.
Job, in like manner numbering his days; My days (says he) are more swift
then a post, and swifter then the ships: And again he says, All the days of
my appointed time, will I wait till my change come. The time of Jobs attending
or waiting on God for his help, is the whole term or act of his life, which
he calls not years, but days, so he measures his short time by the inch
of days, rather then by the span of months, or long ell of years; teaching
thereby that the days of man are few, and his life short upon earth. Our
Savior Christ teaching us to pray, Matthew. 6.11.
bids us to pray thus, Give us this day our daily bread, as if we should
reckon the continuance of our life no longer then a day or a few days.

And again the Lord by his prophet calling upon sinners, says, To day if ye
will hear his voice, Psalm. 95.7.8.9.
harden not your hearts, noting thereby, that if we live this day, we are not
sure to live the next. Where it is said in the Prophecy of Zacharias, That we
should serve the Lord without fear, Luke 1.74.75.
in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. We are to
note that the Holy Ghost defines life, not by years, or Months, or weeks,
but by days, showing thereby that our life is nothing else but a composition
of a few days, which how soon they may be swallowed up by that long night of
death, we cannot tell, Psalm. 19.6.
but it will be sooner perhaps then we are aware.

The Sun arising in the East, and falling in the West, and all in one day*
shows our rising and falling, our coming and going forth of this world; all
which may be done in a day. Ier. 6.4.
Woe unto us (says the Prophet) for the day goes away.

And a day consists but of a morning and evening, and a noone, Evening; and
morning, and at noone (says the Prophet) will I pray and cry aloud, and he
shall hear my voice. Psalm. 55.17.
Some are taken away in the morning of their life, many feel not the heat of
the day, he that draws out the line of his life till the evening, lives but
all the day.

What pleasure (says one) is there in this life, when night and day we cannot
but think that we must pass away? It is but a carkas now, which yesterday
lived yesterday a man, to day none.

The saying of Chrysostom, the Lord has promised pardon to him that
repents, but to live till to morrow, he has not promised.

When Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron to entreat the Lord for him, Exodus 8.8.
that he might take away the Frogs from him, and his people; and Moses
asking him when he should entreat for him he said to morrow. So many with
Pharaoh, defer matters of greatest weight and moment still till to morrow,
not knowing what may happen to us before to morrow, even death it self, for
ought we know. Is to morrow in thine own power? Can thou challenge any such
promise at Gods hand? Happy is that man, which of the safety of his soul,
can say with himself, as that old man Messodamus did, who being invited to
dinner the next day, answered, why inuitest thou me for to morrow, who of all the
years I have lived have not to morrow day, but have every hour expected
death, which always lies in wait for me.

The Rich man in the Gospel gathered much, possessed much, enlarged his
garners, and promised to himself security, Luke 12.19.20.
with a retired farewell to the world. Soul (says he) thou have much goods
laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. But God
said unto him, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, then
whose shall those things be which thou have provided? Alas, this was (it
seems) the first night of his rest, and must it be the last too? Yes. Esaias
57.21.
Esaias answers them, There is no rest to the ungodly. He that has a long
journey to go in a short time, makes have, and he who remembers every day,
runs away with his life, cannot sit still. But where men promise to
themselves long life, and much time, there they wax wanton, and become secure,
and put far away the evil day (as the Prophet speaks). Amos 6.3.
Therefore the Lord does commend our life unto us in all these Scriptures which
we have heard, and in other places in a short abstract of days, and not in a
volume of years. So Christ says to Jerusalem If thou had known, Luke 19.42.
even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong to thy peace; but
now they are hid from thine eyes: not granting a longer term, then the term
of one poor day unto her. Which was to teach her, and us in her to think
every day to be our last day, and therefore to do that this day, as in our
tine, which we are not sure to do the next day, as in the time that God has
taken to himself, and from us, as being more properly his, then our day.

Therefore, boast not thy self (says the Wiseman) of to morrow, for thou
know not what a day may bring forth; Prou. 27.1.
And there is one more this day of thy number spent, and thou art now nearer to
thy end by a day. But if any man does think that he may live as yet many
years, his years may lack months, his months may lack weeks, his weeks
may lack days, his days may lack hours, nay his hours may lack minutes;
an hour is but a short time.

But while one hour by continual succession is added to another, the whole
course of our life is finished, every hour runs away with some part of our
life: and even then, when our bodies grow and increase, our lives fade and
decrease, yea even this day (wherein we live) we divide and part with death.
There is none (says Saint Augustine) but is nearer death at the years end,
then at the beginning, to morrow, then to day, to day, then yesterday, by and
by, then just now, and now, then a little before. Each part of time that we
pass (if time have parts) cuts off so much from our life, and the remainder
still decreaseth When childhood comes on, infancy dies; when adolescencie
comes, childhood dies; when youth comes, adolescencie dies; when old age
comes, youth dies; when death comes, all and every age dies. So that
look how many degrees of ages we desire to live, so many degrees of death we
desire to die. Ask an old man where is his infancy, where his childhood,
where his adolescencie, where his youth, shall he not say true, if he answer,
alas, all these are dead and gone. What speak I of ages? Every year, month,
day, hour of our life that we have lived, is dead to us, and we are dead with
them. What therefore is our whole life, but a long death? What is every day
thereof, but (as Petrach says) a degree of death, what is every moment thereof,
but a motion unto death?

Again, that the days of man are but few, and his life very short,
experience, and that which we see in daily use, does show, besides the word of
God, which, for this, speaking of man's short time, uses to take the shortest
division in nature to express it. As that it is the life of yesterday, as in
the Psalm: Psalm. 90.4.
For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, when it is past: a
life which is gone as soon as it comes, a life of few hours, as a watch in
the night; the life of a thought, whereof there may be a thousand in an hour: a
life of nothing; this Prophet measures it with a short span. Behold (says he)
Psalm. 39.15.
thou have made my days as a hand-breadth.

The valiant Captain Joshua being now resolved to die, Joshua 23.14,
calls death the path that all must tread. Behold (says he) this day I
enter into the way of all the world. So holy David being ready to die, calls
death the way of all the earth.

Experience taught the very Heathen thus much, 1. King. 2.2.
One night tarrieth for all men, and we must all tread the path of death.

This present transitory life is called a pilgrimage, Genesis 47.9.
a path, a travel, and a way, because it continually plieth to an end: for as
they which are carried in coaches, Eccle. 40 1.
or sail in ships finish their voyage, Psalm. 1.1.
though they sit still and sleep, even so every one of us, albeit we be busied
about other matters, and perceive not how the course of our life passes away,
being sometime at rest, sometime idle, and sometime in sport and daliance, yet
our life always wastes, and we in posting speed, hasten toward our end. The
way faring man trauelleth apace, and leaves many things behind him in his
way. He sees stately towers and buildings, he beholds and admireth them a
while, and so passes from them; afterward he sees goodly fields, meadows,
flourishing pastures, and pleasant vineyards, upon these also he looks a
while, he wondereth at the sight, and so passes by, then he meets with
fruitful orchards, green forests, sweet rivers with silver streams, and
behaueth himself as before. At the length he meets with deserts, hard,
rough, and unpleasant ways, foul and ouergrowne with thorns and briars,
here also he is enforced for a time to stay; he labors, sweateth, and is
grieved; but when he has travailed a while, he overcomes all these
difficulties, and remembers no more the former griefs; but always he is
traveling, till he comes to his iourneyes end: even so it fares with us, one
while we meet in our way with pleasant and delightful things, another while
with sorrows and griefs; but they all in a moment pass away.

Furthermore, in high ways and foot-pathes this commonly we see, that where
one has set his foot, there soon after another takes his step, a third
defaceth the print of his predecessors foot, and then another does the like.
Neither is there any, who for any long time holds or continues his place.
And is not man's life such?

Ask (says Basil) the fields and possessions, how many names they have now
changed. In former ages they were said to be such a man's, then his, afterward
another, now they are said to be this man's, and in short time to come, they
shall be called, I cannot tell whose possessions; and why so? Because man's life
is a certain way, wherein one succeeds and expels another.

Behold the seats of States and Potentates, of Emperors and Kings, how many in
every age have aspired unto these dignities and degrees; and when they have
attained them, after much travel, labor and waiting, in short time they are
compelled to give way to their successors, before they have well warmed their
seats.

Yesterday one reigned, to day he is dead, and another possesses his room and
throne; to morrow this man shall die, and another shall sit in his seat. None
as yet could therein sit fast, they all play this part, as on a stage, they
ascend, they sit, they salute, they descend, and suddenly are gone.

The Apostle Paul in respect of the celeritie and swiftness of life, compares
it to a race. What is our life, 1. Cor. 9.24.
says Saint Augustine, but a certain running to death? Our life while it
increases, decreaseth, our life is dying, our death is living. The traveler,
the longer he goes on his journey, the nigher he is to his iourneyes end; the
children of Israel, the longer they wandered from Egypt, the nigher they were to
the promised land: so every mortal man, the longer he lives, the nigher he is
to his iourneyes end. Death, Time and Tide stay for no man. No bridle so
strong, that can keep in our galopping days. He that runs in a race, never
stays til he come at the end thereof, so every mortal wight (will he, nill
he) never stays, till death the end of his race stays him.

Job 9.25. Job 7.6. Job 9.26.
The mirror of patience ( Job by name) compares the race of man to the swift
days of a post, saying, My days are swifter then a post, yea swifter then a
weauers shittle, they are as the motion of the swiftest ship in the sea, and
as the Eagle that flies fast to her prey. 2. Pet. 1.14.
The Apostle Peter compares our time to a Tent or Tabernacle pitched in the
field, soon up, Psalm 90.9.10.
soon down. Our years are spent (says the Psalmist) as a tale that is told,
yea our life is quickly cut off, and we are soon gone.

1. Chro. 29.15.
David a little before his death, offering with his Princes for the building of
the Temple, freely confesses that they were strangers upon earth, as all their
forefathers were, their days like a shadow, and that here was no abiding for
them.

Isa. 40.6.7.
The Prophet Esaias rebuking and checking man's forgetfulness, does cry out and
say, All flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof as the flower of the
field, the grass withers, the flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord
blows upon it, surely the people is grass: the young grass as the old, and
flourishing as a flower. Grass grows soon, and soon decays. The poor, who
in respect of their base condition in this world, are compared to the grass:
the noble and rich in respect of their fresh and flourishing show, are
resembled unto the flower: to both which sorts, noble and ignoble, rich and
poor, there is no difference in death, unless (as Ambrose says) the body of
the rich being pampered with riot and variety of meats, shall yield the more
loathsom^ smell.

The grass and the flower are made by many means to wither, and we by many
more means are brought to our end. The flower of the field, may be by such as
pass by, willingly plucked up, or negligently trodden on, an hungry beast may
devour it, a worm may eat it, or make it to wither, as it did the goard of
Jonas. Ion. 4.7.
The wind may blow it down, the lightning may burn it, the Sun may scortch
it, or at leastwise the nipping winter will mar it. The like may be said of
us, hunger may famish us, abundance of meat and drink may quench our natural
heat with surfeiting and drunkenness, the air can infect us, the water can
poison us, the fire can burn us, the beasts can devour us, wars can dispatch
us, plagues can consume us, diseases can kill us, and a thousand other things
can destroy us. For Alexander the Great was poisoned by his own Taster.
Antiochus of Syria was poisoned by his own Queen Laodicea, for that he loved
King Ptolomeus sister. By fire the Emperor Valentine was burned by the
Goathes. Acteus, King of Lydia, was hanged by his own subjects. Diomedes King
of Thrace was devoured of wild beasts. Cleopatra Queen of Egypt was stung to
death by Serpents. Diogenes was devoured with dogs. Basilius Emperor of
Macedon was killed by a Heart. Anacrion died in eating of an egg; the Emperor
Frederick, going to Jerusalem, was drowned. Queen Sisigambis, King Darius his
mother, died of hunger. Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, was slain with a tyle-stone.
Fabian, a Senator, was choked with hair. Pope Adrian was choked with a fly,
getting into his throat. Julius Caesar, Emperor of Rome, was murdered in the
Senate House. Tullius Hostilius was slain with a thunderbolt. Acts 12.23.
Herod was devoured of worms. And if none of these, yet old age will arrest
us; for young hairs do soon turn gray, and active youth is soon
metamorphosed into crooked old age, which is the champio^ of death, who never
grapled with any but at length threw them into the dust, which shows the
comparison of the Prophet to be most excellent, Esa. 64.6.
without comparison, that all flesh is grass, and the best of us but as the
flower of the field, this day flourishing, to morrow fading. And we all do
fade as a leaf says the prophet Esaias in an other place.

Iam. 4.14.
Saint James compares our life to a vapor that appears for a little while
and afterward vanishes away. Can any thing be spoken more plainly to set
forth our mortality? As a vapor, a mist, a thin watery, and aerie substance,
which a small puff of wind may disperse, or the heat of the sun dissolve.

Psalm. 37.20.
Now unto this if our life may be resembled, then as a vapor is but for one
morning or evening at the most, Psalm. 109.23.
so our life is but a moment for a very short time. Again David compares it to
smoke, because it is corruptible; to a grasshopper because it has but a small
continuance. Nay he says, man is like a thing of naught, Psalm. 144.4.
and less then nothing.

Genesis 4.7.9. 2 Timothy 4.7.
Jacob calls it a pilgrimage, Paul, a course. A pilgrimage has a full
point; a course a stop, and our life and end.

By all which places of scripture we see that the spirit of God to set forth
the frailty and brevity of our life compares it (as we have heard) to things
of shortest continuance, as to the weauers shittle, which he takes, and
presently casts it out of his hands again, to the wind which is very swift,
for the wind blows (says our Savior,) where it lifts and thou hear
the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, nor whether it goes;
to a post which stays not long in a place; to a flower which quickly
withers; to a shadow which soon vanishes; to a thought, which is swiftest
of all the rest; so frail is our estate, so transitory our life, so short are
our days, and uncertain, that as soon as we be borne, we begin to dye.

The breuity and vanity of our life was so noted of the Heathen men
themselves; which made the Egiptians compare it to an Inn, where lodging for a
night, we are gone. Pindarus and Basil compare this life to a dream, wherein
are pleasing and displeasing shows, but at our awaking, are all gone. Man
(says Pindarus) is to be compared to the dream of a shadow. Sophocles, to a
shadow. Homer, unto leaves, that bud, grow out, decay, and blow away.
Pythagoras to a stage play. Aristotle, to a beast called Ephemeron, which is
never but one day old. And many such comparisons we find both in sacred, and
human histories, poynting out the shortness and uncertainty of man's life. For
dreams are but momentarie fantasies of a disturbed brain, for a dream (says
the Preacher) comes of the multitude of business. Eccl. 5.3.
A shadow is a show and not substance. A play is but the handling of some
stately or base part for an hour, then comes the Epilogue and ends all; even
so our life is but a dream to be thought upon, a shadow to be looked upon, and
a play to be acted. As therefore dreams are forgotten, shadows do vanish, and
plays have their conclusion, so our lives have their limits, and bounds, which
they cannot pass. For God that has numbered the hairs of our head, has
numbered our years and days also that we cannot pass them. Mat. 10.30.


Life is nothing else (says the heathen Philosopher) but a glue which
fasteneth soul and body together, which proceeds of the temperament, whereof
the body is made; It passes away as a trace of a cloud, and as a bird that
flies through through the air, and as an arrow that is shot. Our life is
nothing but a little breath, and how easy is it for God to take away our weak
life, when weak man by stopping of our breath is able suddenly and most
certainly to send us to our dust?

Therefore the Prophet says, Psalm. 104.29.
thou hidest thy face and they are troubled, when thou take away their
breath, they die and turn to their dust. Our life it self is not given us in
perpetuity, but lent us for a time; for man's spirit is but borrowed. The wise
man calls it a very debt which a man does owe to yield unto death. Wis.
15.8.16*
Therefore we usually speak (and well too) I owe God a death; for every man's
death is foreseen and appointed in Gods eternal decree with all the
circumstances thereof.

The Prophet David compares our life to the fat of Lambs, Psalm. 37.20.
which wastes away in the rosting; and to a new coat, which is soon w^xed
old, and eaten with moths. Job, to the burning of a candle, which in the end
comes into the socket, and annoyeth, and then every one cries, put it out.
What thing else is man's life but a bubble, up with the water, and down with
the wind?

Job. 8.14.
Again the life of man is compared to a cobweb, for as the spider is occupied
all his life time, in weauing of cobwebs, and draws those threads out of his
own bowels, wherewith he knitteth his nets to catch flies, and often times it
comes to pass when the spider suspecteth none ill, a servant going about to
make clean the house, sweepeth down the cobweb, and the spider together, and
throws them into the fire; even so the most part of men consume their whole
time, and spend all their wit, strength, and labor to have their nets, and
bayts in a readiness, with which they may catch the flies of honors, riches,
preferment, and when they glory in the multitude of flies which they have
taken, and promise to themselves rest in time to come, and will say with the
coueteous rich man in the gospel. Soul thou have much honor, Luke 12.19.
goods, and possessions laid up for many years: live therefore at ease, eat,
drink and take thy pastime. But behold God will say to him. O fool, this
night will they fetch away thy soul from thee. For death Gods servant, and
handmaide will be present with the broom of diverse sicknesses, diseases and
greifes, and will sweep them away, and so the work together with the
workmaster in a moment of time do perish, and then whose shall these things be
which thou have provided?

Our life by an ancient father is said to be more frail, and brittle the^ a
glass, for a glass with good keeping may abide and continue a long time
without breaking, but so cannot man be kept from death, with all the
preservatives and good keeping that can be invented by the art, skill and
learning of the best, and most cunning Physicians in the world, Luke 8.43.
although with the expense of all thou have, even with the woman in the Gospel
that had an issue of blood twelve years, but for all this at length thou shall
dye. For in this respect as Job says in an other case, They are all Physicians
of no value.

As the arrow that is shot at a mark, parts the air, Job. 13.4.
which immediately comes together again, so that a man cannot know where it
went through, even so man as soon as he is borne, hasteneth as fast to his
end, as the arrow to the mark, and that little time of stay is full of misery
and trouble, and therefore may rightly be called, as before, a pilgrimage, in
which is uncertainty a flower in which is mutability, a house of clay in which
is misery, a weauers shittle in which is volubility, to a shepherds tent in
which is variety, to a ship on the sea in which is celerity, to smoke which is
va^ity, to a thought whereof we have a thousand in a day, to a dream whereof
we have many in one night, to vanity which is nothing in it self, and to
nothing, which has no being in the world. For the time past is nothing, the
time to come is uncertain, the time present is but a moment; O life not a life
but a death, to be called and accounted rather death then life, because it is
accompanied not only with death, but with the very shadow of death, that is,
with many miseries, afflictions and calamities of this life, a living death, a
dying life deserving rather to be called a true death, then the shadow of
death, a shadow of life, then a true life. For the time which we have lived is
now no more in the essence of our life, for now our infancy and childhood
lives not, and that wherein we live, which is but the present time, is so
short and fleeting that it cannot be circumscribed, Instans est, momentum est,
ictus oculi est. It is an instant, a moment, the twinkling of an eye. Our life
is a point, and less then a point, a figure of one, to which we can add no
cipher, it is but the least piece of time, that may be measured out, a moment
and less then a moment. And yet if we use this moment well, we may get
eternity, which is of greatest moment. I am not eternity (says one) but a
man, a little part of the whole as an hour is of the day. Like an hour I
came, and I must depart like an hour.

The reasons why our life is become so frail and short are principally these;
first, iniquity now abounds, and more in these latter times, then in former
ages. And because iniquity shall abound (says our Savior Christ) Mat. 24.12.
the love of many shall wax cold. This know also, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy
3.1.2.3 4.5.
that in the last days perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers,
false accusers, incontinent fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a form
of Godliness, but denying the power thereof. Which must needs provoke God to cut
shorter these our days, then those better days wherein our fathers lived; who
lived more simple, and in fewer sins then we their children do at this day.

Therefore it is said by Moses in the book of Numbers. Number. 32.14.
And ^ebold ye are risen up in your fathers stead, an increase of sinful men,
to augment yet the fierce anger of the Lord toward Israel. And ye have done
worse (says the Prophet Jeremy) Ier. 16.12. Ier. 7.26.
then your fathers.

Secondly our time is short, that the shortness thereof might move us not to
defer to do good, as the manner is, seeing even the devil himself is
busy, because his time is short. Therefore says the son of God. Reu. 12.17.
Woe be to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea, for the devil is come
down to you, having great wrath, because he knows he has but a short time.
Therefore the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the
remnant of her seed which keep the commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly our life is as nothing, that Gods children might soon be delivered
from their burdens, and from those that oppress them in this life, and that
the wicked, the children of this world, might have a shorter time to keep in
bondage, and under the whip of malice those poor ones who desire to sacrifice
their life to God in a conscience of his service, and to walk in faith before
him. For if man's life might now extend to the years which were before the
Flood, when men lived (as we have heard) six, seven, eight, nine hundred, and
almost a thousand years; this cruel age in which we live, would too long
torment, and too vilely deal with Gods faithful ones, there being no hook of
short time in the jaws of the wicked, to keep them in fear, as now, when
death is such a tyrant, and short life such a curb unto them, that they dare
not, or cannot do as they would. And indeed how can they do that in their
forty, and under fourscore, which they might and would be bold to do, being
men of might in their hundreds. Also how could the poor Church hold up the
head, and continue in good case, that should have so strong and long-liued
enemies to incou^ter with. And therefore our Savior Christ says in the
Gospel. Except those days should be shortened, Matthew. 24.22.
there should no flesh be saved, but for the Elects sake those days shall be
shortened. Esaias 51.12.
And who art thou (says the Lord) that thou should be afraid of a man that
shall die, and of the son of man, which shall be made as grass.

There is no privilege that can preserve a man from death; Art thou strong?
and does the conceit of thy strength lift thee up in pride? Consider that if in
might, vigor and validity of body, thou did excel Sampson, Hercules, or
Milo, 2. Sam. 23.8.
or David's three Worthiest, when thou come to graple with Death, he will
quickly crush thee and cast thee into the dust. For he will admit of no
composition with thee; for Death has feet of wool, but arms of iron, it
comes insensible, but it having once taken hold, never loses her prize.

Is it for thy beauty? These eyes of thine, which now are as bright as stars.
Death will make a horror to the beholders. These cheeks of thine, wherein now
the lilly and the rose strive for the pre-eminence, Death will make pale and
earthly; these coral lips of thine, will Death change to black and wanne;
this mouth of thine, which in sweetness yields a cynamom breath, will send
forth the stinking savor of a Sepulcher. Therefore the Lord says by his
Prophet, Isa. 3.24.
It shall come to pass, that in stead of sweet smell, there shall be a
stink, and in stead of a girdle, a rent, and in stead of well set hair,
baldness, and in stead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth, and burning
in stead of beauty.

The substance of bodily beauty consists in naught else but in phlegm,
blood, moisture, and gall or melancholy, which are maintained by the
corruptible iuyces of meats; hereby the apples of the eyes glister, the
cheeks are ruddie, and the whole face is adorned: And unless they be daily
moistened with such juice, which ascends out of the liver, incontinent the
skin is dried up, the eyes wax hollow, all ruddinesse and beauty depart from
the visage.

Now if thou consider what is hidden under that skin which thou iudgest so
beautiful, what is shut up within the nostrils, what in the jaws and belly,
thou will protest that this bravery of body is nothing but a painted sepulcher,
which without appears fair to men, Math. 23.27.
but within is full of filthiness and uncleanness. And if thou see in a
ragged cloth the phlegm and spitle that proceeds from the body, thou
loathest it, and wilt not touch it with the typ of thy finger, looking askew
thereon. Therefore this cell and seat of phlegm, this bewtiful body will be so
much altered, that a man may say, O how much is he or she changed from that
they were. And hereof it is that the Wiseman says, Favor is deceitful, Pro.
31.30.
and beauty is vain.

But to digress a little, do thou make thy self beautiful, and art not
contented with that beauty, which God thy Creator has bestowed upon thee?
Then hearken to that excellent saying of Saint Cyprian, that weomen which
advance themselves in putting on of silk and purple, cannot lightly put on
Christ: and they which color their locks with red and yellow, do
prognosticate of what color their heads shall be in hell and they which love
to paint themselves in this world otherwise then God has created them, let
them fear, lest when the day of the resurrection comes, the Creator will not
know them. And besides, know thou that there be aches, feauers, impostumes,
swellings and mortality in that flesh thou so deckest, and that skin which is
so bepainted with artificial complexion shall lose the beauty and it self. You
that sail between heaven and earth in your four sailed vessels, as if the
ground were not good enough to be the pauement to the soales of your feet, know
that one day the Earth shall set her feet on your fair necks, and the slime of
it shall defile your sulphured bewties, dust shall fill up the wrinkled
furrows, which age makes, and paint supplies. Your bodies were not made of the
substance whereof the Angels were made, nor of the nature of stones, nor of the
water, whereof the fire, air, water, and inferior creatures. Remember your
tribe, Esaias 51.1.
and your fathers poor house, and the pit whereout you were hewed. Hannibal is
at the gates, death stands at your doors; be not proud, be not mad. You
must die, and then your finenesse shall be turned into filthiness; your
painted beauty and strength into putrefaction and rottenness. Let him make
what show he can with his glorious adornations, let rich apparel and paintings
disguise him living, seare-clothes, spices, balmes enwrap him, lead and stone
immure him dead, his original mother will at last own him for her natural
child, and triumph over him with this insultation. He is my bowels, Psalm.
146.4.
he returns to his earth. His body returns not immediately to heaven, but
to earth, nor to earth as a stranger to him, or an unknown place; but to his
earth, as one of his most familier friends, and of oldest acquaintance.
Powders, Liquors, Unguents, Odours, Ornaments derived from the living, from the
dead, palpable instances, and demonstratiue ensigns of pride, and madness to
make them seem beautiful, such translations and borrowing of forms that a
silly countryman walking in the City, can scarce say there goes a man, or
there a woman.

Is it for thy youth? If thou think so, thou reckonest without thine host:
Ier. 8.11. Judge. 4.21. Psalm. 49.14.
For thy folly therein may happily cause thee to say, Peace, peace, till with
Sisera thou fall into thy last sleep of destruction, and to go from thy house
to thy grave. But who can be ignorant that on the stage of this world, some
have longer and some shorter parts to play; and who knows not, though some
fruits fall from the tree by a full and natural ripeness, that all do not
so, nay that the more part are pulled from it, and do wither upon it in the
tender bud or young fruit, then are suffered to tarry till they come to their
perfect ripeness and mellowing. The corn falls of it self, sometime is
bitten in the spring, often trodden down in the blade, but never fails to be cut
up in the ear when it is ripe. Some fruit is plucked violently from the tree,
some drop with ripeness all must fall, so do not more (without comparison)
fall from the tree of time, young, either violently plucked from it by a hasty
death, or miserably withering upon it by a lingering death, perishing in the bud
of childhood, or bea en down in the green fruit of youth, then come to their
full age of ripeness, by a mellow and kindly death.

Further does not God call from his work, some in the morning, some at noone,
and some at night? For as his laborers enter into his vineyard, Matthew. 20.1.
so they go out, that is in such manner, and at such hours: some die in the
dawning of their life, who pass but from one grave to another, some die in
youth, as in the third hour, some at thirty, and some at fifty as in the
sixth and ninth, and some very old, as in the last hour of the day. Yet more
die young then old, and more before ten, then after threescore. Besides all
this, the fresh life which the youngest have here, is cut off, or continued by
the same decree and finger of God, that the oldest and most blasted life is
prolonged or finished. For say that a man had in his keeping sundry britle
vessels, as of glass or stone, some made forty, fifty, or threescore years
ago, and some but yesterday. We will agree that the vessel will soonest be
broken, not that is made first, but which is first stricken, or first receives
a knock. So for these brittle vessels of our earthly bodies, they that soonest
receive the blow of death (though but made yesterday) first perish, not that
were first made and have longest lived. What then is our life, and how vain
and false is our hope of long life, seeing no man can tell who he is that shall
receive the first stroke or knock to the destroying of this his mortal
tabernacle?

In a prison where are many condemned, should some riot and forget death,
because they are not first drawn out to die, or because one goes before
another to execution? Shall he that comes last, 1. Sam. 15.32.
come forth pleasantly with Agag, and say, Surely the bitterness of death is
past, because we die not so soon as others? And we shall not all die at once,
shall we therefore count our selves immortal? If we be old, we may be sure
our turn is near, and if we be young, it may be as near, for they that are
old may travel long, but they that are young may have a shorter way home. For
the short liver runs his race no faster then he that lives long; both
run alike, both make speed alike, the difference is, the first has not so
far to run as the latter. It is one thing to run further, another thing
to run faster. He that lives long runs further, but not a moment faster.
Every man hasteneth to death alike; though one have a less way to go then
another.

Death is come up (says the Prophet) into our windows, Ier. 9.21.
and is entered into our Palaces, to cut off the children from without, and the
young men from the streets. Seeing then this hope of living till we be old, is
so vain and deceitful, we should make as great have to God at twenty, as at
fourscore. When we hear a solemn knell, we say some body is departed, Acts
5.9.
and why should not we think that the feet of them who carried out that body,
is at the door ready to carry us out also?

He was not an old man, and had much peace in his days, to whom it was said,
Luke 12.20.
O fool this night they will fetch away thy soul; so death works in us,
whether we will or not. Again, the strong constitution in a young man
persuades him that he shall live long; but no constitution in a man can
enlarge his charter of life one poor hour. Indeed the good complexion of a
man may be a sign of long life, Exodus 20.12.
but he that prolongeth our days on earth, he only can make us to live long.

Again, the strength and beauty of youth makes him believe that he has many
years yet to live. Therefore the Wiseman says, Prou. 20.29.
that the glory of young men is their strength, but how soon is this blighted
and stricken, as the fair flower of grass with an East-winde. For beauty and
strength is but a flower, which if some sickness strike not suddenly yet the
Autumn of ripe years impaireth, and the winter of old age kills. And what
cares death (which is indifferent to all) for a fair strong and goodly
complexion? Is not a beautiful face as mortal as a foul hue? The like may be
spoken of health and stature of body: for what are they? and of what time? In
their own nature they are fickle things, and without good use, crosses.

For touching health, the devouring vulture of sickness does after some short
time wast it to nothing. Strength is common to us with beasts; and there are
many beasts exceed us in strength.

And for our comely stature, it may as soon be brought down to death, and as
deeply be buried in the coffin of the earth, as one of a meaner size. And
further, if men have not used these to Gods glory, but to pride and
vainglory, nor have made them helps to godliness, but have given them
their head to sin; it will be said after death of such that a beautiful
person, a strong young man, a goodly tall fellow, and one that never knew what
sickness meant, is gone to hell.

Therefore of beauty and her attendants, as strength, health, and a goodly
stature, that may be spoken, which usually is spoken of fire and water, that
they are good servants, but ill Masters; where they are ruled they do good
service, but where they overrule, they make foul work.

Or is it for the greatness? But that cannot privilege thee from death; for
Solomon, who in wisdom excelled all other men, who in riches exceeded every
man, who in power as mighty as any man, and who in birth was surpassed by no
man, who for his wisdom was admired of all, for his riches beloved of all, and
for his power feared of all, and honored of all for his birth; even he (I say)
could not refrain to confess for all his wisdom which was angelical, for
all his riches which were innumerable, for all his power so maiesticall, and
for all his birth, so regal, Wis. 7.1 2.3.4 5.6.
He I say could not choose but cry out and say. I my self am a mortal man like
to all and the offspring of him that was first made of the earth, and in my
mothers womb was fashioned to be flesh in the time of ten months being
compacted in blood of the seed of man, and the pleasure that came with sleep.
And when I was borne I drew in the common air, and fell upon the earth, which
is of like nature, and the first voice which I uttered was crying as all others
do. I was nursed in swaddling clothes and that with care.

If then Salamon, who was begotten by a King, and borne to be a King, and one
whose living and conversation before he fell to Idolatry) seemed rather divine
then humane, if he I say, were subject to such imbecility, and had no more
favor showed him by nature then so; to what misery and imbecility then should
all we be subject, or what may we say; that are made of a baser stuff,
fashioned in worse mould and more obscurely and poorly brought into the world?
For as much weakness and feebleness in birth by nature is incident to a Prince,
as to a peasant. For says Solomon in the same place, there is no King that had
any other beginning of birth, for all men have one entrance into life, and the
like going out. Job 31.15.
Did not he that made me in the womb (says Job) make him, and did not one
fashion us in the womb.

A certain man desired to see Constantine the great; whom intentiuely
beholding he cried out. I thought Constantine had been some great thing, but
now I see he is nothing but a man; Constantine answered with thanks, thou
only have looked on me with open and true judging eyes.

Saint Ambrose says. How far will ye great men stretch your couetise? Will ye
dwell alone upon the earth, and have no poor man with you? Why put you out
your fellow by kind, and challenge to your self the possession common by
kind; in common to all, for high and low, rich and poor, the earth was made.
Why will ye rich change proper right herein? Kind knows not riches, that
brings forth all men poor, for we be not got with rich clothes, and borne
with gold, ne with silver: naked he brings them into the world, needy of
meat, and drink, and clothing, naked the earth takes us, as she naked
brought us hither. She cannot close with us our possession in sepulcher, for
kind makes no difference, between poor and rich in coming hither, ne in
going hence. All in one manner he brings forth, and in one manner he closes
in grave.

Who so will make difference between poor and rich, abide till they have a
little while lain in grave, then open and look among dead bones, Lam. 4.5.
who was rich, and who was poor, but if it be thus that more clothes rot with
the rich then with the poor, and that does harm to them that are then living,
not profiting them that be dead. And it may be that the worms shall feed more
sweetly on the rich, Job. 24.20.
then on the poor. But thou will say (says Saint August.) I am not such a one
as he is, God forbid I should be so, he is base and beggarly, I am high,
honorable and rich; tell me not (says Saint August.) The ods of your apparel,
or other external things, but mark ye the quality of nature, remember the
day of your birth, and the day of your death. There is no difference in the one
or the other, both weak, both miserable; for all of all sorts and conditions
are made of one mold, and one matter, of clay and earth, whose foundation is in
the dust, which shall be destroyed before the moth. It is true that as there is
difference of stars, though all made of the same matter, and difference of
metals, some gold, Job. 4.19.
some silver, some lead, some tin, but all made of one earth; and differences
of vessels, some gold, some silver, 2 Timothy 2.20.
some wood, some earth and some to honor, and some to dishonor, but all made of
the same mould, so are there differences of bodies, some more excllent then
other, and made of purer earth; but yet all subject to corruption, as the
matter is whereof they are made. It being the body, then that dies, and sees
corruption, one must dye as well as an other. For as great men have no
privilege from error, nor protection from reproof, for their faults
blameable, so have they no privilege from Death. For all men have one entrance
into the world, a like danger in life, the same necessity of death, respect
cannot change nature, nor circumstance alter substance: a great man is a man, a
man has a body and a soul, both have their diseases, which greatness can
never diminish, but oftentimes augments. And therefore in a bodily infirmity
of some noble personages, the Physician takes them in hand, not as noble men,
but as men. Physic they must have, although with better attendance, more
exquisite and costly medicines, and skilfuller Doctors then the poorer sort
have. Therefore do they think because they live better and are in better
estate, and have better means to preserve life then poor men, that therefore
they shall live longer; and what difference concerning death between a noble
man and a beggar, when both go to one place. All go to one place, says the
Preacher, all are of dust, Eccl. 3.20.
and all turn to dust again. When in these acts and scenes of seeming life,
as at a game at chesse, the highest now upon board may presently be lowest
under board. And the breath in the nostrels of the rich man may as soon be
stopped, and they as soon turn to the dust as other men. Deaths cold
impartial hands are used to strike, princes, and pesants, and make both alike.

Therefore in this respect the case of the rich and poor, great and small,
high and low, may be resembled to the play or game at Chesse. Hear this
therefore all ye people, give ear all ye Inhabitants of the world both low
and high, Psalm. 49.1.2.
rich and poor together. For while the play indureth there is great difference
in the men, greater respect had to some then to others; but when the Check-mate
is given, and play ended then the men are tumbled together, and put up into the
bag, from whence they were taken out, and the lesser men uppermost many times,
there being no difference. And so it is in this world. There is great
difference in men, and greater respect had to some then to others (as it is
meet to be) but when death comes (as surely it will come to all sorts) then
there will be no such difference in the grave, neither does Death know any such
difference, for he spares none; the young as well as the old dies the Lambs
skin is brought to the market, as well as the old Crones, the rich as well
as the poor, the Prince as well as the subject; for there is no difference in
the mould, from the rich Crown of Kings to the poor beggars crutch, from him
that sits on a Throne of glory unto him that is humbled in earth and ashes,
from him that wears Purple and a Crown, Eccle. 40.3.4.
unto him that is clothed with a linen frocke.

Reu. 20.12.
Saint John in his vision in the book of the Revelation saw the dead arraigned
at the bar of the great Judge, both great and small, Matthew. 27.33.
old, and young. In Golgotha are skulls of all sizes, says the Hebrew
proverb. Death attends youth behind, vshereth old age, and walks before
it, and it is hard at hand to all, and to all sorts. All must grind to greet.
Princes are old, cold and chillerie; Princes as well as others must decay and
wear away.

Again in this respect they may be resembled to Actors of a Comedy upon a
stage, wherein one acts the part of a prince, an other of a Duke, another of
an Earl, another of a Nobleman, another of a Gentleman, another of a
Magistrate, another of a Merchant, another of a Countreyman, another of a
servant, every one acts a several part. And so long as they are upon the
stage, so long there is respect (according to their parts) had one of another;
but when the Comedy is ended, and the stage pulled down, then there is no such
respect had amongst them. Yea many times he that plays the basest part is the
best man. So likewise so long as men do act sundry parts upon the stage of
this world, that is, so long as men do live in several vocations and
callings, so long there is respect had amongst them, and that worthily; but
when as the comedy shall be ended, that is, when the day of doom shall come,
when as the stage of this world shall be pulled down, that is when the earth
shall be changed (for the earth shall never be brought ad non-ens, to nothing, but
only the corruptiue qualities shall be consumed) then there shall be no such
respect of persons amongst men. Yea it may be that the poor man shall be of
greater respect before God then the great, rich, and mighty. Thou came lately
into the world, and have found much, that was thy good hap; he came lately into
the world, and found little, and yet his hap was not ill; nay it may be, better
then thine. And what were it to have a purple Coat, and a polluted conscience,
a gay gown and a sick heart, a bed of gold and a diseased mind, a full chest
and an empty soul, a fair face and foul affections, to glister in jewels,
and to be filthy in manners, to be in grace with men, and in disgrace with God.
Luke 16.15.
He that has much worlds wealth and dignity, and but a small measure of grace
is inferior to him that has a great measure of grace, and but little, or no
worlds wealth. For spiritual things among themselves admit comparison, but
between things spiritual and earthly there is none at all. But tarry a while
and nature will take away this ods. Job 1.21.
Naked came thou out of thy mothers womb, and naked shall thou return
again to the earth our common mother, thou know not how soon. If thou were
this day as fair as Absolon, as sweet and lovely as Jonathan, as strong as
Samson, as glorious as Solomon, in less then an hour Death will reprove all
these things of vanity. Eccl. 1.2.
Vanity of Vanities (says the Preacher) all is vanity. A little sickness, a
little headache, one fit of an ague, two spoonefull of phlegm distilling out
of thy head into thy throat, turns all vpside down, and makes a strange
alteration in thee; yea God in a piece of an hour can make as strange an
alteration in thee, 2 King 9.30.
as was in Iesabel that proud painted-faced Queen of Israel, who even now
looked out at the window in much bravery, painted, frizled and curled to please
the eyes of Iehu, and by and by she became as dung upon the ground, and the
dogs did eat her up. And as was Goliath that mighty Giant, 1 Samuel 17.51.
who having challenged and reviled the host of the living God, straightway was
laid upon the ground groueling without a head.

There is nothing that can free any one from Death, no, not length of days,
nor wisdom, strength, riches, beauty, nor tallness of stature. For if length
of days could, then the ancient Fathers and Patriarchs before the flood, who
lived some seven, some eight, some nine hundred years and more, as before,
could not have dyed, of all whom the conclusion is still after he had lived so
many years he dyed. If wisdom could, then King Solomon the wisest that ever
was, who knew the nature of all simples from the very hysop to the cedar, and
therefore if any, he surely could have preserved himself from death. And yet
of him it is said in the end he dyed. Iud. 15.15.
If strength then Sampson who being endued with extraordinary strength at one
time, slew a thousand with the Iawe-bone of an Ass, had not dyed. If talnes of
stature, Saul higher then any of the people from the shoulders upward had not
dyed. 1 Samuel 10.23.
If riches, Dines, if beauty, Absolon had not dyed. Take a man in all his
abundance of riches, treasures, greatness, and pleasures, flourishing in his
greatest felicity, bravery, and prosperity; yea let him be (if he will) another
Policrates of this world, what is he of himself, but a carcass, a caitife, a
prey to death, rejoicing and laughing in this world, but yet as one that
laugheth in his dream and waketh in his sorrow, fraught full of fears and
cares of mind, not knowing to day what will happen to morrow, mortal,
mutable, miserable, whose beginning is in travel, standing uncertain, his end
corruption, his body subject to sickness, his soul to temptations, his good
name to reproaches, his honor to blastnesse, his goods to loss, and his flesh
to rottenness. Nabuchadnezzar is but dust, Alexander ashes. Whereof should we
be proud? Certain Philosophers earnestly beholding the Tomb of Alexander
(said one) alas yesterday he did treasure up gold, and to day gold does
treasure up him. Another said. Yesterday the world did not suffice him, to day
ten cubits are too much. A third said, Yesterday he did command others, to day
others command him. A fourth said, Yesterday he delivered many from the grave,
to day he cannot free himself from Death. A fifth said, Yesterday he led an
army, to day an army conducts him. A sixth said, Yesterday he did ouer-presse
the earth, to day the earth suppresseth him. A seventh said, Yesterday he made
many stand in awe, to day not many repute of him. The eight said, Yesterday he
was an enemy to his enemies, and a friend to his friends, to day he is equal,
yea all alike to all.

Then if Monarchs be so momentary, why should mortals be so proud? It is
true that one writes wittily of the Grammarian, of every son of Adam, that
being able to decline all other nownes in every case, he could decline Death
in no case. There was never Orator so eloquent that could persuade Death to
spare him, never Monarch so potent that could withstand him. Nexus the fair,
Thersites the foul, Zelyus the cruel, Solomon the magnificent, Crassus the
rich, Irus the poor, Dametas the pleasant, Agamemnon the Prince, all fall
down at Deaths feet. If he command, we must away; no tears, no prayers, no
threatenings, no intreatings will serve the turn, so stiff, so deaf, so
inexorable is Death. There are means to tame the most fierce and savage
beasts, to break the hard marble, and mollify the Adamant, but not any one
thing to mitigate Deaths rage. Fire, water, the sword, may be resisted (says
Saint Augustine) and Kings and kingdoms may be resisted, but when Death
comes, who can resist it? Death (says Saint Bernard) pitieth not the poor,
regards not the rich, fears not the mighty, spares not any. It is in man's
power, indeed, to say unto Death, as sometime King Canutus said unto the Sea,
when it began to flow. Sea I command thee that thou touch not my feet: but his
command was bootlesse, for he had no sooner spoken the word, but the surging
waves dashed him: so may many say unto Death, when it approaches, I command
thee not to come near me, but Death will strike him notwithstanding. And no
more power has man to keep back Death, that it strike not, then the
mightiest King on earth to keep back the Sea, that it flow not. The Sea will
have his flux, and Death will have his course, they both keep their old wont.
Since the first division of waters, the Sea has been accustomed to ebb and
flow; who has ever hindered it? And since the first corruption of Nature,
Death has been accustomed to slay and destroy; who has resisted it? Other
customs have and may be abolished; a King may command, and it is done: but
what Monarch so absolute, what Emperor so potent, that can abrogate within his
Dominions this custom of dying?

Nay, there is no privilege, no not spiritual, neither can that grace and
excellent gift of holiness and piety, preserve a man from a natural death (
viz. the first death) out of no Court or Church can a man fetch a writ of
protection against this Sergeant, no place will preserve, no person can be
privileged from it. Esaias 57.1.
For here the holy and good man, the righteous and religious man, is taken
from the earth and dies. James 1.18.
For if any should be spared, he that is begotten again of Gods own will by
the word of truth, he that is borne again of water and of the Spirit, John 3.5.
and so borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, Ioh. 1.13.
nor of the will of man, but of God. He that is borne a new, not of mortal
seed, but of immortal by the word of God, 1. Pet. 1.23.
which lives and endures for ever. A man (I say) would think that such (if
any) should not die; and yet behold the whole generation of Gods children, they
all die in their appointed time, and undergo death, not as a punishment, but
as a tribute (as Seneca the Heathen man speaks) which every man must pay for
his life. The fool dies, the wiseman, the subject, the Sovereign. I have
said (says the Psalmist) ye are gods, Psalm. 49.10. Psalm. 82.6.7.
and ye all are children of the most high, but ye shall die as a man, and ye
Princes shall fall like others: and so also the Prophets and holy men of God:
David was a man after Gods own heart, and yet he died: Moses saw God face to
face, and yet he died: Zach. 1.5.
The Prophets were endued with a great measure of sanctification, yet the
Prophet Zachary ioynes them all together in one state of mortality. Your
Fathers, where are they? And do the Prophets live for ever? What say I, the
Prophets? Nay Christ Jesus himself the Son of God, the only Son, the
Son in whom he was well pleased, more faithful then Abraham, more righteous
then Job, more wise then Solomon, more mighty then Samson, more holy then
David and all the Prophets, though he knew no sin in himself, yet for
taking on him the burden of our sins, became subject to the same condition
of mortality with us, and he died also.

Examples of other times, experience of our own teach us that all of all sorts
die, and are gathered to their fathers, yea the dumb and dead bodies cry this
aloud unto us. As Basil of Seleucia says of Noah, he preached without words of
Preaching; for every stroke upon the Arc was a real Sermon of repentance, so
every corpse that we follow and accompany to the grave, preaches really this
truth unto us. All the worthiest of the first times and whomsoever else the
word of God has well reported of, where are they? Are they not all dead? Do
they not all see corruption? (our Savior Christ excepted). Are they not all
gone down into the slimie valley? Have they not long since made their bed in
the dark? None of them all (our Savior Christ excepted) was able to deliver
his life from the power of the grave. Art thou better then David, and wiser
then Solomon? Nay, art thou greater then our Father Abraham, who is dead, and
the Prophets which are dead? Whom make thou thy self? If thou think thou
should not die; Then surely if the holiest begotten and borne of man do
die, then all must die. And if holiness must yield, then profaneness cannot
stand out. And therefore whether holy or profane, Jew or Greek, bond or free,
male or female, all must die. If the tender hearted woman that wept for Christ,
then the stony hearted men that scoffed at Christ. If those that imbalmed him,
then those that buffeted him. If she that powered ointment on his head, then he
that spat in his face. If John his beloved Apostle, then Judas that betrayed
him.

Man is a little world, the world a great man, if the great man must die, how
shall the little one escape? We must not think much to undergo that, which
all are enjoined unto necessarily. Equality is the chief groundwork of
equity, and who can complain to be comprehended, where all are contained. For
there is not a son of man in the cluster of mankind, but Eodem modo and
nodo, vinctus and victus, is liable to that common and equal law of Death. And
although they die not one death for time and manner, yet for the matter and
end, one death is infallible to all the sons of men. Lift up your eyes to the
heavens (says the Lord) and look upon the earth beneath, Esaias 51.6.
for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old
like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner. But if
any shall object that Enoch and Elias died not. Genesis 23.24. Hebr. 11.6. 2.
King. 2.11.
I answer, We know not. I rather think they did, and that Elias in his fiery
Chariot had his body burnt, and Enoch, who in his years matched the days of
the Sun 365. was without pain dissolved, when God took his soul to heaven;
or if they died not, yet (as Origin says) the general is not therefore false,
because God has dispensed in some particulers, though one or two died not, yet
this is an universal truth of all men to be received, and duly pondered. Heb.
9.21.
It is appointed unto all men that they shall once die, from which there is no
auoidance. For the Lord of life and death has so decreed it; the decree was
made in the beginning: Genesis 3.19.
For dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. If it be his decree, it
must needs have a certain effect. The decree is certain, the event is
inevitable. Our God (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 115.3.
is in heaven, and he does whatsoever he will. Gods will is the deed (as
says Saint Cyprian) if he has once willed it, it is as good as wrought. If he
have decreed it, it is as certain as if it were done. It is heavens decree,
and it cannot be revoked. Dan. 6.1.


I have been somewhat too tedious in this first Division, which is somewhat
contrary to the common proverb, that he should not be tedious that reads a
Lecture of mortality, but because this is on the one side a matter worthy to be
observed: and on the otherside, a matter too too much neglected, I have been
somewhat the bolder to insist the longer upon it. And therefore to conclude
with my Statute. It is appointed etc.

It is therefore a care that every one ought to have, viz. to know that they
must die, and that they cannot avoid it. The decree is gone out against them,
from the highest court of Parliament of the most High. What contempt were it
not to take notice of it?

Every one therefore ought to labor to number his days, and truly to know his
mortality, the greatest as well as the meanest, the wisest as the simplest.
For if any one, then all, and if any more then other, then the greatest, for
the greatest are most subject to death. As they challenge themselves to be the
finest of the common mould, so they must know, that, by that they are not
exempted from the common law of Nature, and force of Gods decree. But as, the
finer the metal, or the purer the matter of any glass or earthen vessel is,
the more subject it is to breaking, and so the daintiest bodies the soonest
gone. It behooves us all therefore to seek for spiritual Arithmeticke,
thereby to number our days in a religious meditation of the incertainties of
the time and the certainty that that time will come. Let us therefore live to
die, yea live the life of grace, that we may live the life of glory. And then
though we must go to the dead, yet we shall rise from the dead, and from
thenceforth live with our God out of the reach of Death for evermore.

The end of the first Division.
THE SECOND DIVISION, ON THE MEDITATION OF DEATH.
THen if Death be thus certain, in the next place the law of reason advises
us to think of the worlds vanity to contemn it, of death to expect it, of
judgment to avoid it, of hell to escape it, and of heaven to desire it. And
think it not needless or superfluous to be exhorted to this Meditation; that
the ignorant may learn, the careless consider, and the forgetful remember
that they all must die. For, as Saint Augustine says, nothing so recalleth a
man from sin, as the frequent remembrance of death. For the error of all men,
for the most part, takes his original from hence, that they forget the end of
their life, which they ought always to have before their eyes. And of the want
of this comes pride, ambition, vainglory, too much carfulness of the
body, too much carking and caring after the things of this life. Hence also it
comes that we build Towers upon the sand. For if we did consider what we
shall be after a few days, our manner of living would perhaps be more humble,
temperate and godly,: for who would have a high look, Psalm. 131.1.
and a proud stomach, if he did with the eyes of his mind behold what manner
of one he shortly after shall be in his grave? who would then worship his belly
for a god, Phil. 3.19.
when he waigheth with himself that the same must in short time be worms
meat? who would be so in love with money, that he would run like a madman
by sea and land (as it were through fire and water) if he understood that he
must leave all behind him?

If this were well thought upon, our errors would soon be corrected, and our
lives bettered. Wish therefore rather for a good, then a long life. It is a
thing doubtless, worthy of every man's best thoughts and intentions. For seeing
every man must die, and has a course to finish, which being finished, he must
away. It is special wisdom to learn to know the length of his days, as it
were the length of his lease: for as he has used himself in his farm, he
shall enter at the expiration of his time upon a better or a worse.

1. Sam. 13.14.
David for his learning a Prophet, for his acceptance, a man after Gods own
heart, for his authority a King, was then very studious in this knowledge, when
after fasting and watching, he besought God to be instructed in it. Lord let me
know my end, Psalm. 39.4.
and the measure of my days, what it is, let me know how long I have to live.
Act. 7.22.
So Moses, wise in all the wisdom of Egypt and Israel, accounted faithful in
the house of God, Heb. 3.2.
prayed yet for this point of wisdom to be informed in it, Psalm. 90.12.
and as well for himself as others. Teach us so to number our days (says he)
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom: like careful scholars, who forsake
their meat and drink, and break their sleep, and are often in meditation
when they beat upon some serious subject.

What think you it will profit a man, if by his skill in Arithmetike, he be
able to deal with every number, and to divide the least fractions, and never
to think on the numbering of his days with the men of God, and yet his days
are few and evil?

What will it profit him, if by Geometry he be able to take the longitude of
most spacious prospects, and not be able to measure that which the Prophet has
measured with his spanne? Psalm. 39.51.


What will it avail him, if with the astronomer he be able to observe and know
the motions of the heavens, and yet have his heart so buried in the earth, that
he cannot think of that which passes away as swiftly as any motion of them
all?

What profits it (I say) If he be able, with the Philosopher, to search out
the causes of many effects, and to know the causes of many changes, as of the
ebbing and flowing of the seas the increasing and wayning of the Moon, and the
like, and be not able to know his own changes, and the causes of them?
Doubtless all this will profit them nothing, all this knowledge will be to
little purpose in the end. And unless they think upon death, they cannot apply
and fashion themselves to a godly life. Yea we find daily by experience, that
the forgetfulness of death makes us apply our hearts to all kind of folly
and vanity.

The holy men in old time were wont to keep such an account of their days,
and so to think on death, that above all things they might apply their hearts
unto wisdom. So mindful of these things was Saint Jerome, who says of
himself, that whether he did eat or drink, or whatsoever else he did, he
thought always this sound of the last trumpet did ever ring in his ears.
Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. Which when I consider (says he) it
makes me shake and quake and not dare to commit sin, which otherwise I should
have committed.

Likewise that ancient and reverend father Innocentius the fourth, was so
careful to avoid the vengeance to come that to stir up all the powers and
faculties of his mind, with due consideration of the vanity of this world,
the vileness of his nature, the shortness of his time, the causes of sin,
and the punishment for the same, he still imagined to hear a damned soul
answer his demand, as follows, in manner of an interlocution or dialogue.
Thou dust and clay, tell me (I say) where is thy beauty fled?
Was it in vain, or does it give thee favor with the dead?
Thy house so high, thy pleasures by, thy cattle more and less,
Thy land so wide, thy wife beside a stranger does possess.
Where is thy strength become at length, thy wit, thy noble blood,
Thy worldly care, thy dainty fair, do these thee any good?
The answer.
I will not feign, all is but vain, there is no food to find,
No wit, nor wealth, no hire, no health, no hope in grave assigned:
What will thou more? my goods in store, my land so large and wide,
My glory gay, my brave array, increased have my pride.
My pride my pain procured again, my pain, my grief, alas,
My grief, my grief, without relief, my senses does surpass.
My wailing woe no man does know, no tongue can half display;
I freeze, I fry exceedingly, alas, and well away.
I weep, I wayle, I faint, I fail, I stir, I stamp, I stare,
I dye, I dye, e'relastingly, farewell, by me beware.
Remember thou learned that die thou must,
And after come to judgment just.
Behold thy self by me, such one was I, as thou,
And thou in time shall be even dust, as I am now.


And so mindful hereof also was Anaxagoras; for when word was brought unto
him, that his son was dead, he was not much moved with the news, because
(as he said) he knew, and had well considered, long before, that his son was
mortal. For a mortal father cannot beget an immortal son. If they that
brought us into the world are gone out of the world themselves, we may
infallibly conclude our own following. He that may say I have a man to my
father, a woman to my mother in this life, may in death say with Job, Job 17.14.
To corruption, thou art my father, to the worm, thou art my mother and my
sister.

Xerxes that mighty Monarch and Emperor of the Persians, (beholding from a high
place) the hugeness of his Army, in strength invincible, in quality diverse, in
number infinite, in whose courage and might he had fully reposed the strength
of his Kingdom, the safeguard of his person, and glory of his Empire, could not
refrain his eyes from tears, considering that of all this marvelous multitude
which he saw, that after one hundred years, there should not a man be left.
And shall we that are Christians, (at least wise by name) viewing from the
highest pinnacle of our conceit, our selves, our glory, magnificence and
renown, our wealth, our strength, our friends, our health, and all our
bravery, wherein we repose all our felicity and happiness, be nothing moved
with the due consideration of our Death, and with the passing away of the
world, and the concupiscence thereof? Therefore says Martial an ancient
Bishop, what have we to do with the delight of the world, that it should
hinder us from the meditation on Death? You may call it as you will, either
pleasure, pastime, gladness, mirth, joy: but in Gods dictionary it has no
such name, in the holy scripture it is otherwise called. It is called Adams
goodly apple, Genesis 3.17. Genesis 25.30. 1 Samuel 14 43. Ioh. 13.27. Reu. 1. Luke
15.16.
which being eaten, deprived him of paradise. Esaus read broth, which being
supt up bereaved him of his birthright. Ionathans sweet honycombe, which being
but tasted, was like to cost him his life. Thus is all the delight in the world
called in Gods dictionarie. It is called Adams apple, Esaus broth, Ionathans
hony-combe. So that all this delight is no delight, or suppose it were, yet
certainly it shall not give thee the desires of thy heart.

As any solid body, though it have never so fair a color, as crimson, or
cornation, or purple, or scarlet, or violet, or such like, yet always the
shadow of it is black, so any earthly thing, though it have never so fair a
show yet always the shadow of it is black, and the delight thou take in it
shall prove to be grievous in the end when thou must leave all. Therefore
Plato calls it a sweet bitter thing; so likewise if we meditate on Death, it
will make us to call all these things of the world not sweet but bitter. And it
would make us say with the Apostle, Gal. 6.14.
God forbid that I should delight in any thing but in the cross and death of
Christ by which the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

But of all arithmeticall rules, this is the hardest, to number our days. Men
can number their herds and droues of Oxen and sheep, they can account the
revenues of their lands and farms, they can with a little pains number their
coin and gains, and yet they are persuaded that their days are infinite and
innumerable, and therefore they never begin to number, nor think on them for
the which they will never find any leisure. Who says not upon the view of
another; surely yonder man looks by his countenance as if he would not live
long, yonder woman is old, her days cannot be many? Thus we can number the
days and years of others, and utterly forget our own. But the true wisdom
of mortal men is to number their own days, and like skillful Geometricians
to measure all their actions, all their studies, all their cares and
endeavors, all their thoughts and desires, and all their counsels by their
departure out of this life (as the end whereunto they are reserved) as it were
by a certain rule, and thereunto to direct all things, and so to finish the
course of our life which God has given us, that at last we may come to the
haven of eternal rest and happiness.

What if we had dyed in the days of ignorance, like Judas that hanged himself
before he could see the passion, resurrection, or ascension of Jesus Christ? We
should then have numbered our days and our sins too. But alas how many
days have we spent, and yet never thought why one day was given us? But as the
old year went, and an other came, so we thought that a new would follow that,
and so we think that another will follow this, and God knows how soon we
shall be deceived. For so thought many of them before, who are now in their
graves.

Dearly beloved, this is not to number our days, but to provoke God to
shorten our days. I that write, you that read, and all that hear this, which
of us has not lived twenty years, yea some forty, fifty, or more, and yet
we have never seriously thought on Death, nor applied our hearts aright unto
wisdom. O if we had learned but every year one virtue, since we were borne,
we might by this time have been like Saints amongst men, whereas if God at this
present time should call us to judgment, it would appear that we had applied
our hearts, minds, memories, hands, feet, tongues, and all our whole bodies
to all kind of sin and wickedness, but not applied our selves at all to
wisdom, godliness, virtue, and true piety.

Democritus was wont to walk amongst the graves, that he might become a right
Philosopher; for true philosophy (says Plato) is the meditation on death; and
thou which art instructed in the true Christian Philosophy, how can thou
behold the bones of the dead, but thou must needs fall into this patheticall
meditation with thy self. Behold these legs that have made so many
iourneyes, this head which is the receptacle of wisdom, and remembers so many
things, must shortly be as this bare skull and dry bones are. I will therefore
betimes bid worldly vanities adieu, betake my self to repentance, and newness
of life, and spend the rest of my days in the service of my God, and
continual meditation on my end.

As the last day of our life leaves us, so shall that last day the day of
Christ's coming find us. How good were it therefore before we run into
desperate arrerages, to cast up our bills of account, and the rather because we
shall be warned out of our office we know not how soon. Luke 16.2.
Some Emperors amongst the heathen (as books say) were wont to be crowned over
the graves, and sepulchers of dead men, to teach them by the certain but
unknown end of their short life, to use their great rooms, as men that must
one day be as they are, whose graves they tread upon.

The old Saints, who lived in a continual meditation of their short and
uncertain time, were wont always like wise merchants to think of their
return homeward; and therefore took up their treasure by bills of payment, not
where they were, but where they would be, and meant to make their long aboade,
that is meant to be for ever. And the Philosophers (who saw not beyond the
clouds of humane reason) when they perceived how much men did decline by course
of years and wast of time, were wont to say that the life of a wise man was
nothing else but a continual meditation on death; the remembrance whereof made
the world (which we for want of this meditation so willingly embrace) vile and
contemptible unto them; and auayled greatly to guide them in all godliness. So a
Christian man's life is, or should be nothing else, but a continual meditation
on death.

All that is within us, and without us, are so many remembrances of Death, all
things cry out unto us that we must hence, Ioh. 8.23.
as Christ cried, I am not of this world. The apparel which we wear upon our
backs, Ioh. 17.14.
the meat disgested and egested, and returning to putrefaction, the graves
shrouding so many corpse under our feet, time the mother of all things, and
the changeable state of times, even winter and summer, cold and heat, seed
time and harvest, all do cry unto us that we shall wear away, and die and
corrupt. As they who were living are now dead, and lie in the dust, first we
wax dry, then old, then cold, then sick, then dead. So that every thing does
serve to put us in mind, that our bodies which we bear about us, are
mortal; for even on our table we have moments of Death; for we eat not the
creatures till they be dead, our garments are either the skins or excrements
of dead beasts; we often follow the dead corpse to the grave, and often walk
over their bodies, and in Churches and Churchyards, especially men that do
use to walk there, shall do well to remember that they tread upon the dead,
and others shortly must tread upon them.

Moreover in great Cities we have almost every day Death rung in our ears,
the deadly bell tells us, that dust we are, and to dust we must go again.
To this perhaps the old Oracle has reference, of whom the Philosopher Zeno
(being desirous to choose the most honest and best rule for the direction of
this life) demanded as the manner then was, his opinion therein, and received
this answer. That if he would frame the course of his life aright, he should
use the commerce and society of the dead. And the Churchyards which are the
howses of Christians, and as it were the chambers or beds to sleep in, they
are the places to which we may resort to be put in mind of our mortality and
future mutability.

But we Christians have in stead of commerce and society with the dead, Luke
16.29.
Moses and the Prophets to put us in mind of our death; and if we will not
hear them, Ezeck 3.7.
neither will we be persuaded, though one rise from the dead to tell us of our
death.

Adam knew all the beasts, and called them by their names but his own name he
forgot. Adam of earth. What bad memories have we, that forget our own names,
and our selves, that we are the sons of men corruptible and mortal? Proud
man (I say) forgets this sentence, that earth is his native womb, when he was
borne, and that being dead, the earth is his tomb.

When we look to the earth, it should put us in mind, that earth we were,
earth we are, and earth we shall be; the earth prouides for our necessity, and
feeds us with her fruits; neither in life nor death does she forsake us; while
we live, she suffers us to make long furrows on her back, and when we die, her
bowels are dug up, and she receives us into her bosom; here now a pit is
dug seven or eight foot long, and so as it may serve for Alexander the
great, whom living, the world could not contain And how lofty soever men
look, death only shows how little their bodies are, which so small a piece
of earth will contain whom before nothing would content; and therein the dead
carcass is content to dwell, whom at his coming the worms do welcome, and
the bones of other dead men are constrained to give place. And in this house of
oblivion and silence the carcass being woond in a sheet, and bound hand and
foot, is shut up though it need not to have so great labor bestowed upon it,
for it would not run away out of that prison, though the hands and feet were
loose.

And now if we do but consider a little of the tombs of noble men and
Princes, whose glory and majesty we have seen when they lived here on earth,
and do behold the skill and silly forms and shapes, which they now have,
shall we not cry out as men amassed? Is this that glory, that highness and
excellency. Whether now are the degrees of their waiting servants gone? Where
are their ornaments and jewels? Where is their pomp, their delicacy and
niceness? All these things are vanished away like the smoke, and nothing is
now left but dust, horror and rottenness; such is man's body now become; yea
though it were the body of an Emperor, King, or Monarch, where is now that
majesty, that excellency, and authority, which it had before time, when men
trembled to behold it, and might not come in presence without all reverence and
obeisance. Where are all these things become? Were they a dream or shadow?
After all these things the funeral is prepared, which is all that men can
carry with them of their riches and kingdoms; and this also they should not
have, if in their life time they did not appoint it for their dignity and
honor. For the Psalmist says, Psalm. 49.16.17.
Be not then afraid though one be made rich, or if the glory of his house be
increased; for he shall carry away nothing with him when he dies, neither
shall his pomp follow him. O would we could but consider the equal necessity
of dying in all, and the like putrefaction in all being dead. This would plant
in our hearts true humility, if we call to mind what we are now, and what we
shall be shortly. We are now in our best estate but as a dunghill covered with
snow, which when Death shall dissolve, there shall nothing be seen of all
our pomp and glory, but dust, rottenness, and corruption. The consideration
of all which things as a dyall puts us in mind that we must all hence;
when we have run our certain race in an uncertain time; the course whereof
because it shall be intercepted, not when we please, but when the Lord will, it
is good that we be forewarned to meditate on Death, that we may be the better
armed to encounter with Death when it comes.

When we look to the waters to see how swiftly they run, let us think,
that so our life passes; when we behold the fowls flying in the air, whose
passage is not seen, so is the path of our life. When we see the Sun and the
Moon how they hasten their course, even so do we. We can turn our selves no
way, but something there is which may put us in mind of our mortality. Cast
your eye upon your houreglasse, and consider that as the hour so passes our
life. Sit in your chair by the fire, and see much wood turned into smoke and
ashes, and say with the Poet. Sic in non hominem veritur omnis homo. So man
will suddenly become no man. See in the fields some grass coming, Esa. 40.6.
some come already, and some withered and gone, and confess with the Prophet
that all flesh is grass, and all the beauty thereof as a flower of the field;
when the air moves, and the wind beats in your face, remember that the
breath of man is in his nostrels, which being stopped his breath is gone, and
that the strongest tenor of your life is but by a puff of wind. Standing by
the rivers side, Esaias 2.22.
confess that as the river runs, and does not return, so does your life.
As the arrow which you see fly in the air, so swiftly conclude that your
days do pass. Psalm. 32.9.
Or if we be like horse or mule without understanding to consider this, yet I
am sure, we cannot be so senseless as to consider that which every days
light presents to our view. And surely if we go no further then our own
selves, and consider how many diseases we continually carry about us, what
aches affect our bones, what heaviness our bodies, what dimnesse our eyes,
what deafness our ears, what trembling our hands, what rottenness our
teeth, what baldness our heads, what graynesse our hairs; all and every one
of these, as so many loud alarums would sound unto us, Death is near. Or if
none of these did affect us within, yet how many thousand dangers do daily
threaten us without, and seem to show us present death: sitting on horseback,
in the slipping of one foot thy life is in danger: by an iron tool or weapon
in thine own or thy friends hand, a mischance, and that deadly, may happen.
The wild beasts, which thou see, are armed to thy destruction. If thou shut
up thy self in a garden well fenced, where nothing appears but sweet air,
and that which is pleasant, there perhaps lurketh some dangerous or venomous
Serpent. Thy house subject to continual winds and storms, does threaten thee
with falling on thy head. I speak not of poisonings, treasons, robberies, open
violence, of which, part do besiege us at home, and part do follow us abroad.
Examples tending to this purpose are infinite; whereof some have been
mentioned before in the former Division: and I will produce here some few
more, thereby to put us in mind that the same things may happen to our selves.
For which cause, hardly should a moment of our life be spent without due
consideration of our death.

If then we ascend the Theater of man's life, and look about, we shall see some
to have perished with sudden death; Ananias and Saphira: others with grief,
Ely: others with joy, Rodius Diagoras: others with gluttony, Domitius Afer:
others with drunkenness, Attilla King of Hunnes: others with hunger,
Cleanthus: others with thirst, Thales Milesius: others in their lascivious
daliances, Cornelius Gallus: others with ouer-watching, M. Attilius: others
with poison, Phocion, Henry 7. Emperor, in a feast by a Monk: some by fire
from heaven, the Sodomites, Anastacius the Emperor an Eutichian Heretic: some
by waters, M. Marcellus: some by Earthquakes, Ephasius Bishop of Antioch: some
swallowed up quick, Corah, Dathan, and Abiran: some stifled with smoke and
vapors, Catulus: some with a fall, by slipping of their feet, Nestorius the
Heretic: some at the disburdening of nature, Arrius the Heretic: some with a
sudden fall from their horse, Philip King of France: others killed and torn
in sunder by dogs, Heraclitus Lucian the Apostata: by horses, Hyppolitus: by
Lions, Lycus Emperor: by Bears, two and forty children: by Boares, Ancaeus
King of Samos: by Rats, Hato, Bishop of Mentz, and the like. I speak nothing
of others, who have untimely perished, some by one means, some by another.
What shall I say then? do so many things within us, so many things without us,
so many about us threaten continual death unto us? Then wretched man thou art,
that do not meditate on these things, seeing thou art so near thy death,
and must certainly die.

Herodotus writes of Sesostris, a King of the Egyptians, that he was carried
in a Chariot drawn with four Kings, whom he before had conquered: One of the
four casting his eyes behind, looked often upon the wheels of the Chariot,
and was at length demanded by Sesostris what he meant to look back so often.
I see (says he) that those things which were highest in the wheel, became
presently lowest, and the lowest eft-soone became highest again. I think upon
the inconstancy of all things. Sesostris hereupon aduising himself, waxed
more mild, and delivered the said Kings. Which History puts us in mind of
our mortality and change.

As a bird guides her flight with her train, so the life of man is best
directed by continual recourse to his end. Do we not know by Scripture, that
death steals upon us, as travel upon a woman, or as a thief in the night,
which gives no warning. And experience shows the truth of this plentifully.
The rich Churl in the Gospel, Luke 12.19.20.
that boasted of store for many years, even that very night had his soul
fetched from him, when like a Iay he was prouning himself in the boughs, he
came tumbling down with the arrow in his side; his glass was run, when he
thought it but new turned, and the axe was lifted up to strike him to the
ground, when he never dreamed of the slaughterhouse.

We had need of monitors, of Philips boys to put us in mind of our end: not
the oldest man, but thinks he shall live a year: and the young man in the
April of his age, when his breasts are full of milk, and his bones run full
of marrow, full little thinks of the slimie valley, and that he shall shortly
remain in the heaps.

Certainly we dwell but in houses of clay, and Corruption is our father, Job
17.14.
the worms our mother and sister. We are creatures but of a days life, and
the four Elements are the four men that bear us on their shoulders to the
grave. Assure thy self, ere many years or months be past, pale Death will
arrest thee, bind thee hand and foot, and carry thee whither thou would
not, to a land dark, as darkness it self. What then remains, but that
thou make thy grave presently, with Joseph of Arimathea, in thy garden (the
place of thy delight) to put thee in mind of thy death, and mourning every day
amongst thy entising pleasures, as if the sun of thy life were to set at
night. For time past is irreuocable, time present, momentary, and time to come,
full of uncertainty.

When thou go to bed, and art putting off thy clothes remember and meditate
that the day comes when thou must be as barely vnstript of all that thou have
in the world, as now thou art of thy clothes. And when thou see thy bed let
it put thee in mind of thy grave, which is now the bed of Christ, which he
has sanctified and warmed for the bodies of his dear children to rest in; and
let thy bed-cloathes represent unto thee the mould of the earth that shall
cover thee, thy sheets, thy winding sheet, thy sleep thy death, thy waking
thy resurrection, for when we rise in the morning, we must remember thereby
that we shall rise out of the grave of the earth at the last day. For all these
things appertaining to Death, yea and Death it self Christ Jesus has
sanctified unto us, by laying his blessed body three da^es and three nights in
the grave, from whence the third day he rose again, ouercomming thereby Death
it self, and all the difficulties thereof, and the miseries incident to the
same, for us most miserable distressed sinners.

With this key of meditation we should open the day, and shut in the night, and
what befalls others in the dust of their bodies, we must think will come to
us, we know not how soon in our own dust and mortality here. And therefore
as the third Captain sent from the King of Israel to Eliah to bring him, 2.
King. 1.13.
and perceiving that the other two Captains with their fifties were devoured
with fire from heaven (at the request of Eliah) grew wise by their experience,
and therefore fell down, and besought favor for him and his fifty, so we
hearing and seeing of so many fifties, young and old, that in these late years
of mortality have ended their lives in a fire of pestilence sent from the
Lord, should make supplication day and night, not as that Captain to the man
of God, but as true Christians to the Man and God Christ Jesus, that our l^ues
and deaths may be precious in his eyes. And that we may not forget, that what
is done to others may come to our selves. Again, the meditation of Death is a
most sovereign and effectual medicine against d^seases of the soul, if we
would well practice the same, and apply it to our spiritual wounds. Other
medicines are aua^leable to some certain and particular diseases, and serve
for their several uses, and seldom does one medicine profit for many
diseases, though it excel Triacle of Venice, Mythridatum, or the herb Moly,
so much extolled by Homer, but only the meditation on Death is profitable to
the extirpation of all the diseases of the soul. Of this it may be said, as
David said of the sword of Goliath, 1. Sam. 21.9.
there is none to that, give it me, and I, by the grace of God, will be a
conqueror of vices.

As bread is necessary for a man before al other elements so the serious
meditation on Death, bears the prize above all other good exercises of piety
and virtue. And surely, as wings are to the bird to fly, to the Mariners their
sails, Compass, Pole-starre, government and direction for their navigations:
to fishes their tails and finnes to swim, to a Chariot wheels to carry it,
to horses hoofes, and shoes for their travel. So necessary is the meditation
on Death, to the leading of a holy, Christian and godly life. The Wiseman
says, Eccl 7.3.
Remember thy end, and thou shall never do amiss: and Seneca could say. That
nothing profits so much to keep us within the bounds of temperance in all
our actions, as the often meditating on our short and uncertain life.

Aptly and elegantly speaks the golden mouthed Doctor, John Chrysostom, of
sins (says he) are borne two daughters, Sorrow and Death, but these two
daughters destroy their wicked mother, as the worm which is bred in timber or
cloth, does by little and little consume the same. As the Viper kills his
Dam, and the Dam the male in conceiving, and (as the Naturalists affirm) the
biting of a Viper is cured with the ashes of a Viper; the stinging of a
Scorpion with the oil of a Scorpion; the biting of a dog with the burnt hairs
of a dog; as Achilles spear cured Tellephus, whom before it had wounded, the
rust thereof being cast into the wound: so sin which is more hurtful then
any Viper, or Scorpion, or other thing, has begotten Death, which has stung
and hurt us, and of immortal, made us mortal, but the meditation on Death
does wound and kill sin which begat it. The wound of this Viper, Scorpion
Dog, Spear, that is our propension and greediness to sin, the ashes of
this Viper, the oil of this Scorpion, etc. that is, the remembrance and
meditation on Death, does wound and slay in us, in as much as Sin is the
parent and author of all evil. And shall a Christian man then be so
senseless and doltish* to intertaine and embrace sin in his heart, which
has been the murderer and paricide of mankind, and will also be our
destruction, unless by time we banish it by often meditation on our end.

Had it not been for sin, Death had never entered into the world, and were it
not for Death, sin would never go out of the world. Basil says, God made
not death, but we our selves, by our wicked minds, of our own accord, we have
drawn it on our selves, which God did not at all forbid, lest it should keep
in us an immortal disease. For he that made heaven and earth, air and fire,
Sun and Moon, all elements, all creatures good, surely would not make him
evil, for whom all these good things were made. How comes he then thus bad?
The words of our royal Preacher teach us to say, This only have I found,
Eccl. 7.29.
that God has made man upright, but he has sought out many inventions. Man
was created happy, but he found out tricks to make himself miserable.

Theophrastus and Aristotle wrangled with Nature her self, as if in a
malignant humor she brought forth men (borne to great affairs) to be snatched
away in a moment, whereas to Ravens and Hearts she grants many ages, which
can neither prize nor use their time. But the truth is* our selves do shorten
our lives, with riot, idleness, dissoluteness, and excess. Kingly treasures
committed to evil husbands, are quickly wasted. Life is short, only to the
prodigal, of good hours.

For to speak as the truth is, and as the matter deserves, we live not, but
linger out a few dolorous days. So much time only we do live, as is
virtuously bestowed, and no more. And as Epiphanius brings in Methodius
disputing with Produs the Originist, says God as the true Physician, has
appointed Death to be a physical purgation, for the utter rooting out and
putting away of sin, that we may be made faultlesse and innocent; and that
as a goodly golden image (says he) sightly and seemly in all things and all
parts, if it be broken and defaced, must be new cast and framed again, for
the taking away of the blemishes and disgraces of it: even so, man, the Image
of God, being maimed and disgraced by sin, for the putting away of the
disgraces, and repairing his ruins and decays, must by the meditation on
death be renewed by weakening of sin, which is the cause of death in us.

As for example, if the covetous man would seriously take a view of himself in
this glass of the meditation on Death, then would h^e not so miserably torment
himself with carking and caring, moiling and toiling in the world, by
falsehood, deceit and oppression, grinding the faces of the poor, and all to get
a handful of feathers, or to catch at a little smoke of vanity, being every
hour in danger to hear this voice of the Lord. Luke 12.20.
Thou fool this night they will fetch away thy soul from thee, then whose
shall these things be, which thou have thus scraped and gathered together? Then
would they consider that death will deprive them of all their treasures, their
houses which they have builded by fraud, their rents, for which they have made
shipwreck of their souls, their fields, which they have gotten by deceit,
their silver and gold, which they have gotten by usury and oppression, their
life which they have so lewdly and unprofitably spent, making their pleasures
their Paradise, and their gold their god Then shall they perceive their error,
that they have chosen dross for gold, grass for grace, rust for silver, loss
for gain, shame for honor, pain for rest, yea for heaven hell. Come also to
this school of the meditation on Death, you drunkards, swearers,
whore-mongers, blasphemers, swaggerers, prophaners of Gods Sabbathes, and all
carnal, riotous and ungodly livers, small pleasures would you take in these
vices, nay, soon would ye leave and forsake them, if you would give your
selves to this meditation.

The ancient Egyptians well knew the force of this medicine, who in the midst
of their mirth at their solemn Feasts, were wont to have the image of Death
brought in and laid before them, with these words; Hoc intuens epulare:
beholding this Image, eat and drink, but within the bounds of temperance; for
you must all be as this dead carcass is, wheresoever ye go. But if we carry
not with us the ugly picture of Death, yet let us carry in our hearts the true
picture of our Death, and then this meditation will correct and amend these
vices in us. It is written of those Philosophers, called Brackmani that they
were so much given to think upon their end that they had their graves always
open before their gates, that both going out and coming in they might always
be mindful of their Death and latter end.

Dionysius the tyrant caused his notable flatterer Damocles (who affirmed the
life of a King to be most happy) to be set in his regal Throne in stately
robes and all Princely cheer, and dainty fare before him, and a naked sword
tied but with a horse-haire to hang over his head, menacing him Death. Could
this Parasite (think you) take any delight in this princely fare and pomp? No
verily, but as if he had sat amongst the greatest hagges of hell, he durst not
once touch the dainty dishes before him; and shall not the meditation on Death
either present or hard at hand, and the sword of the wrathful Judge drawn and
hanging over thine head restrain thee from immoderate and superfluous eating
and drinking.

It is recorded also of a certain King whose mind was so fixed in the deep
meditation on Death, that thereby he became more sober and modest in all his
actions, who being incited by his Iester or Parasite to be merry, banquet and
carowse; he commanded his Parasite to be set on a seat made with rotten wood,
fire to be put under, and a sword to hang over his head, and also princely
dishes to be set before him, and willed him to eat, drink and be merry, but
this stomach would not serve him so much as to taste one of thief dainty
dishes; and will thou O drunkard or glutton sin in excess, and make thy
belly thy God, who sit upon a rotten body, with the fire of natural heat
continually devouring within it, which the fire of the elementarie qualities on
every side disturbeth, having the Etna of hell beneath, and the sword of Gods
wrath above.

Even thus stands our case; a certain divine writer uses this comparison. A
poor traveler pursued by an Unicorn, by chance in his flight, slippes or
falls into the side of a deep pit or dungeon, which is full of cruel
serpents, and in his fall catches hold by one small twig of the arm of a
tree. As he thus hangs, looking downward, he sees two worms gnawing at
the root of the tree, and looking upward he sees an hiue of sweet honey, which
makes him to climb up unto it, and to sit and feed upon it. While he thus
feeds himself, and becomes secure and careless of what may come, the
Unicorn being hunger-bitten, and biting and brusing on other boughs, is each
moment ready to crop of the twigge whereon this wretched man sits. Now in
what woeful plight is this distressed creature? Then after this the two worms
gnawe in sunder the root of the tree, which falling down, both man and tree
fall into the bottom of that deep pit. This hungry Unicorn is swift death,
the poor traveler that flies is every son of Adam, the pit over which he
hangs is hell, the arm of the tree and slender twigge is his frail and
short life, those two worms are the worms of conscience, which day and night
without intermission consume the same, the hiue of honey is the pleasures of
this world, to which while men wholly deuote themselves (not remembering their
last end) the root of the tree, that is the temporal life is spent, and they
fall without redemption into the pit and gulf of hell. If thou thus seriously
ponder this thy unstable estate, I suppose thou will take little pleasure in
riot and dissolute living.

Give those that are condemned to die, Nectar, give them Ambrosia, give them
Manna, the bread of Angels, and will they taste it? No, they can neither eat,
drink, laugh or sleep, and will thou that art already condemned and guilty
of death (perchance) this very moment to be inflicted upon thee, securely
addict thy self to drunkenness, gluttony, excess, and to al manner of
riotous and intemperate living? Remember rather the rich glutton in the
Gospel, Luke 16.23.
who after he had pampered his body all the days of his life, in the end Death
made him a fat dish for the worms, his flesh and bones were consumed into
dust, but (which was most terrible) his soul was cast into hell, the burning
lake of brimstone, and at this time calls for one drop of cold water to cool
his tongue, which yet is denied him.

What adamantine and flinty heart can think upon this without relenting? I
speak not here of the harms and hurts that intemperance in meats and drinks
brings to the body, for meat should be used as oil put into a lamp, to
keep it burning, not to quench it. And Galen the Prince of Physicians says
that abstinence is the whole sum or abridgement of Physic. How then can
they live long, that live by so many deaths, whose bellies are sepulchers of
lusts, and very gulfes and sinckes of the shambles, to their own destruction?
For as he that allows less to his body then he owes to his body, kills his
friend, so he that gives more to his body then he owes to his body, nourishes
his enemy. If the glutton did remember that God is able to come against him,
yea at the very disburdening of nature, he would not make his kitchen his
Church, gurmandizing his Chamberlain, his Table his Alter, his Cook his
Preacher, the odours of his meat his sacrifice, swearing his prayer, quaffing
his repentance, and his whole life wanton fare. Did the Drunkard but remember
this; that God is ready to come quickly against him, yea even in his
drunkenness, he would not rise early to follow strong drink, Esa. 5.11.
which does trouble the head, overthrow the senses, cause the feet to reele,
the tongue to stammer, the eyes to roll, and the whole fabric of his little
world to be possessed with this voluntary madness, loss of many friends, credit
and time.

It would make too great a volume to insist upon all other sins; for the
subduing whereof the meditation on Death is a most sovereign remedy. Are we
strangers upon earth and is our country in heaven, and must we all dye? Yea
verily; this necessity the^ should enforce us to aspire to our heavenly
country; and let us rather meet Death in our meditation, the^ carelessly
attend it, lest we be surprised by it at unawares.

Before thy miserable spirit resign over his borrowed mansion, bethink with
thy self what thou art, and whether thou go, the remembrance whereof will
breed in thy heart sorrow, sorrow remorse, remorse repentance, repentance
humilty, humility godly affection, and love to Godward. And here assure thy
self, that nothing in all the world can enforce a man sooner to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present evil life, then the due consideration
of his own infirmities, the certain knowledge of his mortality, and the often
and continual meditation and remembrance of his last gasp, death and
dissolution, when as a man then becomes no man. For when once he begins to
wax sick, and still by sickness grows more sickly, then does a wretched man
despair of life, having only his pain and grief in remembrance. His heart
does quake, his mind is amazed with fear, his senses vanish quite away, his
strength decays, his careful breast does pant, his countenance is pale,
neither willing nor able to call for mercy, his favor out of favor, his ears
deaf, his nose loathsomely foul and sharp, his tongue furred with phlegm and
choler quite flattereth and fails, his mouth unseemly froathing and foming,
his body dies and rots, at length his flesh consumes, his shape, his beauty,
his delicacy leave him, and he returns to ashes, and in stead and place of
these succeed filthy worms, as one says elegantly. Next after man do worms
succeed,
then stincke in his degree,
So every man to no man must
return by Gods decree.


Behold here a spectacle both strange and dreadful, and assure thy self that
there is neither skill nor means of art nor any kind of learning that can be
more available to quail the pride of man, convince his malice, confound his
lusts, and abate his worldly pomp, and vainglorious vanity, then the often
remembering of these things. For in all the world there is nothing so irksome,
nothing so loathsome, and vile as the carcass of a dead man, whose sent is so
tedious and infectious, that it may not lodge and continue in a house four
days, but must needs be cast out of doors as dung, and deeply buried in the
mould, Ioh. 11.39.
for fear of corrupting the air. Then blush for shame thou proud peacocke,
who in death art so vile, and worms meat, and shortly shall become most
loathsome carrion.

Think therefore upon these things, and thou shall receive great profit
thereby. When the Peacocke does behold that comely fan and circle of the
beautiful feathers of his tail, he jetteth up and down in pride, beholding
every part thereof, but when he looks down and sees his black feet with
great misliking he vaileth his top-gallant, and seems to sorrow. Even so many
know by experience that when they see themselves to abound in wealth and honor,
they glory much and are highly conceited of themselves, they draw plots, and
appoint much for themselves to perform for many years to come. This year
(say they) we will bear this office, and the next year that, afterward we
shall have the rule of such a province, then we will build a palace in such a
City, whereunto we will adioyne such gardens of pleasure, and such vineyards,
and the like. And thus they make a very large reckoning before hand with the
rich man in the Gospel. Who if they did but once behold their feet, that is,
if they did but see how fast they stoop toward death, Luke 12.16.
and considered the shortness of their life, so frail, so inconstant and
transitory, and upon Death so black and ugly, how soon would they let fall
their proud plumes, forsake their arrogance, and change their purposes, their
manners, their minds, their lives? In that they tend and hasten as fast as
they can to death, some at one miles end, some at two, some at three, and some
when they have gone a little further. And thus it comes to pass that some
are taken out of this life sooner, and some tarry a little longer. Abhor
therefore thy haughtines, avoid thy vanities, leave off thy lusts, and amend
thy life. For he that is godly wise vieweth his death present, and by the
meditation and remembrance thereof he armeth himself to amend.

If the greatest man in the world do in a holy meditation strip himself out
of his robes and ornaments of state, and have the scanning of this one point
often in his mind; hence I must, as great as I am, and whether then? Like men
who traveling, no sooner come to their lodging, but they are talking of their
next Inn, the debating of this question in the mind would bring forth most
excellent fruit; and so likewise if every man would thus meditate and reason,
I must remove, and whither then? Hell is my desert, how shall I escape it?
Heaven is the only place I desire to go to, how shall I come to it? And thus
one good meditation and thought would make way for another, and so lead us on
by degrees unto the kingdom of God.

Mark the life and behavior of the wicked to avoid their steps, and of the
godly to provoke thy self to a holy imitation of the like course; as a thing
best pleasing to God. It is one way whereby we honor those that are departed
in the faith, when we resemble them in those heavenly graces, which (like the
stars of heaven) did shine within them, while they were alive. Mark also their
death with like diligence, and think seriously upon thy own death, how thou
must shortly dye and lie down in the dust, and part with whatsoever delight
thou do here enjoy, that this may breed in thee a contempt of the world,
and a longing after a better life.

Gregory said that the life of a wise man must be a continual meditation on
Death, and he only is ever careful to do well, who is ever thinking on his
last end.

It were good that Christians, which tender their salvation, would among so
many hours of the day as they mispend in idle, vain and wandering thoughts,
talk, play or fruitless exercise, employ but an hour of the day, after the
example of a holy man, in reading, meditating and pondering of one little book
(trium foliorum) but of three leaves, which I will commit to your Christian
consideration. I have read of a certain holy man, who at first had led a
dissolute life, and chancing on a time into the company of an honest godly man,
he in short time so wrought by his holy persuasions with his affections (such
is the force of godly society) that he utterly renounced his former course of
life, and gave himself to a more private, austere, moderate and secluse kind
of living; the cause whereof being demanded by one of his former companions,
who would have drawn him (such is the nature of evil company) to his usual
riot, he answered, that as yet he was so busied in reading and meditating on a
little book, which was but of three leaves, that he had no leisure so much as
to think of any other business: and being asked again, a long time after,
whether he had read over these three leaves; he did reply, that these three
leaves were of three several colors, red, white, and black, which contained
so many mysteries, that the more he meditated thereon, the more sweetness he
always found, so that he had devoted himself to read therein all the days
of his life. In the first leaf which is red, I meditate (quoth he) on the
Passion of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and of his precious blood shed for
a ransom of my sins, and the sins of all his Elect, without which we had
been all bondslaues to Satan, and fuel for hell fire. In the white leaf, I
cheer up my spirit with the comfortable consideration of the unspeakable joys
of the heavenly Kingdom, purchased by the blood of my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, a great motive of thankfulness. In the third leaf, which is black, I
meditatate upon the horrible and perpetual torments of Hell for the wicked and
reprobate provided and kept in store; who, if they behold the heavens, from
thence they are justly banished for their sins: If they look upon the earth,
there are they imprisoned; on the right hand they have the Saints, whose steps
they have not rightly followed; on the left hand the wicked, whose course they
have ensued; before them, they have Death ready to arrest them; behind them,
their wicked life ready to accuse them; above them, Gods justice ready to
condemn them; and under them, Hellfire, ready to devour them. From which
the godly are freed by the death of Jesus Christ.

This book of three leaves, if we would always carry in our hearts, and
meditate often therein, assuredly great would be the benefit which we should
make thereby to restrain our thoughts, words and actions, within the bounds
and limits of the fear of God.

1. Sam. 24.10.11.
But we are, on the other side, so busied like Nabal, about white earth, and
red earth, and black earth, in gathering and scraping of transitory trash, and
in uncharitableness, and so devoted unto fleshly pleasures and deceitful
vanities, and spending our hours like Domitian, in hunting of flies, others
like little children, in catching of Butterflies, and playing with feathers;
the rest like fools, in toys and leasings, that we have not leisure at all to
read and meditate on that book of three leaves, nor to think on death. And
so on the sudden the sun of our pleasure sets, the day of our life does
end, the night of our death comes, and we chop into the earth before we be
aware, like a man walking in a green field covered with snow, not seeing the
way, runs on, and suddenly falls into a pit.

Lam. 1.9.
When the Prophet Jeremy had remembered all the calamities and sins of the
Jews, at the last he imputed all to this She remembered not her end: so if I
may judge why natural and carnal men care for nothing but their pomp, their
honor and dignity: why covetous men care not for any thing, but their golden
gain: why voluptuous Epicures care for nothing but their pleasures and
Delicates (whose posie is, that Death has nothing to do with them) I may say
with Jeremiah, They remember not their end: And with Esaias, Thou did not lay
these things to thy heart, Esaias 47.7.
nor did remember the latter end of it. Deuteronomy. 32.29.
O that they were wise (says Moses) that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end, or that we did conceive the happiness and
felicity of our end; and this we should do, if we would thus meditate in this
sort on our end.

When Solomon has spoken of all the vanities of man, at last he opposes this
Memorandum, as a cou^terpoyse against them all. Eccle. 11.9.
Remember that for all these things thou shall come to judgment. As if he
should have said, men would never speak as they speak, think as they think,
nor do as they do, if they were persuaded that their thoughts, words and
deeds should come to judgment. For surely, if a man could persuade himself
that this day were his last day (as God knows it may be) he would not
defer this meditation on Death; If he could think that the meat now in
eating, is his last meat, or his drink now in drinking, his last drink, he
would not surfeit, nor be drunk therewith. If he could believe that the words
which he speaks this day, shall be the last that ever he shall speak, Psalm.
39.1.
he would with the Prophet take heed to his ways, that he offend not with his
tongue, in lying, swearing, railing and blaspheming.

Pambus, one without learning, came to a certain man to be taught a Psalm,
who when he had heard this first verse of the 39. Psalm, would not suffer the
next verse to be read, saying, this verse is enough, if I could practice it,
and when his teacher blamed him, because he saw him not in six months after,
he answered, that he had not yet done that verse. And one that knew him, many
years after asked him whether he had yet learned the verse; I am (says he)
forty years old, and have not yet learned to fulfill it. Now then the harder
it is to rule the tongue, the more care is to be had therein, especially seeing
the words we speak may be the last words (for ought we know) that ever we
shall speak.

If he were or would be persuaded, that this were the last lesson, admonition,
or sermon, that ever God would afford him for his conversion, he would hear
it with more care, diligence and profit, then ever he had done before. Let us
therefore remember our selves whilst it is called to day, Psalm. 95.7.8.
lest our meditation on Death come too late. For which of us all can assure
himself of life till to morrow, or what if he should live one, two, three,
four or five years longer, or what if twenty years longer, who would not
live like a godly Christian so many years, for to live in heaven with Christ
for ever? We can be content to live seven years Apprentise with great labor
and toil, to be instructed in some trade, that we may live the more easily
the rest of our days; and about this we spend our thoughts and meditations,
and cannot we then be well contented to labor a little while in the matters of
our salvation, and spend our thoughts, endeauours and meditations therein, that
we may rest from all our labors for ever after in heaven.

Matthew. 26.40.
Our Savior Christ said unto his Disciples, when he had found them sleeping,
What, could ye not watch one hour? And so I say unto all men, What, can you
not meditate on Death some few hours?

Which meditation on Death we must not make a naked discourse, or bare reading
only, but a vehement application of the mind to the thing it self, with an
inward sense and feeling of the heart, all the distractions of our thoughts
being abandoned. For meditation is an action or work of the soul, bending it
self often, earnestly, and orderly to think upon a thing; and it is either of
Gods word or works, and Death is one of Gods works, even a work of mercy, to
his elect and chosen children, but a work of justice to the ungodly and
reprobate. Therefore that thou may meditate profitably on Death, whereby it
may prove a work of Gods mercy unto thee, put thy self humbly in the sight
of God, who beholds thee in all thy actions, and thus present, beg of him,
that all thy thoughts, words and works, yea and all thy meditations, may wholly
be guided and directed to his glory, and thy own salvation, and entreat thy
God with hearty affections to give thee grace that thou may take profit by
the consideration, and the meditation of thy last end. And let us not imitate
foolish men, who look and think upon present things only, but let us meditate
on things to come; and so by the grace of God we shall bring to pass that the
same hour, which to others that are inconsiderate, is the beginning of
sorrows and miseries, to us shall be the entrance into all joy and happiness.

The end of the second Division.
THE THIRD DIVISION, OF THE PREPARATION FOR DEATH.
NOw by way of preparation unto death, let us observe that the greatest work
we have to finish in this world is to die well; and they which die well die not
to die, but to live eternally. That man does finish his days in his best sort,
that every day esteems the last day of his life to be present or near at
hand, and that a man may die well, Gods word requires a preparation for Death.

The Preparation for death is an action of a repentant sinner, whereby he makes
himself fit and ready every day to leave this life, and to die well. And it is
a duty very necessary, and of great weight and importance, to which we are
tied and bound by Gods Commandment, and therefore it can in no wise be
omitted of him, that desires to make a happy and blessed end.

Wherefore this preparation is twofold, General and particular. General
preparation is that whereby a man prepares himself to die, through the whole
course of his life. The reasons are these, viz.

First, Death which is certain, is most uncertain; I say it is certain,
because no man can avoid it: and it is uncertain three ways. First, in regard
of the time, for no man does know when he shall die. Secondly, in regard of the
place, because no man knows where he shall die: and thirdly, in regard of the
kind of death, for that no man knows whether he shall die of an ordinary or
extraordinary death, whether of a lingering or sudden death, whether easy or
violent. Therefore from thence it follows that we should every day and in all
places prepare our selves for death.

Indeed if we could know when, where, and how we should dye, the case were
otherwise; but seeing we know none of all these, but are ignorant thereof,
therefore it stands us greatly in hand to look about us to prepare our selves
for our latter end.

A second reason serving further to persuade us to the performing of this
duty, is this, that the most dangerous thing in all the world to the hazard of
our souls, is to neglect this preparation. It must not be put off till
sickness, for then it will be unfitting by reason of the pain, and of other
lets and hindrances at that time. It must not be put off to be done when we
will, for it is not in the power of man, to do this duty at his pleasure,
but when God will. Ier. 10.23.
O Lord says the Prophet) I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is
not in man (that walks) to direct his steps.

And again, this late preparation, which consists chiefly in repentance, is
seldom or never true: It is sick like the party himself, commonly
languishing and dying together with us. This preparation should be voluntary
(as all obedience to God ought to be) but preparation taken up in sickness is
usually constrained and extorted by the fear of hell, and other judgments of
God. For in true and sound preparation (wherein chiefly we must repent) men
must forsake all their sins, but in this, the sin forsakes the man, who
leaves all his evil ways only upon this that he is constrained, whether he
will or no, to leave the world.

Therefore ponder with thy self, what then thou would that thou hadest
done, when being near unto death, thou have no more time to live, and the same
thing which thou would wish thou hadest done, when thou art at the point of
death, the same thing without delay do, while thou art in health, that thou
may be ready every hour to embrace the message of Death, as Seneca
persuades. Mors vbique nos expectat, tu si sapiens eris vbique eam expectabis,
so it shall never take thee at any advantage. To this end remember Augustus his
admonition, be afraid to live in such an estate, as thou art afraid to die in.
And pray unto God that by his grace these things may penetrate into the bottom
of thy heart, and be there so fixed, that they may never be quenched; and
that from this time forward thou may make such use of the preaching and
hearing of his holy word, of the comfortable sacraments of his Church, and all
other the good means of thy salvation that thou may begin to walk now with
a better conscience before him, that in the peace of a quiet conscience (after
this preparation) thou may thereby arrive at the heaven of eternal glory and
happiness, and say with the blessed Apostle. Act. 24.16.
Herein do I exercise my self to have always a good conscience void of
offense toward God and toward men.

Thus then this point being manifest, that a general preparation must be made,
let us now see in what manner it must be done. And for the right doing of it
five duties must be practiced in the whole course of our lives. The first is
the meditation on Death; for the life of a Christian is nothing else (as was
noted) at large in the second diuisi^n; but a meditation on Death; A notable
practice whereof we have in the example of Joseph of Arimathia, Mat. 27.60.
who made his tomb in his life time in the midst of his garden, to this end
(no doubt) to put himself in mind daily of his death, and that in the midst
of his delights and pleasant walks, he might be the better prepared for Death.

And in this respect a decent funeral is a duty to be performed, and a debt
to be pa^d to the bodies of all Christians, who are the temples of the holy
ghost, and members of the body of Christ, 1. Cor. 6.19. Ephesians. 5.30.
and therefore are to be laid with honor into their graves, as into howses of
safe custody and beds of rest, to remain there in peace, until the
resurrection, to the end that thereby all others might be admonished to
meditate hereon, to prepare themselves for their end. Genesis 23. Genesis 25 9. Genesis
50.
And therefore did not only the fathers in the old testament, but the
faithful also in the new, perform funerals for their friends departed this
life. So Abraham performs a funera^l for Sarah, Isaac and Ismael for Abraham,
Joseph, Number. 20.29. Deuteronomy. 34.8.
the Israelites and the Egiptians a most sumptuous one for Jacob, and all
Israel at two times kept a solemn mourning thirty days together for Aaron
and Moses. In the new testament John the Baptist is buried and intombed of his
disciples. Mat. 14.12. Mark. 15.43.
Our Savior Christ by two great Counselors. And Stephen is carried out to be
buried by men fearing God, who made great lamentation for him. And likewise all
the rest of the Patriarchs and holy men of God.

This honor is to be given unto the dead, which from the Church was derived
unto the very gentiles with whom to violate the sepulchers of the dead, was
ever accounted an heinous offense, and the place of burial sacred. But God
threatens it is a judgment to the wicked that they shall not be buried and
lamented, and denounces it twice as a great curse against Iehoiakin the son
of Josiah that he shall be buried as an Ass is buried, Ier. 16.4.6. Ier 22
18.19. Ier. 36.30.
and that his dead body shall be cast out with contempt without any pomp or
decency of burial.

It appears also in Ezechiel that it was a custom in old time to enterre
valiant men in their arms, Ezech. 32.27.
to put them into their graves with weapons of war, and to bury them with
their swords under their heads, which thing God seems there to threaten that
his enemies shall not have; giving us thereby to understand that the having of
such funeral pome and ceremonies is an honor a worldly blessing and a gift of
God of which he depriues his enemies, and therefore threatens in the next verse
that they shall ly by them that are slain wi^h the sword, that is, shall not
be honorably enterred like Conquerors, but basely buried amongst the conquered.

And although the wicked do come to this honor of sumptuous funerals, and to
be laid in costly and painted tombs and sepulchers (as it often falls out)
yet it may be said of such a one, that he which was not long since clad in
silk, purple, and gold, and shined with diamonds, is now assaulted with
troops of worms, and breathes forth intolerable sents; while that his heir
lives pleasantly in riot and excess, possessing the fruit of his labors
which he himself never, or a small time enjoyed. And herein his very dust and
corruption does appear, and his ambition, and pride does rest it self within
this tomb; for then behold stately Sepulchers, engraven stones, that report
some famous actions, and proud titles upon his tomb, set out with false
narrations, to the end that passengers may say here lies a goodly stone, but a
corrupted body.

But the use that we must make of all burialls and funerals for whomsoever
they be, is to admonish and put us in mind, that we must make preparation for
our own end, and for the felicity and happiness of the life to come. Which
kind of preparation is of especial use and brings forth many excellent fruits
in the life of man. For a worldling surfeted with vanities, a proud man in the
midst of his aspiring thoughts, the covetous man in the dogs-hunger of his
avarice, the voluptuous man in the fury of his fornication, the envious man in
the torment of his malice, if they can be so happy as once to prepare
themselves for Death in a holy meditation, into what amazement will they be
brought to consider of their wondrous folly in their dangerous estate? Then
pride will strike her sails, covetousness will be satisfied, voluptuosnesse
more continent, and envy more charitable, Genesis 18.27. Job. 42.6.
it will make us say with Abraham, I am but dust and ashes; and with the holy
man Job, to abhor our selves, and to repent in dust and ashes.

The second duty in this general preparation, is that every man must daily
indeauor to take away from his own Death the power and sting thereof. Judge.
16.5.
The Philistimes saw by experience that Samson was of great strength, and
therefore they used means to know in what part of his body his strength lay^
and when they found it to be in the hair of his head, they never ceased
practicing with Daliah till it was cut off, and then they had their will of
him. In like manner the time will come, when we must encounter hand to hand,
and grapple with cruel death; and therefore the best way is before hand, while
we have a breathing time to learn where the sting of Death (which is his
strength) does ly, which being once known, we must with all speed cut off his
Samsons locks, bereave him of his power, disarme him, and make him weak and
unable to destroy us.

Now to find out the way, we need not use the counsel of any Dalilah, but we
have the oracles and counsels of God, which direct us plainly, wherein the
strength and sting of Death consists, namely in our sins, 1 Cor. 15.56.
The sting of Death (says the Apostle) is sin. And seeing we now know that
the power and force of every man's death does lie in his own sins, (the wages
whereof is death, as the same Apostle tells us) and the body is to die because
of sin, Romans 6 23. Romans 8.10.
we must therefore endeavor before Death come upon us, to pull out this
sting, and take from him his power and strength by humbling our selves in the
time present for all our sins past, and by turning our selves to God for the
time to come; and to labor to have our sins pardoned and forgiven by the
precious death and bloodshedding of our Savior Jesus Christ; by which means,
and none other, the power of Death is much rebated. For Christ dyed not to take
away Death (as yet) but to change Death, not to overthrow the being of death,
but to pluck out the sting of Death, not quite to stop up the grave, but to
remove and quell the victory of the grave. By which means Death cannot now
sting them that have their sins forgiven, nor the grave triumph over them.

Death in it self is the way to hell unto the wicked, but it is altered and
changed unto the children of God by grace, and is become unto them a portall,
by which the soul passes out of the frail body into heaven. In it self
Death is as a Sergeant to arrest men, and bring them to judgment, but to the
elect children of God, by the Death of Christ, it is as the Angel which guided
the Apostle Peter out of prison, Acts 12.
and sets them at liberty, and leads them from the vale of tears into the land
of righteousness; and by this means of a mighty and bloody enemy, is so far
forth made tractable and friendly, that we may now with comfort encounter with
Death, and prevail, seeing now it is become a piece of our happiness.

Exodus 8.8. Acts 8 24.
The most notorious and wicked person when he is in dying, perchance will pray,
and (with Pharaoh) desire others ^o pray for him, and will promise amendment
of life with solemn protestations, that if he might live longer, he would
become a practiser of all the good duties of faith, repentance and reformation
of life, although God knows, there be too many that after recovery do with
Pharaoh break this promise. This therefore is a duty which you must be
careful to do every day.

Number. 23.10.
Wicked Balaam that false Prophet would feign dye the Death of the righteous,
Let me (says he) dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like
his; buthe by no means would live the life of the righteous. But this
preparation will bring thee to live the life of the righteous, and then no
doubt but thou shall also dye the death of the righteous.

The third duty in our general preparation, is in this life to enter into the
first degree of life eternal; for eternal life and happiness has three
degrees, one in this life, and that is when a man can truly say with the
Apostle, Gal. 2.20.
I live, and yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live
in the flesh, I live by faith in the son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me; and this all such can say as do unfeignedly repent, and
believe, and that are justified from their sins, sanctified against their
sins, and have the peace of a good conscience, with other good gifts and
graces of the holy Spirit, being the earnest penny of their salvation.

The second degree is in the end of this life, that is, when the body goes to
the earth, from whence it came, and the soul returns to God that gave it, and
is carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom.

The third degree is in the end of the world, that is, at the resurrection and
last judgment, when body and soul being reunited together, who were ancient
loving familiers, living and suffering together, and from their first
conversion did draw together as sweet yoke-fellowes in the Kingdom of grace,
do now jointly enter together into the Kingdom of glory. So that the first of
these three degrees is in this life into which we must enter. For he that will
live in eternal happiness, must first begin in this life to rise out of the
grave of sin, in which by nature he lies buried, and then live in newness of
life by grace.

The fourth duty in our general preparation, is to exercise and inure our
selves in dying by little and little, before we come to that point that we must
needs die indeed. For he that leaves this world, before the world leave him,
gives Death the hand like a welcome messenger, and departs in peace. Wherefore
as they in open games of actiuitie, as running, shooting, wrestling and such
like, long before hand, breath their bodies, and exercise themselves, that in
the day of trial they may win the game, etc. Even so should we begin to
die now while we are living, that we may be the better prepared for it when it
shall come indeed.

But some may here object and say, how can this be done? The Apostle Saint
Paul does answer it in giving us direction by his own example, when he says,
1. Cor. 15.31.
By our rejoicing which we have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. And
doutlesse this Apostle died daily, not only because he was often in danger of
death by reason of his calling, but also because in all his dangers and
troubles he inured himself to die. For when men do make the right use of
their afflictions, and do with their might endeavor to bear them patiently,
humbling themselves, as under the Lords chastisement and correction, then they
are said to begin to die well. And he that would mortify his greatest sins,
must first begin to do it in his smallest sins; which being once reformed,
he shall with more ease be able to overcome his master sins. For this is the
way to keep sin from reigning in our mortal bodies. So likewise he that
would be able to bear the cross of all crosses, as namely death, which is
the end of all crosses, must first of all learn to bear small crosses, as
sicknesses, diseases, troubles, losses, poverty and the like, which may fitly
be termed little deaths, and the beginnings of the greater death; with which
little deaths we must first acquaint our selves, before we can be able to
encounter with great Death. For as one well says, Death after the cross is
the less.

The world is set unto us as a house, wherein we are but tenants at will; out
of which the Lord by sickness and crosses gives us warning, and by death
determines his will, and requires it again at our hands, and wills us
thereby to prepare our selves for a better house; and the new house for which
we are to prepare our selves is most pleasant, and not so frail, ruinous and
weak, as our worldly house; for the tiles do sometimes fall off this house,
the walls do reele, the roof does drop, the pillars do lean, the
foundation does sink; And what are these, but so many warnings of the Lord to
us to depart hence, and prepare for a better place? Therefore when thou do
perceive thy falling hairs, thy watering eyes, thy trembling hands, thy weak
knees, and thy stooping body; what are these, but only the citations of
Death, which seems to warn thee to prepare to pack up, that thou may with
more ease be able to go out of this ruinous house of thine.

It is a fable, but it has a good mortal: A certain man did covenant with
Death that he should never surprise him at unawares or suddenly, before that he
had first sent a messenger to him to give him warning that shortly he would
arrest him; to which Death assented, that though he could not always forbear
him, yet before he did strike him, he would give him warning. Upon Deaths
promise thus past, this man lived secure, spending his time in all manner of
riot and excess; and when he thoughtfull little of Death, then came Death to
take him away; with whom this man expostulating for breach of promise: Death in
discharging of his fidelity, replied, that with none, no not those that
violate all promises, had he broken promise, for (says he) I have sent many
messenger unto you, from time to time, to give you warning of my coming; thou
wast six years since taken with a grievous Fever; within these two years
sore troubled with Rhumes and distillations; since that, taken with the cough
and pain in the head, and then troubled with the consumption of the Lungs: And
did I not lately send my brother German unto thee, the drousie sleeping
disease veturnosum soporem, in which thou did lie for a while like a dead
man? All these were forerunners of my coming, to warn thee to make thy self
ready for me, who was near at hand. Is there any amongst us, that is not
sometimes admonished of Deaths approaching by some of these his Apparators,
that he must shortly depart? The Poet says truly: Mill modis lethi miseros
mors vna fatigat.
A thousand kinds, yet but one death,
Has death, to take away our breath.


From whence let all men learn, that have care of their salvation, what they
ought to do, and be wary to prepare themselves for Death, before Death does
end their life. Often we ought to prepare for Death, and do not, at last we
die indeed; and would then and cannot.

Therefore while our feet are at liberty, and before we be bound hand and
foot, let us run the way of the Lords Commandments, and while we have
tongues, and before we become speechless, let us use our tongues well, and not
suffer them to sin. Mat. 22.12.13.
And while we have hands and arms, and before our arms not from our
shoulders, Ephesians. 4.28.
let us work with our hands the things that are good, and procure things
honest in the sight of all men; Psalm. 150.6.
and while we have breath, before God stop our breath, let us praise the Lord.
And while we have ears, Eccl. 12.4:
before these daughters of singing be abased, let us lift up our ears to
hear the word of God, and not to vanity.

Gal. 6 10.
All we therefore (says the Apostle) have opportunity, to do good unto all
men, especially to them that are of the household of faith. All this is a good
preparation for death, and by our patience in suffering afflictions, it will
make Death when it comes, the easier for us, and the less able to afflict us.
For he that dies (says one) before he die, shall not dye when he does die.

In a temporal building the stones must be broken, cut, hewn, and squared,
ere they be fit to make up the work. The corn must be cut down, bound up,
carried into the barn, threshed, winnowed, cleansed and grinded, before it be
ready for good bread. And the whirlewinde must first blow, 2. King. 2.11.
before Eliah be rapt up into heaven. And we must be cut, hewn and squared
with a number of Deaths messengers before we can be made fit for the Lords
building. We must be tossed with the wind and weather, before we can arrive
in the haven of heaven. The very victuals which we eat, must first from life
be brought to the fire, and be clean altered in losing their property, from
the fire to the table, from the table to the mouth, so to the stomach, and
there be concocted and disgested, before they can nourish and work their
perfection in us. Even so Gods children must be mangled and defaced in this
world, which is the mill to grind us the kitchen to receive us, and the fire
to boil, roast and bake us, to alter the property from that we were at the
first, that we thereby may be made fit to be brought to the Lords table. For
as raw flesh is wholesome meat for men, so unmortified men be no creatures
fit for God.

By all which means the Lord brings us to mortification, which be the little
Deaths, that thereby we may be the better armed and prepared for the great
death, when it comes, to endure the same with more ease. For we must learn
to give intertainment, to the Herbengers, servants, and messengers of Death,
that we may the better intertaine the Lord and Master when he comes.

This point, that blessed martyr, Saint Bylney, well considered, who oftentimes
before his burning and martyrdom, did put his finger into the flame of a
candle, not only to make trial of his ability in suffering, but also to arm,
strengthen, and prepare himself against greater torments and pains in his
death, which he did suffer with the more ease. And thus you see the fourth
duty which we must in any wise learn and remember, because otherwise we
cannot be so well able to bear and endure the pangs of death well, except we
be first well schooled, nurtured, and trained up by inuring our selves to die
through the sundry afflictions and trials of this life.

The fifth and last duty of our general preparation is set down unto us by
the Preacher, who says, Eccl. 9.10.
All that thine hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power. And mark
the reason, For there is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave, whither thou go. Therefore if any man be able to do
any good service or office, either to the Church of God or Commonwealth, or to
any public or private person, let him do it with all speed, and with all his
might, lest by Death he be prevented. He that has care thus to spend his
days, shall with much comfort and peace of conscience end his days. Thus much
of the general preparation for death.

Now follows the particular preparation for Death, and this is in the time of
sickness; and in the right and true manner of making this particular
preparation, are contained three sorts of duties: one concerning God, another
man's self, and the third, our neighbor.

The first concerning God is to seek to be reconciled unto him in Christ, and
by Christ, though we have bin long since assured of his favor: all other
duties must come after in the second place, and they are of no value or effect
without this.

Touching the duties which he is to perform to himself, they are twofold,
the one concerning his soul, the other his body.

The duty concerning his soul, is, that he must arm and furnish himself
against the immoderate fear of present death, and the reason hereof is very
plain, because how soever naturally men fear Death through the whole course
of their lives more or less, yet in time of sickness, when death approaches,
this natural fear bred in the bone, will most of all show it self even in
such sort, as it will astonish the senses of the sick party. And therefore it
is necessary that we should use some means to strengthen our selves against
the fear of Death: which means are of two sorts, Practice and Meditation.
Practice, that the sick man must not so much regard Death it self, as the
benefits of God which are obtained after death. He must not fix his mind upon
the consideration of the pangs and torments of death, but a^l his thoughts and
affections must be upon that blessed estate that he is to enjoy after death.
He that is to swim over some great and deep River, must not look downward to
the violent running of the stream, but if he would pr^uent fear, he must
cast his eyes to the bancke on the further side, to the which place he is to
pass: and even so, he that draws near unto death, must look, as it were
over the waves of death, and directly fix the eyes of his faith upon the
eternal life and happiness.

The meditations which serve for this purpose are principally three: the first
is borrowed from the special providence of God, namely that the Death of every
man, much more of every child of God is not only foreseen, but also appointed
by God. Yea the death of every man deserved and procured by his own sins, is
laid upon him by God, who in this respect may be said to be the cause of every
man's death. Acts 4.28.
The Church of Jerusalem confessed that nothing came to pass in the Death of
Christ, but that which the foreknowledge and eternal counsel of God had
appointed; therefore also the Death of every member of Christ is foreseen and
foreordained by the special decree and providence of God. I add further that
the very circumstances of Death, as the time, place, and manner, the beginning
of the sickness, the continuance, the end of it, every fit in the sickness, and
the pangs of Death are set down particularly in the counsel of God. For unto
the Lord (says the Psalmist) belong the issues of Death. Psalm. 68.20.
The careful consideration of this one point will be a notable means to arm
us against all fear, distrust and impatience in the time of sickness, as also
of our Death.

The second meditation is to be borrowed from the excellent promise that God
has made to the death of the righteous, which is this, Blessed are they that
dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors and their works follow them;
Reave. 14.13.
this the Author of truth that can not lie, has spoken.

Now then let a man but thoroughly consider this, that Death joined and
accompanied with a reformed life has a promise of blessedness adjoined with it,
and it alone will be a sufficient means to stay the rage of our affections,
and all immoderate fear of Death.

The third meditation, is that God has promised his special, blessed and
comfortable presence to his servants in their sickness, and at their death. And
the Lord does manifest his presence three ways. The first is by moderating and
lessening the pains and torments of sickness and Death; and hence it comes to
pass, that to many men the sorrows and pangs of sickness and death are nothing
so greiuous and troublesome, as the crosses and afflictions which they suffer
in the course of their lives. The second way of Gods presence is by an inward
and unspeakable comfort of his holy spirit (as Saint Paul says) We rejoice in
tribulation; Romans 5.3.4.
but why is this rejoicing? Because (says he) the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts by the holy Ghost, 2 Chro. 2.5.
which is given unto us. Again this Apostle having in grievous sickness
received the sentence of Death, says of himself, that as the sufferings of
Christ did abound in him, so his consolation did abound through Christ. Here
then we do see, that when earthly comforts do fail, the Lord himself
draws near unto the bed of the sick, and (as it were) does visit them in his
own person, and ministers unto them from above refreshing for their souls,
with his right hand he holds up their heads, Can. 2.6.
and with his left hand he imbraceth them; Psalm. 41.3.
yea the Lord (says the Psalmist) will strengthen them upon the bed of
languishing, and he will make all their beds in their sickness.

The third means of Gods presence, is the ministry of his good Angels, whom
he has appointed as keepers and nurses for his servants, Psalm. 91.11 12.
to hold them up and to bear them in their arms as nurses do their young
infants and babes, and to be as a strong guard unto them against the devil and
his wicked Angels. And all this is observed especially in the time of sickness;
at which time the holy Angels are not only present with the children of God
to succor the^, but they are ready also to receive their souls at their last
gasp, and carry them into Abraham's bosom. Luke 16.22
And thus much of the first duty of a sick man, and the means to arm him
against the fear of Death. Now follows the second duty concerning the body,
and that is, that all sick persons must be careful to preserve health and
life, till God do wholly take it away, Therefore we must refer our life and
our death to the goodwill and pleasure of the Lord. And touching this temporal
life it is a precious jewel, and as the common saying is, life is very sweet,
being given to man to this end, that he might have some space of time, wherein
he might prepare himself for his happy end, and use all good means to
attain unto eternal life.

In the preservation of life two things must be considered the means, and the
right use of the means. The means, is good and wholesome physic, which must
be esteemed as an ordinance and blessing of God We read that King Asa is blamed
for seeking to the Physicians in the extremity of his sickness. 2 Cor. 16.12.
Whereupon a question may rise whether it be lawful (when necessity of
sickness constrains) to fly to the remedies of Physic whereunto the answer
is easy. Asa is not here blamed for seeking the ordinary means of physic,
but because he sought not the Lord in his disease, but only to the Physicians.
Iam 5.14.
Is any sick amongst you (says Saint James) let him call for the elders of
the Chu ch, and let them pray over him, and that is in the very first place
bfore all other help be sought Wh^re the divine ends, th^re the Physician must
begin, and it is a very preposterous course, that the Divine should there begin
where the Physician makes an end; for until help be had for the soul, and
sin which is the root of sickness, be cured. Physic for the body is
nothing worth: therefore it is a thing much to be misliked that in all places
almost the Physician is first sent for, and comes in the beginning of the
sickness, and the Minister co^es when a man is half dead, and is then sent for
oftentimes, when the sick party lies drawing on and gasping for breath; as
though Ministers of the Gospel in these days were able to work miracles. The
art of Physic therefore, nor the Physician is here disallowed, but over much
confidence in Physic and in the Physician, without relying upon God the
sovereign Physician; without whose blessing no Physic nor potion can be
available to the curing of any malady or disease; neither can the Physician
any ways profit the sick and diseased patient, except the Lord in mercy gives
a powerful working and operation to the medicine against the disease, to
predominate over it for the curing of the same.

The doctrine then from hence is, that the helps of physic are not to be
despised, not too much to be depended on; but our chiefest hope is to be fixed
upon God, who as he only puts the soul into the body, so he only can take
it away again when it pleases him. Yea these ordinary means which God has
appointed, are not to be contemned or neglected, lest we seem thereby to tempt
God, especially in dangerous diseases. Eccle. 38.1.2.3.4.56.78.9.12.13.14.
Hereof Jesus the son of Sirach says, Honor a Physician with the honor due
unto him, for the uses which you may have of him, for the Lord created him; for
of the most high comes healing, and he shall receive honor of the King; the
skill of the Physician shall lift up his head, and in the sight of great men he
shall be in admiration. The Lord has created medicines out of the earth, and
he that is wise will not abhor them. Was not the water made sweet with wood,
that the virtue thereof might be known; and he has given men skill that he
might be honored in his meruellous works. With such does he heal men, and
takes away their pains, of such does the Apothecary make a confection, and of
his works there is no end, and from him is peace over all the earth. My son
in thy sickness be not negligent, but pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee
whole, then give place to the Physician, for the Lord has created him, let him
not go from thee, for thou have need of him. There is a time when in their
hands there is good success, for they shall also pray unto the Lord, that he
would prosper that which they give for ease and remedy to prolong life. And
hereof also Jesus the son of God says, they that be whole need not the
Physician, but they that are sick; which speech of our blessed Savior
commends that art, Matthew. 9.12.
and the good service done thereby. This commenda^ion also the Prince of Poets
gives to the Physician, The Physician alone (says he) is to be equalled with
many other in honor.

Genesis 17.12.
Again whereas God did not command circumcision of children before the eight
day, he followed a rule of physic observed in all ages, that the life of the
child is very uncertain till the first seven days be expired. And upon the
very same ground the Heathen men used not to name their children before the
eight day. 2. Sam. 12.18.


And that Physi^k may be well applied to the maintenance of health, special
care must be had for the choosing of such Physicians as are known to be well
learned, and men of experience, as also of a good conscience, of sound religion
in the profession of the Gospel of Christ, and of upright life and
conversation.

Now touching the manner of using the means, these rules must be followed.
First of all, he that is to take physic, must not only prepare his body, as
Physicians do commonly prescribe, but he must also prepare his soul by
humbling himself under the merciful hand of God in his sickness for his
sins; and making earnest prayers unto him for pardon, before any medicine
come in his body.

The second rule is, 1. Tim. 4.5.
that when we have prepared our selves, and are about to use the physic, we
must sanctify it as we do our meat and drink, by the word of God and
prayer.

The third rule is, that we must carry in mind the right and proper end of
Physic, lest we deceive our selves. We must not therefore think that
Physic serves to prevent old age, or death it self; for that is impossible:
neither do we eat, drink and sleep, that we may never die; but that we may
prolong our l^fe for a few days and to spend those days in the service of
God, preparing our selves to die. For life c^nsists in a certain temperature
and proportion of natural heat, and radical moisture, which moisture being
once consumed by the heat, is not by all art reparable; and therefore Death
must needs follow. But the true end of physic is to continue and lengthen our
life to his full natural period, which is, when nature which has been long
preserved by a^l possible means, is now wholly spent. Now this period though
it cannot be lengthened by any art of man, yet may it easily be shortened by
intemperance in diet, by gluttony, by drunkenness, by violent diseases, and
such like. But care must be had to avoid all these evils, and the like, that
the little lamp of corporal life may burn, till it go out of it self by
Gods appointment, and until God has fulfilled the number of our days. Exodus
23.26.
And this very space of time is the day of grace and salvation. And whereas God
in his justice might have cut us off, and utterly destroyed us long before this
day, yet in his great mercy he does give us thus much time, that we might
prepare our selves for our end. Which time when it is once spent, (which may be
nearer then we are aware) if a man would redeem it with the price of ten
thousand worlds, Mat. 16.26.
it cannot be obtained. For what is a man profited (says our Savior) if he
shall gain the whole world, and lose his soul?

And having thus seen what be the duties of the sick man to himself: now
let us see what be the duties which he owes to his neighbor. And they are
two: First, the duty of reconciliation, whereby he is freely to forgive all
men, and to desire to be forgiven by all. In the old Testament when a man was
to offer a Bullock or a Lamb in sacrifice to God, Matthew. 5.23.24.
He must leave his offering at the Altar, and first go and be reconciled to
his brother, if he had ought against him, and then come and offer his gift;
much more then must this be done, when we are dying, to offer up our selves,
souls and bodies, as an acceptable and reasonable service and sacrifice to
God, in forgiving of all men. And if the party be absent, or will not be
reconciled, yet the sick party by forgiving, has discharged his own
conscience, and God will accept his will for the deed in such a case. For if
ye forgive men their trespasses (says our Savior) your heavenly Father will
also forgive you; Matthew. 6.14.15.
but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
you.

The second duty is, that those which are Rulers and Governors of others must
have great care that they which be committed to their charge and government,
may be left in good estate after their death; wherein are three duties to be
handled, the first of the Magistrate, the second of the Minister of the
Gospel, and the third of the Master or Governor of the family.

The Magistrates duty before his death, is to provide as far forth as he
can, for the godly and peaceable state and government of all such as are under
his charge and government; and that is done partly by procuring the maintenance
of piety, godliness, and sound religion, and partly by establishing of good
and wholesome laws for their safety, peace, and quietness. Whereof there are
examples of the practice of these duties in Gods word. Deuteronomy. 31.1.
When Moses was an hundred and twenty years old, and was not longer able to
go in and out before the people, he called them before him, and signified that
the time of his departure was at hand, and therefore he took order for their
welfare after his death. And first of all he placed Joshua over them, in his
stead, to be their guide to the promised Land. Secondly, he gave special
charge to all the people, to be valiant and courageous against all their
enemies, and to obey the Commandments of their God. And Joshua follows the
same course, Joshua 24.1,
for he called the people together, and tells them that the time of his death
is at hand, and gives them a charge to be courageous, and to worship the
true God; which being done, he ends his days as a worthy Captain of the Lord.
And so when King David was to go the way of all flesh, 2. King. 1.1.
and lay sick on his deathbed, he placed his own son Solomon upon his
throne, and gave him charge, both for the maintenance of true religion, and for
the execution of civil justice.

Touching the duty of Ministers of the Gospel, when they are going out of the
world, they must cast about and provide, as much as in them lies, that the
Church of God, over which God has made them overseers, may flourish after they
are gone. An example whereof we have in Saint Paul, Take heed therefore (says
he) unto your selves, Acts 20.28.29.30.31.
and to all the flock over which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to
feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. For I
know this, that after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in amongst you,
not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore watch, and
remember that by the space of three years, I ceased not to warn every one
night and day with tears.

If this duty had been well observed and performed, there could not have been
such abundance of errors and heresies in the Church of God, as has been and
are at this day. But because men have had more care to maintain personal
succession, then the right succession, which stands and consists in the
wholesome word and doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, therefore Wolves, and
unprofitable teachers have come into the places and rooms of faithful and
painful Pastors and teachers, not sparing the flock of Christ, but have made
havoc of the same; the Apostacy whereof has ouerspread the face of the
Church.

Thirdly, householders and masters of families, must have great care to set
their household and family in good order before they die. Which duty the Lord
himself, by his Prophet Esaias, does command that good King Ezechiah to
perform. Isa. 38.1.
Thus says the Lord, set thy house in order, for thou shall die and not live.
And for the procuring good order in the family after death, two things are to
be done. The first concerning this life, and that is touching the ordering and
disposing of lands and goods. And that this may be well and wisely done, if
the last will and testament be unmade in the time of our health, (which is a
great fault) it is with godly advice and counsel to be then made in the time
of sickness, according to the practice of ancient and worthy men. Genesis 25.5.6.
Genesis 27. Genesis 49.1.
Abraham before his death makes his will, and gives Legacies; so did Isaak and
Jacob, in whose last will and testament are contained many worthy and notable
lessons, blessings and prophecies of the estate of his children. And our
Savior Christ, Ioh 19.25.
when he was upon the Cross provided for his Mother, especially in remembering
her unto John his well-beloved Disciple. And indeed, this duty of making a Will,
is a matter of great consequence, for it cuts off much hatred and contention in
families, and it preuents many troubles and suites in Law. It is not therefore
always a matter of indifferency, which may or may not be done, as many
falsely imagine, who upon blind and sinister respects abstain from making
their last Wills. Some, because they fear they shall die the sooner, and
others for such like carnal respects; but all such are greatly deceived; For
by disposing thy worldly goods in thy will and testament, thou shall not
thereby die the more quickly, but the more quietly, and shall thereby prevent
the jarres and brawles, that otherwise when thou art gone, may arise amongst
thy children, kindred and friends. And herein remember that thou partest from
earthly possessions, and art going to take possession of heavenly. And in the
bestowing of their possessions and goods, it must be principally upon their
wines and children. This man (says God unto Abraham, Genesis 15.4.
of Eleazar a stranger) shall not be thine heir, but the son which shall
come forth of thine own bowels, shall be thine heir. Therefore it is utterly
a fault in any man, to alienate his lands or goods, wholly and finally from his
blood and posterity; it is a thing which the very law of Nature it self has
condemned. Again it is utterly a fault to give all to the eldest, and little
or nothing in respect to the rest, as though the eldest were borne to be the
gentleman only, and the younger brethren borne to bear the wallet. Yet in
equity the eldest is to have more then any of the rest, Deu. 21.17.
because unto him there belongs by the law of God, a double portion, and
because Stocks and families in their persons are to be preserved and
maintained; and because also there must always be some that must be fitted
thereby, to do some special service for the good both of Church and
Commonwealth.

In the second place, in the will there must be provision made for the godly
preaching Minister, and poor of the place, and for others well deserving the
same, according to every man's ability, Number. 27.1. Number. 36.1.
and especially for want of children, the next of kin must be remembered in
their stead.

The second duty of the governor and master of the family, concerns the
good of the souls of all those that are under their charge and government. And
this consists in teaching and instructing of them in the fear of the Lord,
and to give them charge that they may persevere and continue in the same, after
the example of faithful Abraham, whom the Lord himself commends to his
everlasting praise and commendation, for the performing of this duty, as
appears in the book of Genesis, Genesis 18.19.
For I know him (says the Lord) that he will command his children and his
household after him, that they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice
and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken
of him. And after the example likewise of King David, 1. King. 2.1.2.3.4.
who gave his son Solomon on his deathbed a most excellent and solemn
charge. And this duty is also commended unto us in the second book of Esdras,
2. Esdr. 14.13.14.15.
where it is said, Now therefore set thy house in order, etc.

Thus if masters and governors of families shall so carefully dispose of their
estate, and give such a godly charge to them whom they shall leave behind
them, then they shall hereby greatly honor God dying, as well as living. O that
they were wise (says Moses) Deuteronomy. 32.29.
that they understood this, that they would consider, and prudently provide for
their latter end. Wherein four things are commended unto us, to wit, knowledge,
understanding, wisdom and providence: whereby it is apparent that God would
have us to know, understand and wisely provide for our end. But first to know;
what? This our life to be both short and dangerous, stuffed with miseries,
subject to vanities, defiled with sins, corrupted with lusts and desires, and
ever slyding toward an end.

Likewise God wishes us well to understand, what? Our own frail estate, that
as naked as we came out of our mothers womb so naked we must return again,
and as earth we are, so to earth eftsoone we are to be converted. Well may we
be compared unto men scaling the walls of a beseiged City, Ecle. 5.15.
at whom the Citizens discharging their pieces, encounter their assault with
darts, stones and other munition, the better to defend themselves, and to
offend their enemy. Who as they be wounded, fall down, some from the top,
some from the midst and at the bottom of the wall, some being wounded with
gunshot, some with darts, and some with stones, some with one thing, some with
an other; even so it fares with the men of this world, if we well under stood
it, who while they labor to climb up to the top of honor and wealth, are
tumbled down by death some from the highest degree of honor, some from a middle
estate, and some from a low and poor estate, some in their old age, some in
their middle age, some in their youth, and some in their infancy.

If a man were tied fast to a stake, at whom a m^ cunning archer did shoot,
wounding many about him and nearer him, some above, some under, and some
against him, and the poor wretch him self so fast bound to the stake, that it
were not any way possible for him to escape; would it not be deemed madness in
him, if in the mean while forgetting his misery and danger, he should
carelessly fall to bibbe and quaffe, to laugh and be merry, as though he could
not be touched at all? Who would not judge such a man beside himself, that
would not rather in this case provide for his end? And are not we much rather
to be accounted stark mad, who do or should know and understand that the most
expert Archer that ever was, even God himself has whet his sword, Psalm.
7.12.13.
and bent his bow (as the Prophet says) and made it ready, and has also
prepared for him the instruments of Death, and ordained his arrows. Yea he
has already shot forth his darts and arrows of Death against them that are
above us, that is against our ancestors elders and betters, and now one while
he shoots at them that be right against us, that is at our equals, another
while he hitteth such as be very near us, as our nearest and dearest friends,
on the right hand he wounds our friends on the left hand our enemies, and
under us such as are our inferiors and yongers. And if among so many arrows of
death, we in the mean time shall become secure and careless, and never
provide nor prepare for our end, as though we should ever escape; who would not
say that we were worse then lunatike?

O then let us understand thus much that we are fast bound to the stake of
mortality, and that it is not possible for us to escape Gods arrows and darts
of Death, but that at one time or other we shall be as deadly wounded
therewith as others; that so by the right understanding of these things we may
prepare our selves against the time that it shall happen unto us; Psalm.
91.5.6.7.
and then thou shall not (as the Pslmist says) be afraid for the terror by
night, nor for the arrowe that flies by day, nor for the pestilence that
walks in the darkness, nor for the destruction that wastes at noonday; a
thousand shall fall at thy side and ^en thou^and at thy right hand, but it
shall not come nigh thee.

Let us therefore be wise, but in what? Moses in another place tells us in
what. Psalm. 90.12.10.
Lord (says he) teach us so to number our days that we may apply our hearts
to wisdom. So that this wisdom consists principally in numbering of our
days, which may be done four ways.

First the account which Moses makes, the days of our life are threescore
years and ten; and though some be so strong that they come to fourscore
years, yet is their strength then but labor and sorrow: for it is soon cut
off, and we fly away. Therefore the sum of our years (whereunto
nevertheless, all do not attain is threscore years and ten. But this number
every child can tell.

Secondly, by comparison of three times, first, past, which being ^ee gone, and
past is nothing now it is past, were it a thousand years, it is but as a
thought; secondly, future which being to come, is but uncertain whether it
will be to us or no; thirdly present, and know that the same is only ours,
which is but a moment or instant.

Thirdly deduction, or abstraction, as thus, take from threescore and ten
years, thirty five spent in sleep; and fifteen years for our childhood, the
time of our vanity, for this, part of a man's life is spent before he knows
what time is; and ten years allowed, for eating and drinking, tricking and
trimming, moiling and toyling, recreating and sporting, idle talking and
complementing, such like; then there will be found but ten years remaining to
be well spent, (whereof Lord how little is spent in thy service!) these three
ways of numbering may be taught us of men.

The fourth way God only can teach us by a Christian and heavenly
Arithmaticke, that is, so to number, as we may by due consideration of the
shortness and uncertainty of our life, apply our hearts unto wisdom. And so
we should learn to provide, what? To provide with Joseph for the dearth to
come, and imitate the Ant, who provides her meat in the summer, and gathers
her food in the harvest for the winter to come. (As the wise man says) Genesis
41.33.
Go to the pismire, O sluggard: behold her ways and be wise. For she having
no guide, gouerner nor ruler prepares her meat in the summer, and gathers
her food in harvest. Prouer. 6.8.


Saint Austine says that in this our pilgrimage we must think of nothing
else, but that we shall not be ever here, and that here we should prepare for
our selves that place from whence we shall never depart. Damascene reports an
excellent history touching this purpose. There was a certain country (says
he) where they chose their King of the poorest and basest sort of people, and
upon any dislike taken, they would depose him from his throne, and exile him
into an Island, where he should be starued to death. Now one more wise the^ the
rest considering hereof, sent money before hand into that Island, into which he
should be banished; which coming to pass to him as to others before him, he
went and was received into that Island with great joy and triumph. Even so
against thou be banished by Death from this world, Job 1.21.
without penny or farthing (for naked thou came, and naked thou shall
return) thou must provide and prepare for it, whilst thou art in this life
whereby thou may be received into Heaven hereafter with great joy and
triumph.

And as a Merchant being to travel into a far country, does first deliver
here his money upon the exchange, that so he may be sure to receive it again
at his arrival in that country, even so for as much as we must pass from
hence having here no abiding, nor continuing City, being out of our own
Country, Hebr. 13.14.
but we seek one to come, let it therefore be our care, wisdom and
providence, to pass by these things which will pass from us, and to lay up
something that may serve us beyond the grave, against our arrival there,
Matthew. 6.19.20.21. Luke 12.33.
which is heaven. To which purpose tends that exhortation of our Savior
Christ in the Gospels of Saint Matthew and Luke. Lay not up for your selves
treasures upon earth, where moth and rust do corrupt, and where thieves break
through and steal, but lay up for your selves treasures in heaven. Sell that
yea have, and give alms, provide your selves bags which wax not old, a
treasure in the heavens that fails not etc. For where your treasure is there
will your heart be also. So that we must send our substance and our treasures
before hand to our standing house, and to our continuing country, as
Chrysostom speaks, and our Savior Christ does advise us here. For we loose
them if we lay them up here, where we must leave them, and can neither tarry
with them, nor carry them hence; but we keep them, if we send them to heaven,
as it were by bills of exchange, by the hands of Christ's poor member, where we
shall receive interrest for them of the Lord himself. Pro: 19.17.
He that has pity on the poor (says the wiseman) lends unto the Lord, and
that which he has given will he pay to him again. So that the god^y provident
man like wise Bias, either carries all with him, or rather has sent them
before him to his heavenly habitation. Therefore I say unto you (says our
Savior) make to your selves friends of Ma^mon of unrighteousness, that when
ye fail, Luke 16.9.
they may receive you into everlasting habitations. So that we may say when
the world is on a fire, I have left nothing where I loved nothing; and I have
my whole portion when I have Christ my only love and joy with me.

Let us not therefore build, where we cannot long continue, but let us make our
provision for that place where we may live and remain for ever.

It is wisdom then in every one to labor to be fitted for this passage. Let
us be prepared for this journey (as Chrysostom says) for we have need of
much provision, because there is much heat, much drought, much solitude, no
Inn, no resting place, no place of aboade, there is nothing to be bought by
him who has not taken all things here. Hear what the Virgins say, Mat. 25.9.
go ye rather to them that sell, but going they found not. What ought we then
to do? Even that we do not so labor for the things of this life, from which
we must be taken, and which we must leave behind us, but for those things which
concern a better life, which we may carry with us, not for those things, which
shall have either finem tuum, vel finem suum (as Bernard speaks) an end of
thee, if thou have not an end of them. Either shall they be taken from us as
they were from Job; Job 1. Luke 12.20.
or else we from them, as the rich man was from his substance and wealth, but
for those things which we may carry with us, and ^ay either bring us to, or
adorn us where we must be perpetually even for ever.

It were a very foolish part, and senseless practice for strangers when they
are in exile, or far from their own Country, in a foreign soil, where they
are sure either to be called by their own Prince; or cast out by the prince of
the Country, to lay out all their wealth upon some land there, never providing
for that which they may carry with them to their Country, for to adorn them
when they come there; especially if the so employing of themselves and their
estate be a means to keep them from enjoying the happiness of their Country,
yea a cause why they shall be cast into prison, or plunged into miseries. So is
it mere madness for us to employ all our care, and spend our time and
endeavors for this life and things pertaining to it, and the body, which we
found here and must leave here, and being here from home, strangers in the
body, 2 Cor. 5.6.
absent from the Lord, and our own land (as the Apostle speaks) whence we
know we shall be called either by a natural or violent death, ordinary or
extraordinary, taken away by God, or thrust out by the cruelty of man; never
providing for that which must adorn us there or further our passage, yea
procure our entrance; and specially when such things and the care for them,
(which was joined with the neglect of so great things, even of so great saluati
n) shall procure misery and punishment, where the other would procure mercy and
happiness; here these things are left behind us, those other go with us, of
these we shall give an account of those there we shall reap a reward (as
Chrysostom says.) Luke 16.2.


We must therefore imitate strangers, who provide for their departure, and
store themselves with such things as are both portab^e and profitable, and may
stead us in our passage and possession of our Country, so must we provide for
things spiritual; and store our selves with them, which we shall only carry
with us, and cannot be taken from us, and shall be only commodious to us
when we come to our Country.

Chrysostom says, he that is endued with virtue has such a garment, which as
moaths cannot, so neither can Death it self hurt. And not without cause, for
the virtues of the mind take not their beginning from the earth, but are
fruits of the spirit. They are then eternal riches, and we shall be eternal
by them; and though Death dissolve body and soul, and destroy our present
being in this life, yet as Iustine Martyr spoke for himself and others to
their persecutors, you may kill ^s, but you cannot hurt us: so Death, may kill
us but it cannot hurt us; whilst it comes expected and provided for, it will
be to our great commodity and advantage. And thus shall Death, when it
comes, be less hurtful, as a tempest beforehand expected.

Death is compared to the Basiliske, which if she see before she be seen, is
dangerous, but if a man first descrie the Basiliske, the Serpent dies, and
then there is no fear. So if Death be not seen, and provided for beforehand,
there is great danger; but if it be seen and provided for, the danger is past
before their death come. And they who with the glorified Virgins wait for
Christ in the life of the righteous, Mat. 25.10.
are always prepared for Death, when it knocks, to open unto it; and what is
a prepared death, but a happy death? and what follows a happy death, but a
happy life, never to die again? Such go in with Christ to his marriage, and
have everlasting life.

Let us not therefore forget heaven for earth, the soul for the body, and
heavenly joys for earthly toys, one month or day, for one hour or minute;
let us not deprive our selves of that everlasting happiness, that shall never
be taken from us, if we prepare our selves for it.

O that men would be wise to understand and know, what? Acts 1 7.
that the great and general day of Judgment cannot be fa^re off, as that
likewise of their own death; that they might in time prepare themselves for
the same. And although this day cannot be known of mortal men, For it is not
for you (says our Savior) to know the times and seasons, Mark. 13.32.
which the Father has put in his own power, and is unknown to the Angels,
and to the Son, as he is man, yet nevertheless they must know that this day
cannot be far off. As Daniel searched and found out by the books of
Jeremiah, not only the return, but the time of the return of Israel to their
own land from their captivity. So by the study of the Scripture ought they
to search, and so may they come to know the time of their return from their
exile on earth to their country in heaven. And though they cannot find the
particular day or year, yet shall they find it to be most certain, and in
short time to be finished.

Man should be wise to understand and know the reasons of the certainty of this
day of Judgment and they are these. First it is the will and decree of God.
For the Apostle says, And the times of this ignorance God winked at, Acts
17.30.31.
but now commands all men every where to repent, because he has appointed a
day in which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained; whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised
him from the dead. Now the will and decree of God is unchangeable, Esaias 46.10.
His counsel (says the Prophet) shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure.

Secondly, it is an article of our faith grounded on the word of God, and from
thence (says the Article) he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead.

Eccles. 12.14.
Thirdly, the Scripture says, That God shall bring every work unto judgment,
with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. But all this is not done
here, for here many matters are cloaked, and carried in a mist, that deserve
judgment, and merit condemnation. Therefore, that God may be just in his
sayings, there must be a sessions of gaole-deliuery, which the Scriptures call
the judgment of the last day.

Fourthly, the godly do here groan under many miseries, and the ungodly
wallow in many delights and pleasures. The rich live delicately, and Lazarus is
in pain; therefore it is necessary (as it is certain) that a day should come,
wherein the Lord may make known his righteousness, and magnify his justice
before his most glorious throne; that they who have lived merrily and dishonored
God, might live in torments of fire; and they whose life has been miserable,
serving the Lord, might be comforted for ever. Some have off^nded deeply, and
have not been touched by the Magistrate: some have suffered great rebuke, and
sometimes death, who have done good, and deserved not only favor, but
recompense, and therefore a day must come, and is appointed, wherein the Lord
that is just, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.7.8.
will recompense tribulation to all that have troubled the righteous, and rest
to them that were troubled. On the otherside, would it not be hard for the
godly, who have here endured the cross, for the joy that was set before them,
if there should not come a time of refreshing from God. And would it not too
much obdurate the wicked (who drink iniquity as water) if they should escape
all punishments and vengeance here, and also after death?

Fifthly, this is shadowed out in that Householder, Mat. 20.8.10. Matthew. 25.19.
who when evening was come, called the laborers, and gave every man his hire,
and penny.

And if a wise master will reckon with his servants, shall we think that
Wisdom it self will not one day reckon with impeniten sinners, and call them
before him for his money, that is, precious graces of wit, learning, authority,
wealth, and other outward and inward ornaments of life, which they have
consumed on their lusts.

Sixthly, every man's conscience does by a trembling fear (as in Felix) at one
time or another, Acts 24.26.
justify this point of a judgment to come. And therefore as the Flood of
waters once drowned the world, Genesis 7.1.7.
except a few who were sau^d in the Arc: so it is certain that the flood and
tempest of the last day with fire shall consume it, and all therein, 2. Pet. 2.5.
except such as Christ has, or then will gather into the little Arc of his
Church. In the evening of the world, and when there shall be no more time, he
will call the laborers before him, giving them the penny or pay of everlasting
life; but for the idle and loyterers, he will put them out of the vineyard,
Matthew. 7.23.
and out of Christ, and send them with sinners to the place prepared for them:
as they have lived without the Church, or idle in it, so when the laborers
receive their penny, they shall hear this sentence, Depart from me ye that
work iniquity I know you not.

Thus it is proved not only to be certain, but necessary that there should
be a judgment, which we are to understand, know, and wisely provide for.

But some will say, seeing men come to their account at their death, what
needs any other day of audit or hearing; to whom I answer, That men at their
death receive but private judgment, but here they shall receive public
sentence, then they are judged in their souls only, here they shall be in
soul and body. This first is but a close sessions, the other is an open and
solemn assise. In the first, much of their shame is hid, here they shall be
ashamed to the full and utterly confounded. If our own laws do not condemn
and execute malefactors in prison, but in open place and manner for their
greater shame; it is great reason that wicked sinners should not privately in
the graves, as in prison, be judged, and led to execution, but be brought to
the public skaffold and bar of solemn sessions, there to receive their
shame and sentence together, and not to be executed by a close death in the
jail, but be brought forth to suffer upon the high stage of the world, in the
sight of Saints and Angels, where all eyes may see and behold them.

And that this day cannot be far off, it may appear, both according to the
prophecies of holy Fathers* as also the truth of the Scriptures. Augustine in
his book on Genesis, says against the Maniches, That the world should last
six ages, The first from Aadam to Noah, the second from Noah to Abraham, the
third from Abraham to David, the fourth from David to the Transmigration to
Babylon; the fifth from the Transmigration to the coming of our Savior Christ
in the flesh; and the sixth from the coming of our Savior in the flesh, to his
coming again to Judgment. So that according to this Prophecy we live in the
last age; 1. John 2.18.
which last age is called by Saint John, the last hour. And how long this last
hour shall continue, Reave. 1.11.
he only that is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, knows.

The Hebrews, they boast of the Prophecy of Eliah, a great man in those
days; who prophesied that the world should last six thousand years, two
thousand before the Law, two thousand under the Law, two thousand from Christ's
coming in the flesh, to his coming again unto Judgment If this Prophecy
be true, then cannot the world last four hundred years. But leaving men, and
coming to the Scriptures, which cannot err.

Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 10.11.
That we are they upon whom the ends of the world are come; If therefore the
end of the world were come upon them that lived above one thousand and five
hundred years ago, then surely Doomes day cannot now be far off.

Saint James says Iam. 5.9.
Behold the Judge stands before the door.

Saint John Baptist preached repentance to the Jews, saying, Matthew. 3.2.
Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 4.7.
The end of all things is at hand. Though no man can show the fingers of this
hand.

The Apostle Saint Jude says Jude 1.14.15.
And Enoch, the seventh also from Adam prophesied of these saying, Behold the
Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all,
and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds,
which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him. The tense or time that the Apostle
speake^h in notes the certainty, or (as I may say) the presentnesse of the
Judges coming, where he uses the time present for future, ( he comes, for,
he will come). And this is to teach us, that a Judgment will and must most
certainly be, ere long. So it is said, Reu. 6.17.
That the great day of the Lords wrath is come, not will come as if tha^ had
bin come a thousand and five hunddred years ago, that is not come yet.

The like speech we have in the Prophecy of Esaias, Isa. 13.9.
Behold the day comes, when it was further off.

In the time of the Prophet Zephany it is said, Zeph. 1.14.
The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hastes greatly, even the
voice of the day of the Lord.

And Malachy, the last of the Prophets, speaks as Enoch, Malac. 4.1.
For behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea
and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall
burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts.

Revel. 3.11.20.
The Son of God says, Behold I come quickly, nay (he says) behold I stand
at the door, as if he were come already. And indeed, as the day will most
surely come, so it cannot be long in coming, as may appear by the signs and
tokens which should immediately go before this day. Of which many, yea almost
all are already fulfilled. And although some flatter themselves with an
imagination of a longer day, the^ God has set unto them, or perhaps unto the
world, for the last hour thereof. (Who are such as the Apostle Saint Peter
speaks of, 2. Pet. 3.3.4.
That there shall come in the last days, scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, and saying where is the promise of his coming, for since the Fathers
fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
Creation.) But let such know, that though the day of Judgment were far off,
yet the day and hour of every man's particular judgment in death cannot be
far off: it being a common and true saying, 2. Pet. 3.10.
To day a man, to morrow none. And unto such then Death does specially come,
when they do least think of it* even as a thief in the night.

Revel. 3.3.
The Son of God also says, Behold I will come on thee as a thief, and thou
shall not know what hour I will come upon thee. And thieves have this
property, to break open houses when men sleep soundly suspecting nothing.

Amos 8.9.
The Prophet Amos says, It shall come to pass in that day (says the Lord)
that I will cause the Sun to go down at noone, and I will darken the earth in
the clear day. That is to say, when men think it to be the high noone of
their age, when they think they have many years yet to live, and when they
shall say Peace and safety, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with
child, and they shall not escape.

Matthew. 24.48.49.50.51.
And hereupon also our Savior Christ says, But if that evil servant shall
say in his heart my Lord delayeth his coming and shall begin to smite his
fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; the Lord of that
servant shall come in a day, when he looks not for him, and in an hour that
he his not aware off, and shall cut him in sunder, and appoint him his portion
with the hypocrites, There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

And for the day of the general death of this languishing world, he that
wisely considers the wayings and declinings that have been found in it
within these few years, and how like a woman with child (which has many pangs
and fits before the throws of her great labor come) it is now in pain, till
it be delivered, having much complained in those signs and alterations which
have gone before, I say, that he that well observes to the true purpose of
his salvation, these and such like throws, or rather downe-throwes of things
in the womb of this old and sickly world, so near unto the time of her
travel, and appointed end by fire, cannot but say, that it cannot continue
longer, and that the Lord will come amongst us very shortly.

When we see a man in whose face wearing age has made many wrincles, and deep
furrows, we say this man cannot live long; so when we see the furrows of old
age to appear and be manifest in so many wastes and consumptions, as this
feeble world is entered into, why do we not see and conclude that the Death of
it is near.

More particularly and specially, as there is no greater sign that a man is
drawing toward death, then when he always is catching at the sheets and
blanckets, and ever pulling at somewhat; so seeing that every one catches and
pulls all that he can in this griple and covetous age, and that there is so
insatiable a mind of having, now in all conditions and callings of people, it
is a sure sign to the heart of a wise man, that this world is sick even to
death; so as it cannot hold out long. And if there be no greater sign of Death
then that the body is so cold, that no heat will come unto it; Mat. 24.12. Luke
18.8.
surely the cold charity of the world, men's want of zeal in religion, our
nullitie of faith, or poor growth therein) in so much as good sermons are
seldom heard, and with small amendment) these things cannot but testify,
that the world it self can be of no long life. And if it be so should it not
much concern us presently without delay to turn unto God, to repent, and
believe the Gospel, to enter into, and keep the way of truth and virtue, and
to prepare our selves for our end. Which sort of people are rare birds in our
days.

The reasons why God would not have us to know either the general or
particular day of judgment are principally these.

First to prove and try our faith, patience, love preparation for Death, and
other virtues, to see whether we will be constant in them, till the very day
it self shall come. He that indureth (says Christ) Math. 24.13.
to the end shall be saved.

Secondly as it is the glory of a King to know something that no man else can
know, so it is a part of Gods glory to hide fron men and Angels the particular
hours of man's death, and this worlds doom, which he has closed up with the
seal of secrecy, and put in his own power. In which respect the wise man
says Pro. 25.1.
it is the glory of God to conceal a thing. Therefore this is hidden from us to
bridle our curiosity and peevish inquisition after such high and hidden
matters above our reach and capacity. For it is not in the fadom of man's head
to tell, or heart to know how near or far off the day is; only God knows,
and Christ as God in what year, month, day and moment this frame shall go
down. In an age long since the day was near; now the hour is near; but
curiosity is to be avoided in a co^cealed matter, and in this forbidden tree
of knowledge. For secret things (says Moses) Deuteronomy. 29.29.
belong unto the Lord our God.

Many men beat their heads about frivolous matters, some (says Chrysostom)
being more busy to know where hell is, then to avoid the pains of it, others
pleasing themselves in pelting and needless questions (as this is) to seem
singular amongst men, neglecting in the mean time this duty of their
preparation for their end, and such necessary things. But when they come to
their departing they shall find that they have beaten their brains about
fruitless matters, and wearied themselves in vain. It is sufficient for us
therefore to know that such a day will come, and it shall be wisdom in us
always to be ready for it, that it come not upon us as the snare upon the
bird unlooked for. Therefore our Savior Christ says, Luke 12.34.35.
take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be ouercharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you
unawares; for as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of
the earth.

Thirdly if we knew the day, hour, or certain time of our death, we would
put off all ti^l the coming of that day and it would give us too great boldness
and encouragement to wallow in all manner of sin till that time or hour came.

The whorish woman because she knew the just time when her husband would
return, who went into a far Country, did the more liberally power out her
soul to sin and wantonness. Pro. 7.19.20.
For the good man (says she) is not at home, he is gone along journey, he
has taken a bag of money with him, and will come home at the day appointed.

Fourthly and lastly. It is therefore unknown to us when we shall dye, to the
end that all the days of our appointed time, we may wait for this day, and
all our time look for this last time, and prepare our selves for it. Argus (as
is fained) had his head environed with an hundred watching eyes, signifiing
thus much unto us, that he was every way endued with great wisdom,
providence, and singular discretion. Therefore if a pagan and Heathen man so
excelled in wisdom and providence, how much rather ought a Christian man to
be well furnished with wisdom and circumspection for his latter end. Be thou
therefore an other Argus, nay more wary then he, more wise and provident then
he, more watchful and circumspect then he that thou may learn to know, to
understand, and finally to provide for thy last end.

Gregory upon the watches mentioned by our Savior Christ in the Gospel of
Mark in these words; Mark. 13.35.36.37.
Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the house comes, at
even, or at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in the morning, lest coming
suddenly he find you sleeping; and what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch;
he says that there be four watches in a man's whole life, wherein it behooves
him to be vigilant and careful, and as a wakefull and wary watchman, to keep
his watch, and so prepare himself for his end.

The first is childhood, the second youth, the third manhood, the fourth old
age. In all which ages he must prepare himself for death; but he which
remiss^ly passes over his childhood without this preparation and
watchfulness, let him be more careful of his watch in his youth, and pray as
it is in Jeremy, Ier. 3.4.
My father, be thou the guide of my youth. If he has passed his youth
dissolutely, let him be more careful of his watch in his manhood. And if he
has passed over his manhood carelessely, let him in any case look to his last
watch of his old age. Nay, if we prepare not for death before we come to this
last watch of old age (to which very few do attain) it is so frail, weak
and feeble, and decayed by the custom of sin, that it is an age not so fit
for this preparation and watchfulness. For at such an age men for the most
part are like to the Idols of the Heathen, Psalm. 115.4.5.6.7.
which have mouths, but speak not, eyes, but see not, ears, but hear not,
etc.

Therefore put not off this preparation and watchfulness to thy old age, which
is thy dotage, but be thou watchful and prepared in thy childhood* youth,
manhood.

Eccl. 12.1.
Remember now thy Creator (says the Preacher) in the days of thy youth, while
the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say I have
no pleasure in them. Wherefore not without cause our Savior Christ cries so
often in the Gospel. Matthew. 24.42. Mar. 13.32.33.
Take ye heed, watch and pray, because ye know not the day nor the hour, nor
when the time is, the which is as much as if he had more plainly said, because
ye know not that year, watch every year; because ye know not that month,
watch every month; because ye know not that day, watch every day; and because
ye know not that hour, watch every hour. That is to say, watch continually,
years, months, days, hours, yea all your life, if you have a care of
everlasting life. And let your loins (says our Savior Christ) be girded
about, and your lights burning, Luke 12 35.36.37.38.
and ye your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will
return from the wedding; that when he comes and knocks, they may open to
him immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord when he comes,
shall find watching. Verily I say unto you, that he shall girde himself, and
make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. And if he
shall come in the second watch, or in the third, and find them so, blessed are
those servants. Prou. 19.20.
Therefore hear my counsel and receive instruction, that thou may be wise
in thy latter end.

The end of the third Division.
THE FOVRTH DIVISION, OF THE RIGHT BEHAVIOVR IN DEATH.
THis behavior is nothing else, but a religious and holy behavior, especially
toward God, when we are in or near the agony and pangs of death. Which
behavior contains four especial duties.

The first is to die in, or by faith. And to die by faith, is, when a man in
the time of death, does with all his heart wholly rely himself on Gods
especial love, favor and mercy in Christ, as it is revealed in his holy
word. And though there be no part of man's life void of just occasions, whereby
he may put faith in practice, yet the special time of all is in the pangs of
death, when friends, riches, pleasures, the outward senses, temporal life, and
all earthly helps forsake us. But put thy trust, confidence, and faith in God,
which neither fades nor vanishes, Psalm. 118.8.9.
but abides and continues for ever. Psalm. 146.3.4.
For if thou be in amity with God, the night will be short, and thy sleep
sweet, thy grave will be to thee as a bed of down, there to rest till the day
of resurrection; thy prayers at that time will smell as perfume, and thy praises
sound in thy soul, as the harmony of the heavens, where thou shall reign for
ever and ever. And then true faith will make us to go wholly out of our
selves, and to despair of comfort and salvation in respect of any earthly
thing, and to rest and rely wholly with all the power and strength of our heart
upon the pure love and mercies of Jesus Christ.

When the Israelites in the wilderness were stung with fiery Serpents, and lay
at the point of death, they looked up to the brazen Serpent, Number. 21.8.9.
which was erected for that purpose by Gods own appointment, and then were
presently healed; even so, when any man feels death to approach and draw near
with a fiery sting to pierce his heart, he must then presently fix the eyes
of a true and lively faith upon Christ his Savior exalted, lifted up, John
3.14.15.
and crucified upon the Cross: which being done, he shall by death enter into
eternal life. It is recorded by the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.13.
that the holy Fathers of the old Testament died in faith, and so entered into
glory. And if we will look to be glorified with them, then must we follow
their steps in dying in the same faith with them. And because true faith is no
dead thing, it must be expressed by special actions, as namely, by the last
words, which for the most part in them that have sincerely and truly served
God, are very excellent and comfortable, and full of grace; some choice
examples whereof I will rehearse for instructions sake, and for imitation, viz.

The Last words of Jacob, Genesis 49.18.
O Lord I have waited for thy salvation.

The last words of Moses his most excellent song set down in Deuteronomy.
Deuteronomy. 32.


The last words of David, 2. Sam. 23.1.2.
The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue.

The last words of Zacharias the son of Iehoiada the Priest, when he was stoned
to death by King Ioash, 2. Chro. 24.22.
The Lord look upon it, and require it.

The last words of the converted Thief upon the Cross, Luke 23.40.41.44.
first rebuking his fellow for railing on Christ, then confessing his and his
fellows guiltiness; thirdly, his justification of Christ, that he had done
nothing amiss: and lastly, his sweet prayer, Lord remember me, when thou
come into thy Kingdom.

The last words of our Savior Christ himself, Luke 23.34.43.
when he was dying upon the Cross, are most admirable, and stored with
abundance of spiritual graces. First to his Father, concerning his enemies,
he says, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Secondly, to
the Thief upon the Cross with him, John 19.26.
I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Mat. 27.46.
Thirdly, to his Mother, Woman behold thy Son, and to John his beloved
Disciple, Behold thy Mother. John 19.28.30.
Fourthly, in his agony he said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Luke 23.46.
Fifthly, he earnestly desiring our salvation, said, I thirst. Sixthly, when he
had made perfect satisfaction for us, he said, It is finished. And seventhly,
when his body and soul were parting, he said, Father into thy hands I
commend my spirit, and having thus said, he gave up the ghost.

Act. 7.56.59.60.
The last words of the Martyr Saint Stephen at his stoning. First, Behold I see
the heavens open, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.
Secondly, as they were stoning of him, he called upon God, and said, Lord
Jesus receive my spirit. And thirdly, he kneeled down, and cried with a loud
voice, saying, Lord lay not this sin to their charge, and when he had said
this he fell a sleep.

By these and such like examples we see what a blessed thing it is to learn
to die well, which is to die in faith, at which end true wisdom wholly aymeth;
and he has not spent his life ill, that has thus learned to die well. For the
conclusion of our life is the touchstone of all the actions of our life, which
made Luther both to think and say, that men were best Christians in death, and
Epamynandas, one of the wise men of Greece, being asked, whom of the three he
esteemed most, viz. himself, Chabrius, or Ephicrates, answered, We must first
see all die before we can answer that question; for the act of dying well is
the science of all sciences, the way whereunto, is, to live well, contentedly,
and peaceably.

But what must we think, if in the time of Death such excellent speeches be
wanting in some of Gods children, and in stead thereof idle talk be used?
Answ. We must consider the kind of sickness whereof men dye, whether it be more
easy or violent; for violent sickness is usually accompanied with frenzies or
unseemly motions, or gestures; which we are to take in good part in this
regard, because we our selves may be in the like case, and we must not judge of
the estate of any man before God, by his behavior in death or in a troubled
soul; for there are many things in Death, which are the effects of the sharp
disease he dies of, and no impeachment of the faith he dies in; and these may
deprive his tongue of he of reason, but cannot deprive his soul of eternal
life.

One dies (says holy Job) in his full strength, being whole, Job.
21.23.24.25.26.
at ease and quiet, his breasts are full of milk, and his bones are full of
marrow; another dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with
pleasure, they shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover
them. Wherefore in this case we must judge none by the eye, nor by their
deaths, but by their lives.

The second duty is to die in obedience, otherwise our death cannot be
acceptable to God, because else we seem to come unto God upon fear and
constraint as slaves to their Master, and not of love, as children to their
father. And thus to dye in obedience, is when a man is ready and willing to go
out of this world without murmuring, grudging and repining, when it shall
please God to call him. Death is the fear of rich men, the desire of poor
men, but surely the end of all men; to this step man comes as slowly as he
can, trembling at this passage, and laboring to settle himself here; the sole
memory of Death, mournful funerals, and the reading of inscriptions engraven
on sepulchers do make the the very hair to stare and stand on end, and strike
many with an horror and apprehension of it; which is a reproof to those, who
can see nothing in their own deaths, but what is dreadful beyond measure, and
simply the end of man. Such conceive Death not as it is to the righteous, and
as Christ has made him to be by his glorious death, but as fools judge of
him, who behold him through false spectacles as he is in his own uncorrected
nature considered out of Christ, Amos 6.3.
that is, most ugly, terrible, and hideous; so did they behold him in Amos, who
put the evil day of his coming, (that which they call evil, and the godly
long for, and judge happy) as far from them as they could by carnal
delicacie and wantonness. So did Baltashar look upon him, Dan. 5.5.6.30.
whose heart would not serve him to read the hand writing of his own end so
near. 1 Samuel 25.37.38.
And Nabal who had no heart to die, when he must needs dye, dyed like a stone,
that is, dyed blockishly, and so faintly that he was as good as slain before
Death slew him. He had no comfort in Death, being churlish and profane, and no
marvel, for this adversary Death armed as Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.10.11.
and vaunting as that proud Giant of Gath comes stalking toward such in
fearful manner, insulting over weak dust, and daring the world to give him a
man to fight withal. Therefore at the sight of him the whole host of
worldlings bewray great fear, turning their faces, and flying back, as men
ready to sink into the earth, with abated courages, and dejected
countenances, stained with the colors of fear and Death, trembling like
leaves in a storm, and stricken with the palsy of a sudden and violent
shaking through all the body. But the true child of God, armed as David, with
trust in God, and expectation of victory by the Death of Christ, (who by Death
overcame Death, as David cut off the head of Goliath with his own sword) dares,
and does boldly, and obediently encounter with this huge Philistime Death
(supposed invincible and seeming great) but neither with sword nor spear, but
in the name of the God of the host of Israel, by whose might only he wounds
and strikes him to the earth, trampling upon him with his feet, and rejoicing
in the return of his soul to the place from whence it first came, he sings
this joyful and triumphant song of victory. O Death where is thy sting etc. 1
Cor. 15.55.
he has the eyes of Stephen to look up into heaven, and therefore in
obedience and a willing mind he dies.

But a wicked man dying may say to Death as Ahab said to Eliah, have thou found
me, O mine enemy: 1 King. 21.20.
but when it is told the child of God that Death is come within his doors* and
begins to look him in the face, he to show his courage and obedience, may say
as David says of Ahymaaz, 2 Samuel 18.27.
let him come and welcome, for he is my friend and a good man, and he comes
with good tidings; so he, Death is my friend, let him come, he is a good man
and brings good tidings. As for the wicked they do with Felix, tremble, Acts
24.26.
if they do but hear of death and of judgment, and are like unto Saul having
no strength in them, but fall into a sound when they hear of death, and if
they could but see it, they would cast a jauelin as Saul at David, 1 Samuel 18.11.
to slay it.

But the children of God do willingly welcome Death, as Gods servant and
messenger, and applaud it as Jacob applauded the Chariots that Joseph his son
sent for the bringing of him out of a Country of misery into a land of plenty,
Genesis 45.27.48
where he should have food enough, the best in the land. So the hope and
expectation of the Saints is that they shall see God, and come to Christ by
Death presently in their souls, and in their bodies at the last day. So they
may say of Death as Adoniah said unto Jonathan the son of Abiathar the Priest
come in, for thou art a valiant man, 1 Kings 1.42.
and bring good tidings.

Cruel and unmerciful Death makes a league with no man, Esaias 28.15.
and yet the Prophet Esaias says that the wicked man does make a league with
death: how may this be? There is no league made indeed, but only in the
wicked imagination of man, who falsely thinks that Death will not come near
him, though all the world should be destroyed. And therefore the separation of
the soul from the body will be bitter to the wicked, which cannot be
separated without great grief, woe, and lamentation. As the Ox does commonly
low and mourn, when his yoke fellow wont to draw with him, is taken away, so
the wicked then mourn, when the soul shall be separated from the body; then
will the soul and the body with tears repeat again and again, do thou
thus separate us bitter Death? O Death etc. Then griefs follow griefs, and
sorrow comes upon sorrow, and then what a wound does the heart of the wicked
receive which loves this present life? When the Physician says unto him, thou
must from henceforth think no more on life but of Death; at the hearing of
which heavy news, the body shall dye once whether he will or no, but the
heart shall dye so often, as the things and sins be in number which he loved.
Then shall the most clear light be turned into darkness, because those
things which aforetime were occasions of great joy, shall now become most
horrible vexations and torment, which will make the wicked set their throats
upon tainter hooks, and lift up their voices like trumpets, and cry out at
that time upon Death, as the devils did upon Christ in the Gospel, saying what
have we to do with thee O cruel Death, Mat. 8.29. Job 2.4.
art thou come hither to torment us before the time? And therefore well said
the devil pellem pro pelle, skin for skin, and all that ever a man has will
he give for his life, so that he may enjoy that, although but for a moment
longer. As Pharaoh said to Moses depart from among my people, so say the
ungodly to death be banished from us, thy presence, thy shadow and the very
remembrance of thee is fearful to us, to hear Saint Paul speak of Gods
terrible judgment to come is too trembling a doctrine for their delightful
dispositions, to hear with Felix they are not at leisure, for this is iarring
music which sounds not arright in the consort of their worldly pleasures, to
think of death is Aceldama (says one) even a field of blood: but if any
Physician would take upon him to make men live ever in this world what a
multitude of patients should he have? And how well would they reward him?

But the children of God rejoice at the news of Death, to show their obedience
to it, and their joy is according to the joy of harvest (as the Prophet
speaks) and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. Isa. 9.3.
And they may say of Death when it comes, as the people triumphantly sometime
spoke of the day of King David's coronation, Psalm. 118.24.
This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.
And they may call Death, as Jacob did the place where he came, Mahanaim,
because there the Angels of God met him, when he was to meet with his cruel
brother Esau, Genesis 32.1.2.
even so when the children of God are to meet with cruel Death, the Lord will
send his holy Angels, Hebr. 1.14.
(who are all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be
heirs of salvation) to carry them into Abraham's bosom.

Tell one of our gallants in his sickness, that Death is come for him, 2.
King. 9.20.
and that his driving is like the driving of Iehu, coming furiously toward
him, he has the Athenian question presently ready, What will this babbler say?
Acts 17.18.
But this news coming to the child of God in his sickness, he may be
talked withal; for he has learned with Samuel to say, Speak Lord, for thy
servant hears: 1. Sam. 3.10.18
and to say with Ely, It is the Lord, let him do as seems good to him: and
with David to say, Here am I, let him do to me, 2. Sam. 15.26.
as seems good to him.

Now the reason of this great difference betwixt the wicked and the godly, why
they are thus diversely affected unto Death, is this; the wicked enjoy their
haue-best in this life, but the godly look for their good, and are walking
toward it. And if it should be demanded when a wicked man is at his best: the
answer is, the best is evil enough, and that his best is, when he comes first
into the world; for then his sins are fewest, his judgments easiest; they go
astray as soon as they are borne, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 58.3.
It had been good for him therefore, that the knees had not prevented him, but
that he had died in the birth; Nay, it had been good for him, Job 3.11.12.
(as our Savior Christ said of Judas which betrayed him) if he had never been
borne. Mat. 26.24.
For as a River which is smallest at the beginning, increases as it proceeds
by the accession of other waters into it, till at length it be swallowed up in
the deep. So the wicked, the longer he lives, he waxes ever worse and worse,
2. Tim. 3.13.
deceiving, and being deceived (says the Apostle) proceeding from evil to
worse (says Jeremy) till at length he be swallowed up in that lake that
burns with fire and brimstone. Ierem. 9.3. Revel. 19.20.
And this the Apostle expresses most significantly, when he compares the
wicked men to one gathering treasure, wherein he heaps and treasureth up wrath
to himself against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous
judgment of God. For even as the worldling, who every day casts in a piece
of money into his treasure, in few years multiplies such a sum, the
particulers whereof he himself is not able to keep in mind, but when he
breaks up his chest, then he finds it in sundry sorts of coin, whereof he had
no remembrance. Even so, and worse it is with thee, O impenitent sinner, who
not only every day, but every hour and minute of time multiplyest thy
transgressions, and defilest thy conscience, hoording up one evil work upon
another. To what a reckoning (think thou) shall thy sins amount in the end?
though thou forgettest them, as thou do commit them; Romans 2.5.
yet the Apostle tells thee that thou have laid them up in a treasury, and
not only so, but that with every sin, thou have gathered a portion of wrath
proportionable to thy sin, which thou shall perfectly know in that day, Psalm.
50.21.
wherein the Lord shall break up thy treasure, and open the book of thy
conscience, and set thy sins in order before thee.

But if you will ask when the children of God are at their best, I answer,
praised be God, our worst is away, our good is begun, John 7.6.
our best is at hand. As our Savior said to his kinsmen, so may we say to the
worldlings, Your time is always, but my time is not yet come: the children of
God are not at their best now, it is in the working, only we were at our
worst before our conversion; For our whole life till then was a walking with
the children of disobedience, in the broad way that leads to damnation; and
then were we at the worst when we had proceeded furthest in the way of
unrighteousness, because then we were furthest from God. Our best, began in
the day of our recalling, wherein the Lord by his word and holy Spirit called
upon us, and made us turn our backs upon Satan, and our face toward the Lord,
and caused us to part company with the children of disobedience, amongst whom
we had our conversation before; then we came home with the penitent forlorn,
to our Fathers family, but they went forward in their sins to judgment. That
was a day of division betwixt us and our sins; in that day with Israel we
entered into the borders of Canaan into Gilgal, and there we were circumcised,
Joshua 5.9.
and the shame of Egypt was taken from us, even our sin, which is our shame
indeed, and which we have borne from our mothers womb. The Lord grant that we
may keep it for ever in thankful remembrance and that we may count it a
double shame to return again to the bondage of Egypt, to serve the Prince of
darkness in brick and clay, that is, to have fellowship any more with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but that like the redeemed of the Lord, Psalm.
84.7.
we may walk from strength to strength, till we appear before the face of
our God in Sion. For here we are not at our best, but our best is to come Now
our life is hid with the Lord, and we know not yet what we shall be; 1. John
3.2.
but we know when he shall appear, we shall be like him, the Lord shall
carry us by his mercy, and bring us in his strength to his holy habitation; he
shall plant us in the mountain of his inheritance, Exodus 15.13.
even the place which he has prepared, Isa. 35.10.
and the Sanctuary which he has established. Then everlasting joy shall be
upon our heads, and sorrow and mourning shall fly away from us for ever.

Therefore for this cause, we must first endeavor that our death be voluntary;
for to die well, is to die willingly. Secondly, we must labor that our sins
die before us. And thirdly, that we be always ready and prepared for it. O
what an excellent thing it is for a man to end his life before his death, that
at the hour of death he has nothing to do, but only to be willing to die,
that he have no need of time, nor of himself, but sweetly and obediently to
depart this life, showing thereby his obedience to the ordinance of God; for we
must make as much conscience in performing our obedience unto God in suffering
death, as we do in the whole course of our lives.

Our Savior Christ is a notable example and pattern for us to follow in this
case. And therefore the Apostle says, Let this mind be in you, Phil.
2.5.6.7.8.
which was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men, and
being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient unto
death, even unto the death of the cross.

And although the wicked be ill affected unto death, (as we have already
heard) and would (if it lay in their power) most villanously entreat and
handle death, 2. Sam. 10.4.
as Hamon the son of Naash King of the Ammonites, did the messengers of King
David; yet let every good man (when Death shall come for him, as it may seem
to him untimely, before the thread of his life be half spunne out) be here
informed to entertain it kindly, Genesis 19.1.
as Lot did the Angels, who came to fetch him out of Sodom. For though he be
pulled from his seat, which was to him, as the plain of Sodom seemed to Lot,
as a pleasant Paradise, yet shall he find with Lot, that he is taken away
from the judgment to come, howsoever he be taken away, either by the malice of
wicked men, or by the mercy of God; and that he is separated from the sins
of this world, which grieved his soul; yea from sinning himself, and from his
own sins, which grieved the Lord his so gracious and kind Father. How can
it be, but that Death should be a welcome guest, and this a choice blessing,
which as a gentle guide leads us to Christ, carries the soul to her beloved
Husband? The resolution of Saint Ambrose was neither to loath life, nor fear
to die, but obediently yield unto Death, because (says he) we have a good Lord
to go unto.

The third duty is to die in repentance, which must be performed by us at
all times, and especially at this time. Tertullian says of himself, that he
is a notorious sinner, and borne for nothing but repentance; and he which is
borne for repentance, must practice repentance as long as he lives in this
sinful world, into which he is borne upon this condition, that he must leave
it again, and repent at his end also.

Repentance is a very sore displeasure, which a man has in his heart for his
sins, even because they are the breach of Gods holy Laws and Commandments,
and an offense to God his most merciful and loving Father, which ingendreth in
him a true hatred against sin, and a settled purpose and holy desire to live
better in time to come, ordering his life and death by the will of God revealed
in his holy word.

Repentance consists of four parts: the first of confession; by which the
Prophet Daniel says, Dan. 9.4.
We acknowledge our own wickedness, and the wickedness of our fathers, for
we have sinned against thee; righteousness therefore belongs unto thee, but
unto us shame and utter confusion. Father (says the prodigal child) I have
sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, Luke 15.21.
and am no more worthy to be called thy son. He that covers his sins
(says the Wiseman) shall not prosper, Prou. 28.13.
but who so confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy. 1. John 1 9.
If we confess our sins (says the Apostle) he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Secondly, Contrition. Psalm. 51.17.
The sacrifices of God (says the Prophet) are a broken spirit; and a contrite
heart, O God, thou will not despise. Isa. 57.15.
For thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name
is holy. I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of an humble
and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the
heart of the contrite ones. For all these things has my hand made, Isa. 66.2.
and all these things have been (says the Lord) but to this man will I look,
even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my words.
So that this contrition is the bruising of a sinners heart (as it were) to dust
and powder, through unfeigned and deep grief conceived of Gods displeasure for
sin; and this is Evangelical contrition, and is a work of grace, the
beginning of renewed repentance. Therefore the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 7.10.
Godly sorrow works repentance unto salvation not to be repented of.

The third is faith. For without faith, neither by repentance, nor by any other
means are we able to please God, neither indeed can there be any true
repentance without faith.

The fourth and last point is amendment. To amend, is to redress and reform
faults; repentance is as the root, amendment the fruit. Matthew. 3.8.
Bring forth therefore fruit (says Saint John) meet for repentance, or
answerable to amendment of life. Repent (says the Apostle Paul) and turn to
God, Acts 26.20.
and do works meet for repentance; so that first there must be a change of the
heart from evil to good, by the gift of repentance put into it of God, and
then will follow amendment of our lives and manners.

There is no part of Christian religion, of that maine importance, wherein men
do more voluntarily deceive themselves, then commonly they do in this duty
of repentance. In respect whereof it will not be amiss, but very material to
deliver, certain infallible signs, and inseperable fruits, whereby we may
assure our selves that we have repented.

The Apostle Saint Paul names seven fruits, which in some measure always
follow, where true amendment goes before. 2. Cor. 7.11.
Behold (says he) your godly sorrows, what care (1) it has wrought in you?
yea what clearing (2) of your selves? yea what indignation (3)? yea what fear
(4)? yea how great desire (5)? yea what zeal (6)? yea what punishment? Those
then who are true conuerts, who do unfeignedly amend their lives they are not
sluggish or secure in sin, but careful to redress what is amiss, not
hiders or excusers of evil, but confessors, and by humble supplication
clearing their offenses; they are not contented to dwell in wickedness, but
vexed in soul, and full of indignation against themselves for their sins
committed; they stand in awe and are afraid of Gods judgments, they desire his
favor as the Heart desires the water-brookes, Psalm. 42.1.
they labor by religious zeal to approve their lives to God and good men, and
they are so far from favoring their faults, as that they severely punish them
upon themselves.

Must then amendment of life yield such worthy works and fruits? Is care,
clearing, indignation, fear, desire, zeal, and punishment required thereunto?
O then to repent can be no light matter, nor trifling labor, which a man may
have at commandment, or perform when he lists; no, no, for much toil and
travel belongs unto it.

Sin cannot be cast off as an upper garment, the hearts of sinners must
suffer an earthquake within them, and tremble, and rend like the veil of the
Temple, Mat. 27.51.
which was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, and like the earth which
did quake, and like the rocks which rent at the yielding up of the host of our
Savior Christ for our sins; so that must torment us at the heart, which
delighteh us in our bodies, that must be sour to our souls, which was sweet
in our lives; we must change our vices into so many virtues, and so turn to
our gracious God, as if never more we would return unto sin. For mourning
is in vain, says Saint Augustine, if we sin again. Great sins, says
Saint Ambrose crave great weeping and lamentation; the Angels in heaven sing at
this lamentation, neither does the earth afford any so sweet music in the
ears of God. And if we will purge our selves from the filthiness of our
sins, we must often rince our selves with tears, we must undergo the
agony of repentance, mingle our drink with weeping, water our couches with
tears, Psalm. 6.6.
yea the very blood (as it were) of our souls must gush out of our eyes. O
that our head (says the Prophet) were waters, Ierem. 9.1.
and our eyes a fountain of tears that we might weep day and night for our
sins. Psalm. 119.136.
O that rivers of waters (says the Psalmist) would run down our eyes, because
we keep not the law of God. We must be grieved because we cannot always be
grieved. Repentance is a baptisime of tears; and the greater that our fall
has bin, the greater must be the terrent of our tears. It is natural to men
that their lamentation be in some sort answerable to their loss. Naamans
body must be seven times washed in water, and our souls seventy times seven
times purified by repentance.

Will examples move us to the performance of this duty? Look upon repenting
David, and behold there are ashes upon his head, and sackcloth upon his back;
he did not brave it in attire, nor lie streaking upon his bed, with a bare
(Lord help me) in his mouth. Look upon the repenting Nineuites, Luke 7.37.
and behold King and people are strangely humbled; men and beasts fast and
drink water; they sat not belching at their bordes, saying pardon Sir, and so
post it over. Look upon repenting Magdalen, and behold (says Gregory) so many
pleasures as she found in her self she had abused, so many sacrifices she
made of her self, she had abused her eyes to wanton looks, and therefore now
she caused them to ouer-flow with tears, she had made her lips the weapons of
lasciviousness, and gates of vanity, and therefore now she caused them to
kiss her Saviors feet, her hair once set out and frizled after the newest
fashion, does she now make serve in stead of a napkin, her precious ointment
that was her wonted perfume, she now powered upon Christ's feet, which her eyes
had watered, her hair wiped, her mouth had kissed, so many sins, so many
sacrifices, such sins such sacrifices, notable examples to teach all their
duties. Have you delighted in pride of attire? Put on sackc-loth; have you
offended in surfeting and drunkenness? Fast and drink water. Has your mirth
bin immoderate? Weep and strangle that sin with the stream of tears. Have
you robbed, oppressed, and wronged your brethren? Make restitution with
Zacheus. No restitution, no atonement. Nay further, Luke 19.8.
revenge that sin upon your selves, by giving somewhat of your own. Have you
been unclean and fleshly livers? Chastise your bodies with Paul, and keep it
under, and br^g it in subjection by all means possible; 1. Cor. 9.27.
avoid uncleanness, which commonly drives two at once to the Devil together.
Psalm. 38.8.
Roar with David for very grief of heart and not for one sin alone, but for
all. Christ cast not six diuils only, Luke 8.2.30.
out of the woman, but the seventh also, he left not one of a whole legion. We
are not freed till we be freed from all. We must not slay Amaleck only, which
is a master-sin, 1. Sam. 15.3.
but likewise all his cattle even all our beloved sins, and say unto the
devil as Moses said unto Pharaoh, 2. King. 5.18. Exo. 10.26.
we will not leave a hoof behind, which may cause desire of returning into
Egypt. It is not sufficient to pluck out the arrow, but we must apply a
plaster to the wound. We must leave off the rotten rags of Adam, and be
wholly renewed and turn unto our God with a settled purpose ever whilst we live,
more and more to amend our lives.

Have thou failed in thy faith, and repented? Luke. 22.61:
Behold Gods mercy to repenting Peter.

Have thou robbed thy neighbor and repented? Luke 23.40.
Behold Gods mercy to the repenting thief.

Have thou couetously gained and repented? Luke 19.8.
Behold Gods mercy to repenting Zacheus.

Have thou burned in unclean lust, and repented? Luke 7.37.
Behold Gods mercy to repenting Magdalen.

Have thou committed adultery, and repented? 2. Sam. 12.13. Psalm. 136.2.
Behold Gods mercy to repenting David.

Unto the repenting person he gives a soft heart, for his mercy endures for
ever. He sends the comfort of his holy spirit, for his mercy endures for
ever. He gi^h peace of conscience, for his mercy endures. And bestows on
them the joys of Heaven, for his mercy endures for ever.

We must repent instantly and continually without any delay. God will not permit
us to give the prime days to the devil, the dog-dayes to him, to pour out
our wine to the world, and to serve him with the dregs. We may not repent by
quauers and starts, but go through stitch. We must follow repentance as the
widow in the Gospel did her suite, Luke 18.40.
and keep our hold as Jacob did in wrestling. Genesis 32.26.
Amend to day, amend to morrow, run on, not for a time, but even our whole
time with a continued act; immoderately at the first time, constantly in the
midst, and cheerfully to the end. All the trees in Gods orchard must be
Palms, and Cedars; Palms, which bring forth fruit betimes, and Cedars, whose
fruit lasts very long.

And let us consider well the manifold dangers which follow the want either of
speed, or continuance in repentance. First our lives of all things are most
uncertain, as we have at large observed in the first division.

Matthew. 25.6.
The foolish Virgins supposed the Bridegroom would not come like a bat in the
night; there is time enough (said they) to repent, what needs all this have?
But poor fools they were excluded. Many thousands are now (no doubt) in hell,
who purposed in time to have repented; but being prevented by death, are fallen
into the burning lake there to be tormented for ever. Therefore let us esteem
it as an imminent danger to live in that estate, wherein we would be loath that
death might find us.

Secondly bad customs are dangerous, and greatly to be feared. He that from
his youth has wickedlie in his old age shall have sin in his bones, Job
20.11.
his bones (says Job) are full of the sins of his youth, which shall ly
down with him in the dust. Sins are not like diseases in the body, the older
the sorer, but (says Saint Augustine) the older the sweeter, and yet the more
toothsome the more troublesome. The Disciples of Christ could not cast out a
foul spirit that had remained in one from his childehood; Mark. 9.18.21.
he that has had long possession will plead prescription; a custom long
retained is not quickly changed; and therefore it is very dangerous not to
repent before we can sin no more.

Thirdly, we must remember that the longer we continue in sin without
repentance, the further we run from God. And there is no great likelihood
that he that has been running from God forty, fifty, or perhaps three or
four score years together, and with the Prodigal runs into a far
Country, can return again in the space of six days, six hours, six
minutes; for it may be his sickness (unto which time he deferreth his
repentance) will not be so long as the shortest of these times, how then is it
possible to turn in time to our God by repentance? Neither is this a work of
one day or two, as it is said in the book of Ezra in another case. Solomon
gives a young man counsel to remember his Creator in the days of his youth,
Ezra. 10.13.
early to begin repentance, that is, in the prime and bud of his life, Eccle.
12.1.
while he is fresh and gallant, and not to tarry till the dead winter of age
cause his buds to fade, and leaf to fall, or till the brawne of his strong
arms fall away, or till the keepers of the house (the hands which defend the
body) tremble, or til every thing be a burden, feeing even then the
grasse-hopper shall be a burden; or till they wax dark (the eyes) that look
out at the windows, or till the grinders cease, that is, his teeth fall out of
his head, or till the doors of his lips be shut, and jaws fallen, or till
the daughters of singing (the ears) be abased, being not able any longer to
hear the voice or sound of Instruments, or till it be too late to knock,
Eccle. 12.3.4.
when the Lords door is made fast, Mat. 25.10.12.
and there shall be no more opening.

And lest this young man should think the term of his age (which Solomon calls
the evil day or time) to be the most convenient time and term of beginning
repentance, in the verses following he brings the old man, deaf, blind, lame,
short-winded, full of aches and diseases in his body, trembling upon his
staff, his lips and hands shaking, without memory, and almost robbed of his
senses; as if he should say: look my son, is this man fit to learn or
repent, who cannot hear, speak, see, go, nor remember? Thus Solomon
schooleth his young man.

Exodus 2.22.29.
Further God requiring the first borne for his offering, and the first fruits
for his service, does (no doubt) require the prime and maidenhead of every
man's work, Leuit. 23.10.
and that we should repent betimes, and serve him with our first and best
means.

It is for young men to believe. And therefore the ordinary Creed (which is
both for young and old) says, I do believe. In the Leuiticall temple, there
was a morning offering as well as an evening sacrifice. And when the Angel of
the covenant stirs the poole, that is, offers salvation, not he that is
oldest, John 5.2.
but he that steps in first (young or old) is healed.

Ephesians. 5.16. Colos. 4.5.
Some, say that youth must have a time, but Christians must redeem the whole
both of youth and years. For here God will not be satisfied with the first
fruits, as in the legal Priesthood, but must have the whole crop of time
offered to him in his service, and performance of his commandments. Elisha
could say to his servant is this a time to take rewards? And amidst the pangs
of death, is that a time to think of amendment of life?

Again let us remember that in time of sickness we think most upon that
which we most feel. Death does besiege us, sin affrighteth us, our wives
grieve us, our children withdraw us; being many ways distracted, how shall we
then repent and amend? Being then at the weakest; how can we resist Satan, who
is then at the strongest? Our repentance then will be late repentance, and late
repentance is never or very seldom true repentance; according to this saying,
sera poenitentia raro est vera, sed vera poenitentia nunquam est sera; late
repentance is seldom true, but true repentance is never too late. Also those
repentance^ that men frame to themselves at the last hour, are but false
conceptions, that come not to bearing; for in such repentance men forsake not
their sins, but their sins forsake them. It will be too late to come to the
kay when the ship is launched, too late to transplant trees, when they be many
years grown, too late to season flesh, when it crawleth with worms, too late
to mend a house when it is on fire; so stands the case with him that has lived
long in sin without repentance.

Such as by their prophannesse, do wilfully refuse the offer of Gods mercy,
and do prefere their pleasures and profits before it, may run so far, that
all the means they can use shall never obtain mercy at the hands of God. I
say as there is a time in the which the Lord will woo us, yea he sends his
Ministers to entreat us, he will chide and expostulate the matter with us, why
we will not accept of his mercy. O Ephraim (says the Lord) what shall I do
unto thee, Hos. 6.4.
O Judah what shall I do unto thee? So there is and will be a time that after
the refusing of grace, and contemning of mercy offered, the Lord will shut up
and bolt the gate of mercy, so as he will not be entreated at our hands any
more. This is proved unto us by the Prophet David in one of his Psalms, Psalm.
95.7.8.
where he exhorts the people that they will take and accept the time the Lord
offers them, lest it come to pass by their contempt, and refusing the time of
grace, the Lord cast them off and reject them.

I deny not, but that in respect of us, till God has manifested his will,
there is hope; but in respect of Gods secret decree, the time of Gods mercy
may be out even during this life; therefore when mercy is offered, we must
take heed we wilfully cotemne it not, lest we provoke the Lord to be gone, and
utterly to reject us.

One of the most fearful signs of a Castaway is to delay and put off the
Lords gracious offer of mercy; as we read of Pharaoh, who when Moses offered
himself to pray to the Lord for him, he put it off till the next morrow; Exodus
8.9.10.
so he that has the mercies and graces of God offered him to day, and puts
them off from his youth to his age, and from his old days till his deathbed,
may justly fear an utter reiection, even then when he hopes for most comfort.

And as it is most certain that after death, tears are fruitless, repentance
unprofitable, as after death no mercy is to be expected, nothing but misery,
nothing but wrath, so is it doubtful and very dangerous, that our sighs,
tears, and groans, are of little force at the very near approach of death,
whether by age, extremity of disease, or otherwise. For at that time when our
powers are distracted or spent, when no part is free either from the sense or
fear of his cruel gripe, we may well be said to be in death, or at leastwise
in such a condition or state that does less participate of life then death.
And therefore at the least it is doubtful that at that time we shall not
remember God, and that our repentance shall come too late.

What a shame is it that the children of this world are wiser in their kind,
then the children of light? A good husband will repair his house while the
weather is fair, and not defer till winter does rise. A careful Pilot will
furnish his ship whiles the Seas are calm, and not stay until tempests do
rage. The traveller will take his time in his journey, and will hasten when he
sees night approach, lest darkness overtake him. The Smith will strike while
the iron is hot, l^st it cool upon him, and so he lose his labor. The
Mariner will not let the tide pass him, for (as the common proverb is) the
time and tide tarry for no man. The Lawyer will take the term, because he
knows that it being ended, his clients will be gone. So we ought to make
every day the day of our term, and a provident man will repent him of his
sins in the seasonable time of health and strength, and not protract till he
be in the very arms and the imbracement of death; when many occasions may cut
from him either his mind or power, or time to repent. For we have just cause
to fear, that if we would not when we might, we shall not be able when we
would, and that by our will to do evil, we may happily lose the power to do
well. Thy very tongue will condemn thee in thy trade: if thou trust a man with
thy wares, thou will require a bill or bond, saying, all men are mortal, and
at less then an hours warning. But let the Preacher exhort thee to accept of
the gracious time of the Lord, and put thee in mind that thy life, as a
vapor, is soon gone, yet thou will not believe him, but so lead thy life in
sin, as if thou had the same in see farm.

And to thee that call thy neighbors, friends and companions to Cards,
Dice, or any such pastime, saying, come let us go pass the time away. Is time
so slow that it must be driven? I tell thee there are at this day many
thousands in hell, who if they had many kingdoms, would gladly give them all,
for one hour of that time, whereof thou have many, not to pass it away or
drive it from them, but in hope to recover that which thou do most
gracelessely contemn.

Alas, who dares trust to the broken reed of extreme sickness or age, bruised
by original, but altogether broken by our actual sins. We have good cause
not to trust to this deferring of time, and late repentance. For if Esau could
not find repentance, albeit he sought it with tears; Heb. 12.17.
how may we with good reason suspect our extreme late seeking for repentance?
Not because true repentance can ever be too late, but because late repentance
is seldom true, (as we have already heard) Et sera raro seria, that which is
late is seldom lively, as proceeding rather from fear, then from love, from
necessity, then from willingness, and desire, rather outwardly pretended,
then with the heart intended.

We all of us in our iolitie, think we may do what we list, and so long as
God forbeares to punish, we will never forbear to sin, but still defer the
time of repentance. But God grant we may remember and lay to our hearts, what
that good Father Saint Augustine says, Nihil est infoelicius, etc. Nothing is
more unfortunate then the felicity of sinners, whereby there penal impiety
is nourished, and their malice strengthened and increased. When God does suffer
sinners to prosper, then his indignation is the greater toward them (says that
Father) and when he leaves them unpunished, then he punishes them most of
all.

For the further pressing of this doctrine on our consciences, let us observe
some places of Scripture. And first let us see what the Lord says to such as
despise wisdoms call; being of three sorts, viz.

The first, that like fools content themselves with ignorance.

The second that scoff at the Lords offer by his servants.

The third which are carried away by their own lusts.

Prou. 1.24.28.
Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and none
would regard, and then they shall call upon me, but I will not answer; they
shall seek me early, but shall not find me. Noting to us, that as they did
refuse the time in which he called, so they should call in hope of mercy, but
find none. Esaias 23.12.13.
The like we read how the Prophet Esaias, calling Jerusalem to repentance in
sackcloth and ashes for their sins; she fell to sporting and feasting,
despising the Lords message, and offer of grace by his Prophet; what came of
it? You may read presently, that their contempt coming to the Lords ears, he
does answer. Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till you die
(says the Lord of Hosts) giving them to understand, that seeing they set so
light by the admonitions of the Prophet, there should be left them no time to
repent in, till he had destroyed them. But of all the places of Scripture for
this purpose, let us see what the Lord says to Jerusalem by his Prophet
Ezechiel. Ezech. 24.13.
Because (says he) I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou
shall not be purged, till I have caused my wrath to light upon thee. Mark this
Place well, which may terrify our hearts, (if we carry not the hearts of
Tigers) in which the Lord testifies not only to them, but to us, then when by
all kind means and loving allurements, he offers his favor, and we
obstinately refuse it, let us be sure, then when we would have mercy and
favor from him, though we beg it, crying and howling, he will deny us. For
there is a time set in which we may repent, but being despised and outrun,
there is after no hour to obtain mercy. The reasons whereof are speciallly
three. viz.

The first taken from God, who, because it proceeds from his love to offer
mercy, it must needs stand with his justice to punish the wilful contempt of
it, with a perpetual denial of mercy.

The second from Satan, who by contemning and neglecting the Lords gracious
offer of mercy, gets great advantage of us, and hereby makes a way for such
sins as hardly in time we can repent us of.

The third is from the nature of this sin which hatcheth three horrible
sins; for delay breeds custom, custom breeds security, and security
breeds impenitencie. A drunkard, we see, is more easily reclaymed from that
sin at the first, then when he has gotten the custom of it; and so it is
of all other sins. And hence it is that the Lord by his Prophet does note it
a thing impossible in respect of humane power to leave those sins which are
customably committed, saying. Can the black-more change his skin, Ierem. 13.23.
or the Leopard his spots, then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to
do evil.

Oh beloved, let us take heed of despising the Lords kind offer of mercy, lest
he be angry, Psalm. 2.13.
and so we perish in his wrath. For which cause let us call to remembrance
these four motives to move us to accept of the time of grace, 2. Cor. 6.2.
this acceptable day of salvation. viz.

First, how merciful the Lord has been to us, who might have cut off our
time in our youth, in which it may be we were unthrifty, or in the midst of
some grievous sin. that we committed heretofore, or of late days, and so have
sent us to hell.

Secondly, consider how many good motions of his holy spirit we have let slip,
and made light account of, and sent him away from us with grief, which it may
be we shall never enjoy again.

Thirdly call to thy mind how he has this day offered thee his Majesty's
gracious pardon upon thy willing accepting of it, which for ought that either I
or thou know, he will never offer again unto thee.

Fourthly consider that at the Lord has given thee a time, so he has given
thee thy senses, thy wits, thy memory, which he has deprived others of, and
may thee also, for ought thou know, because thou have made no better use of
them for his glory, and thy own salvation. Therefore say, Lord turn me unto
thee, and deliver my soul, enlighten my understanding, from this gross
darkness, free my desires from these iron chains, from these massy fetters
of sin, that I may turn unto thee in the seasonable time of health and
strength; and not defer the great and weighty work of my repentance, until
either by long custom of sin, or by debility of body or mind or both, I shall
not be able to think upon thee.

But some will object, what is there no hope of salvation for him that
repents at the last hour? Answer. I will not say (says Saint Augustine) he
shall be saved, I will not say he shall be damned. You will say, the thief was
saved at the very last cast of life, Luke 23.43:
or some short time before he departed from the cross to paradise. Answer. I
confess that the scripture speaks of such a one crucified at the right hand
of the son of God, who craving with faith mercy to salvation, received this
answer, to day shall thou be with me in paradise. He was called at the
eleventh hour at the point of the twelfe, when he was now dying and drawing
on; and therefore his conversion was altogether miraculous and extraordinary.
And there was a special reason why our Savior Christ would have him to be
then called; that while he was in suffering he might show forth the virtue of
his passion, that all which saw the one, might also acknowledge the other. Now
it is not good for any man to make an ordinary rule of an extraordinary
example, and besides the scripture speaks but of one that was so saved; and it
speaks of another in that very place, and at that very instant that was
damned. And hereupon a father says, we read of one, that no man should
despair, and but of one, that no man should presume. And upon this also Origin
writes thus, there is no man has cause to despair of pardon, seeing Christ
said unto the thief verily this day thou shall be with me in paradise, and yet
may not too much presume of pardon, because Christ said not verily this day
shall ye be with me in paradize.

This example therefore is a medicine only against desperation, and no cloak
for sin. And therefore let us remember before we sin, that Christ pardoned
not the multitude, and thereby fear his justice; and after we have sinned,
let us remember that Christ pardoned the thief; and so hope for mercy. Etsi
poenitentia est sera, tamen indulgentia non est fera. Says Lombard Gods mercy
is above our misery, and an evening sacrifice is accepted by him; and yet on
the other side we never read that Christ cured one blind man often, that he
healed the same leapers diverse times, that he raised Lazarus twice. Mark well
(says one) what I say, that a man which repents not but at his latter end
shall be damned; I do not say so, what then do I say? He shall be saved? No.
What then do I say? I say I know not, I say I presume not, I promise not, will
thou then deliver thy self out of this doubt? Will thou escape this dangerous
point? Repent thou then whilst thou art whole, for if thou repent whilst thou
art in health, whenever the last day of all comes upon thee thou art safe,
for that thou did repent in that time when thou might yet have sinned: but
if thou will repent when thou can sin no longer, thou leauest not sin but
sin leaves thee. One being demanded when it was time to repent, answered,
one day before our Death; but when it was replied, that no man knew that day;
he said, begin then to day, for fear of failing; and boast not of to morrow,
for thou know not what a day may bring forth: many pretend to mend all in
time, and this time is so deferred from day to day until God (in whose hands
only all times consist) does shut them out of all time and send them to pains
eternal with out time, for that they abuse the special benefit of time in
this world.

Again concerning those which post off their repentance til age, sickness, or
death; of these there are specially two sorts. viz.

The first sort are such as plead the sweet promises of the Gospel, Ezech.
18.21. Mat. 11.28.
as namely these. At what time soever a sinner does repent etc. Come unto me
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Answer. True
it is and most true, but to whom are these promises made, and to what sinners?
They are made to all repentant sinners that turn to the Lord with all their
hearts, but thou art an unrepentant wretch and continuest in thy sins,
therefore those comfortable promises belong not unto thee. And what sinners
does he bid come unto him? Those that be weary and heavy laden, that is, whose
sins pinch and wound them at the very heart, and withal desire to be eased of
the burden of them. Therefore take not occasion to presume of the promises of
the Gospel; for unless thou turn from thy evil ways, and repent of thy
sins, they belong nothing at all unto thee. I know the Gospel is a book of
mercy, I know that in the Prophets there are many aspersions of mercy; I know
that out of the eater comes meat, and out of the strong comes sweetness; and
that in the ten commandments (which be the administratio^s of death) there is
made express mention of mercy, I will have mercy upon thousands; yea, the very
first words of them are the covenant of grace, I am the Lord thy God; yet, if
every leaf and every line, and every word in the bible were nothing but mercy,
mercy: yet nothing auailes the presumptuous sinner that lies rotting in his
iniquities; O but he is merciful, gracious, slow to anger, abundant in
goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin; is not here mercy mentioned nine or ten times
together? It is, but read on the very next words, and not making the wicked
innocent, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon
childrens children unto the third and fourth generation: is not this the
terrible voice of justice? But stay, in the 136 Psalm. there is nothing but his
mercy endures for ever which is the foot of the Psalm. and is found six and
twenty times in 26 verses, yet hark what a rattling thunder-clappe is here,
and overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the red sea, and smote great Kings, and
slew mighty Kings etc.

The second sort are such, that by reading and hearing of the story of Lots
drunkenness, of David's adultery, of Peter's denial, do thereby bless
themselves, and strengthen and comfort their hearts, yea they have learned to
allege them as examples to extenuate their sins, and to presume that they
shall find the like mercy. Am I a Drunkard? (says one) so was that good man
Lot. Am I an Adulterer? (says another) so was David, a man after Gods own
heart. Am I a swearer, a forswearer, a curser, a denyer of Christ? So was the
holy Apostle Saint Peter. Shall I despair of salvation, says the wicked
persister in sin, and I read that the thief repented on the cross, and
found mercy at the last hour? O vile wretches, who has bewitched you to
pervert Gods word to your destruction? It is as much as to poison the soul.
Look on their repentance. Lot fell of infirmity, and no doubt repented with
much grief; yet look upon Gods judgment upon that incestuous seed. Look
upon David. Psalm. 38.
Read the 38 Psalm, it made him grow crooked, his sins were as fire in his
bones; he had not a good day to his death, but the grief of his sins made
him to roar out; thou would be loath to buy thy sin so dear as he did.
Look upon Peter who wept for his sins most bitterly. Mat. 26.75.
And as for the example of the thief (as we have heard already, and cannot
hear too often) seeing it is so often objected and urged; the Lord knocks
but once by one sermon, and he repented, but thou have heard many sermons
crying and calling unto thee, and yet thou have not repented; and this is as
we have heard) an extraordinary example, and thereof not the like in all the
scripture again; and the Lord has set out but one, and yet one, that noe man
should despair, and yet that noe man should presume by this one example, for
what man will spur his Ass till he speak, Number. 22.28.
because Balaam did so, and yet one, that no man should despair, but to know
that God is able to call home at the last hour. And by this he did declare the
riches of his mercy to all such as have grace to turn unto him; where contrary
we see, many thousands of those, who having deferred their repentance, have
been taken away in their sins, and dyed impenitent. But this example is for
all penitent sinners, who upon their hearty repentance may assure themselves
that the Lord will receive them to mercy. Now if thou can promise to thy
self the same repentance and faith in Christ, that he had, then may thou
promise thy self the same felicity which he now enioyes.

S. Ambrose calls the history of this man, pulcherrimum affectandae conuersionis
exemplum, a most goodly example to move men to turn to God. But look thou on
his fellow, who had no grace to repent, and who hangs as an example to all
impenitent wretches to look upon, that they despise not the mercy of God, nor
reject his call by his messengers and Ministers, lest it come to pass, that
when they would repent they cannot.

To thee then that art privy, thou have had many calls, many offers of grace,
yea that have seen the painful and faithful Preachers of Gods holy Word and
Sacraments, spend their wits, their strength, yea ouerspend themselves for thy
good, what devil has bewitched thee to post off all, and willingly to cast
away thy self?

To thee therefore, that do strengthen thy self in thy sins upon
presumption of mercy to others, I refer thee to the words that the Lord
himself speaks in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20.
He that when he hears the words of this curse, blesses himself in his
heart saying, I shall have peace, though I walk according to the
stubbornenesse of my own heart, thus adding drunkenness to thirst, the Lord
will not spare him, nor be merciful unto him, but the wrath of the Lord and
his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are
written in this book shall light upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his
name from under heaven. Besides this place, there are many others in the
Scriptures against those that strengthen their hearts in their sins. If you
presume that a Lord Lord will serve the turn at the close of your life, it is
nothing else but Infidelis fiducia, a faithless confidence, as Saint Bernard
calls it.

Again, by that parable in the Gospel of the Laborers, Mat. 20.1. etc.
that were called into the Vineyard at several hours in the day, do many
wicked men take great encouragement to neglect the time of their calling, and
repentance, because they that were called in the last hour were accepted, and
rewarded equally with those, which came in the first hour of the day. But show
me which of those laborers, being called, did refuse to come. It seems
rather unto me, that hereby they should learn without delay to repent, when
they are called to repent, at what time soever it be, for he is not bound to
us, but we to him. He that says, when the wicked man turns from his
wickedness that he has committed, Ezech. 18.27.
and does that which is lawful and right, shall save his soul alive, does say
also. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth: Lam. 3.27.
for old age is like to flint, you may break it before you can soften it. In
youth sins are few and feeble, but by continuance they grow to be as strong
as Giants, and increase into mighty armies. And where Solomon said before to
the young man, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth; Eccles. 12.1.
in the same verse he also shows the reason of the same, and therefore says,
Before thy evil days come, and years approach, wherein thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them. These are the reasons for which Solomon would have
his young man not to put off in the age of youth (which is most prime, and
teachable) the remembrance of his Creator, and his repentance; and they are
taken from the many infirmities and withdrawings that are to be found in old
age, when youth is abused: As much as if Solomon should have said; Well, my
son, thou art now young, lusty and active, of good apprehension and sharp
conceit, endued with fresh and strong faculties of wit and remembrance, thy
feet are nimble, thy sight is good, and thy hearing perfect, now therefore
serve God, and repent, whiles thou may; the time will come, when thou will
be old, weak, and sickly, dull in apprehending, and of bad capacity and
remembrance, without good legs to bring thee to Church, without a good ear
to hear at Church, and either without eyes, or darke-sighted, and not able to
read long, nor to see a good letter, but through spectacles. Then it will be
too late to do any good service to God thy Creator. This I take to be the
Wisemans meaning in these words; which teaches us that old age is no fit time
wherein to begin repentance and godliness, when the green and fresh age of
youth has been consumed in vanities.

The Israelites are complained of by the Lord in Malachy, Mal. 1.8.
that they offered the blind for sacrifice, and the lame and sick for a
hallowed thing. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and
if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? Offer it now unto the
Governor, will he be pleased with thee? or accept of thy person? says the
Lord of Hosts. He that would not have a beast (while he had no eyes) in his
service, would have thee, while thou have eyes, to serve him; the sick and the
lame were no good offerings then, Leu. 22.20.
as being forbidden in the Law, and be they good ware now in the sick and lame
body of a man, that has desperately put off his repentance, and turning to
God, till he can neither draw wind nor leg? Moses knew this, and therefore
bore this burden young, and whiles his legs were able to bear him; for the
text says, Heb. 11.24.
That when he was come to age, he refused to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter, that is, would not live in delicacies, while he had strength to live
unto God. Joseph also in his beauty, and fair person, turned his back to his
tempting Mistress, Genesis 39.10.12.
and his face to the Lord, he would not put off to serve God till old age had
made wrinckles in his fair face, and his skin withered. Josiah, a good King,
2. Chro. 34.3.4.5.6.
in the eight year of his reign, and sixteenth of his age (when he was yet a
child) began to seek after his God, the God of David his Father, and in the
twelfth year of his reign, and twentieth of his age, made a famous
reformation. What? So soon and so young? So says the Scripture; and so it was
without controversy. For Gods children take the good days of youth for good
duties, and not the evil days of sickly and saplesse old age, as commonly the
children of the world do. Samuel served God in his minority, 1. Sam. 3.19.
and grew in spirit, as he shot up in years; he was a good man, and the
better, because a good young man. And Timothy from a child did know the holy
Scriptures, 2. Tim. 3.15.
as the Apostle Saint Paul witnesses for him.

The reasons why we must thus begin to repent betimes, are these, viz.

First, repentance, as it can never come too soon, where sin is gone before,
so it must needs with much ado, and not without some special work of God,
overtake so many sins of youth and manhood, so far, and much before it.

Secondly, old age is full of weariness and trouble, and where we have
elbow-roome in youth, we cannot turn us in old age; perhaps we shall neither
hear, nor see, nor go, nor sit, without pain and torment in all parts; and
is this (say you) a fit condition of life, and time of age to serve God in. But
say that the forcible working of the holy Spirit, like a great gale of wind,
be able to blow thee home on the sudden, yet art thou not sure to have it. And
do thou think, seeing thou will not repent and know God in youth, that he
will know thee at these years, and in this case and state? And will thou
bestow on Satan the beauty, strength and freshness of youth, and offer to God
the wrinkles, weakness, and foul hew of old age? or when thou have given away
the flower of thy youth to Gods enemy, will thou offer to God (who will have
the first, and deserves the best) the dregs and leauings? To all such I say,
if you will not know God in your youth, he will never know thee, (for ought
that thou know) when thou art gray headed. If (as has been said) thou will
not give him the young and sound, and that which is without blemish, he will
never take in good part the old and sick, and evil favored, which no man
will give to his friend, nor dare offer to his prince. If thou will not, when
thou art quick-witted, when thou art come to the years of dotage, he will not.
If thou will not hear him in his day, thou shall cry in thy day, that is, in
the evil day, and shall not be heard. Yea God has told thee (as we have said
before) Because I have called and you refused, you shall call upon me, Prou.
1.24.28.
and I will not answer you. A doleful and heavy doom for a dying man. It is
too late to sow, when thy fruit should be in, and no time to leave sin, when
sin must leave thee.

Luke 16.24: Heb. 12.17. Mat. 25.11.12.
Dives prayed, but was not heard. Esau wept, but was not pitied. The foolish
Virgins knocked, but were denied. By which fearful examples it appears,
that it will be too late to call for mercy after this life, when the gates of
mercy will be shut up, and repentance comes too late. For if we through our
negligence and carelessenesse ouerslip this opportunity, which the Lord in
mercy offers us, we cannot recover it afterward, although we seek it with
tears; which we find truly verified by the fore-alledged fearful examples.
Esaias 59.2.
For your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins,
have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. It is therefore the surest
and safest way, and better by many degrees, for the salvation of our souls, to
leave our sins now in our youth, and now to repent in our health, then
hereafter (alas!) when it may be too late.

The holy Ghost in the Scriptures points us to the present time and exhorts
us to make that the time of our repentance; and upon this Theme many of the
holy men of God spent their Sermons. Look in Esaias, Jeremy and the rest, and
you shall ever find that they beat upon this present time. Esaias 55. Ier. 35.
Heb. 3. Psalm. 95. Joel. 2.
Now turn unto the Lord; now whiles it is called to day; to day if ye will
hear his voice, this is the accepted time; and therefore we may not come for
it many years hence, being promised to day.

Iniquity did then abound (as now it does) and procrastination was ever
dangerous, and therefore they judged no doctrine so fit, as often to urge
repentance without all delay.

So that now even now is the time of repentance, even now whilst he calls,
now whilst he speaks, now whilst he knocks, now let us take up this day,
and make it the joyful day of our repentance. For joy shall be in heaven
(says our Savior in the Gospel) Luke 15.7.
over one sinner that repents. Therefore let us now say, this shall be my day
of repentance, I will defer it no longer; and so let us repent from day to
day, even to our dying day; and then whosoever shall continue so repenting to
the end, he shall surely and undoubtedly be saved. Mat. 24.13.


Now for conclusion of this duty of repentance, mark here how happily we
fall upon repentance; God grant repentance to fall upon us. It is a grace (when
it falls upon a sinful soul) that makes the Devils murmr, Luke 15.
and vex themselves in hell, and the good Angels rejoice in heaven.

This is that which makes the eternal Wisdom content to forget our
iniquities, and to remember them no more, then if they had never been; and
this is Magnaspongia (as Saint Augustine calls it) the great sponge that wipes
them all away out of the sight of God: this speaks to mercy to separate our
sins from the face of God, to bind them up in bundles, and drown them in
the sea of oblivion: this is that mourning Master, that is never without good
attendants, tears of contrition, prayers for remission, and purposes of a
mended life. This makes Mary Magdalen of a sinner, a Saint: Zacheus of an
extortioner, charitable; and of persecuting Saul, a professing Paul. Repentance
is the Supersedeas that discharges all bonds of sin. Behold the office of
repentance, she stands at the door, and offers her loving service;
entertain me, and I will unload thy heart of that evil poison, and return
it to thee empty, though it were full to the brimme. Peccasti? poenitere;
millies peccasti? millies poenitere; millies poenitet? adhuc etiam poenitere:
Have thou sinned? repent; have thou a thousand times sinned? why then a
thousand times repent: have thou repented a thousand times? I say despair not,
but still betake thy self to repentance.

If you welcome repentance, knocking at your door from God, it shall knock at
Gods door of mercy for you. It asks of you amendment, of God forgiveness.
Receive it therefore and embrace it.

The fourth duty is to die in prayer; for when it shall please God in the
weakness of our bodies, to give us a remembrance of our mortality and our end:
let us pray to God for grace, that we may spend the time of our sickness in
reading Gods word and comfortable books, in godly conference, in holy
meditation, and in fervent prayer to the Lord: first for patience in thy
sickness: secondly, for comfort in Christ Jesus: thirdly, for strength in his
mercy: and fourthly, for deliverance at his good pleasure; yea endeavor as much
as thou can to die praying. For when thou art in the depthes of miseries, and
at it were at the gates of death, there is a depth of Gods mercy, who is
ready to hear and help thee: for misery must call upon mercy, and Prayer is
the chiefest thing that a man may present God withal. For by prayer we are
oftentimes in spirit (with the blessed Apostle) rapt up into the third heavens,
2. Cor. 12.2.
where we that are otherwise but worms, walk with the blessed Angels, and
even cont^nually to our very end, talk familiarly with our God. And hence it
is, that holy men and women in former times could never have enough of this
exercise.

Nazianzen in his Epitaph for his sister Gorgonia, writes that she was so
given to prayer, that her kne^s seemed to cleave unto the earth, and to grow to
the very ground, by reason of her continuance in prayer.

Gregory in his Dialogues writes, that his Aunt Trasilla being dead, was
found to have her elbowes as hard as horn, which hardness she gate by
leaning to a deske, on which she used to pray.

Eusebius in his History, writes, that James the brother of our Lord, had
knees as hard as Camels knees, benumbed and bereaved of all sense and feeling,
by reason of his continual kneeling in prayer.

Hierom, in the life of Paul the Ermite, writes that he was found dead
kneeling upon his knees, holding up his hands, lifting up his eyes, so that the
very dead corpse seemed yet to live, and by a kind of religious gesture to pray
still unto God. O how blessed was that soul without the body, when as that
body without the soul seemed so devout!

O would to God that we likewise might be so happy, so blessed as this holy
man was, that we might depart hence in such sort as he did; nay in such sort
as our Savior Christ did, who died in prayer: Luke 23.46.
Father (says he) into thy hands I commend my spirit: and in such sort as
Stephen died, for when Death had seized his body, he died in prayer, Acts 7.59.
Lord Jesus (says he) receive my spirit. And in such sort as Jacob died, who
in the seasure of death upon his body, raised up himself, and turning his
face toward his beds head, leaned on the top of his staff, by reason of his
feebleness, and so prayed unto God. Which prayer of his at his death, was an
excellent fruit of his faith: For by faith, Jacob, Heb. 1.21.
when he was in dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph, and worshipped
leaving upon the top of his staff. God grant when he comes, that he may
find us so doing, that when we shall lie upon our deathbeds gasping for
breath, ready to give up the ghost, that then the precious soul of every one
of us, redeemed with the most precious blood of our sweet Savior Christ
Jesus, may pass away in a prayer, in a secret and sweet prayer, may pass (I
say) out of Adams body into Abraham's bosom.

But here it may be objected, that in the pangs of death men want their
senses, and convenient utterance, and therefore are unable to pray. Answer:
The very sighs, sobbes, and groans of a penitent and bleeding heart, are
prayers before God at such a time, even as effectual as if they were uttered
by the best voice in the world. For prayer stands in the affection of the
heart, whereof the voice is but an outward messenger. For God at such a time
especially looks not upon the speech and voice, but upon the heart. And
therefore the Psalmist says. Psalm. 10.17. Psalm. 145.19.
That God hears the desire of the humble, the Lord will fulfill the desire of
them that fear him.

What prayer makes the little infant to his mother? He weepeth and cries, not
being able to express what he lacks, the mother offers him the breast, or
gives him some other thing, Psalm. 38.9. Matthew. 7.11.
such as she thinks his necessity requires; much more then the heavenly
Father, heedeth the desires, sighs, groans, and tears of his children, and
doing the office of a Father, he hears them, and provides for them.

Exodus 14.15.
We read in the book of Exodus, that the Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore
cryest thou unto me? and yet (as it is there said) there was no voice heard.
We read also in the first book of Samuel, 1. Sam. 1.12.13.
that Hannah continued praying before the Lord, that she spoke in heart only,
her lips moved, but her voice was not heard; and yet the Lord heard her
hearty prayer, and granted her request. Yea the very tears of the children of
God are loud, and sounding Prayers in his ears who will (as the Psalmist
says) put them into his bottle, Psalm. 56.8.
and register them in his book; yea the very blood of his Saints are crying
prayers unto him. And therefore the Lord said unto Cain, Genesis 4.10.
when he had slain his brother Abel, What have thou done? the voice of thy
brothers blood cries unto me from the ground.

If thou can not pray distinctly and orderly, lifting up thine eyes on high;
with Hezekiah chatter like the Swallow, mourn like the Done. For the sorrow of
his heart did so oppress his soul, that though he remembered God, and looked
up unto him, and had all his desires waiting upon the hand of God, yet he was
not able to pray to God in any distinct manner, like a well advised man; his
praying was all out of order, it was more like the mourning of a Done, and the
chattering of a swallow, then like the holy and orderly prayers of a wise and
godly man, as we may read in the Prophecy of Esaias. Esa. 38.14. Luke 22.62.
We read not in what words Peter prayed, but only that he wept bitterly; let
thy tears flow likewise, when thy words can find no free passage. Which tears
of sinners S. Bernard calls the wine of Angels.

And as concerning the true vigor of praying, S. Augustine in one place says;
It stands more in tears then in words: for instructing a certain rich widow
how to pray unto God, among other words, he has this saying: Plerumque hoc
negotium plus gemitibus quam sermonibus agitur, plus fletu quam afflatu. This
business of prayer (for the most part) is performed rather with groaning then
with words, with weeping then with speech. Let God hear thy sighs and groans,
let him see thy tears, when thou can not show him thy desire in words. Psalm.
6.6.
Water thy couch with tears as did the Prophet, and God will gather up, and
put every drop into his bottle. Thus doing, when thou think thou have not
prayed, thou have prayed most powerfully. For as Saint Jerome says, Oration
Deum lenit, lachryma cogit, prayer greatly moves God, tears forceably compel
him; he is allured and won with the words of prayer, to hear us, but with
the tears of a contrite heart, he is drawn and enforced to hear and help,
where otherwise he would not. And in this case we must remember, that God
accepts affecting for effecting, willing for working, desires for deeds,
purposes for performances, pence for pounds,

S. Chrysostom says, That prayer is the soul of our souls, and in this
affliction growing in thy soul, because thou know not how to pray, hear a
notable comfort that the Apostle gives thee, saying; The spirit helps our
infirmities; Romans 8.26.
for we know not how to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self makes
request for us with sighs that cannot be expressed. Where thine own strength
and wisdom fails in this service of prayer unto God, there the wisdom and
power of Gods spirit kindles in thee strong desires, and earnest longing after
mercy; and the meanings of those desires and longings God perfectly
understands, and needs not be informed by thy words. So that though thou
can not pray as thou oughtst to do, yet that service goes forward well,
while heartily thou desire Gods favor. Esaias 65.24.
And it shall come to pass (says the Lord) that before they call to me for
aid, (that is, in our purpose of prayer) I will answer, and whiles they are
yet speaking, I will hear.

Remember that many go to bed, and never rise again, till they be raised up
and wakened by the sound of the last trumpet. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
If therefore thou desire to sleep safely and securely, whether in health or
sickness, go to bed with a reverence of Gods Majesty, and a consideration of
thine own weakness, frailty and misery, which thou may imprint in thy heart
in some poor measure, and pray thou thus, and say: If it be thy blessed will
to call for me in my sleep, O Lord for Christ Jesus sake have mercy upon me,
forgive me all my sins, and receive my parting soul into the heavenly
kingdom. But if it be thy blessed will and pleasure, to add more days unto my
life, then (good Lord) add more amendment to my days, and weane my mind from
the love of this world and worldly things, and cause me more and more to
settle my conversation and meditations on heaven and heavenly things.

And whether thou shall recover or not recover thy former health again by
prayer, that belongs to thy God, and rests altogether in his good will and
pleasure. For God (says Wisdom) has power of life and death. Wisd. 16.13.
And to God the Lord (says the Psalmist) belong the issues of death. Psalm.
68.20.
And to speak truth, God (for the most part) seems to sleep, that so he
might be awakened by our entreaties. For God (as S. Augustine notes) amat
nimium vehementes, and is so delighted with our prayers, as that he does many
times deny us our suites, that he might hear us continue earnest in our
prayers. And again, if he should upon every motion we make unto him, grant
our requests, his benefits at last would come to be contemned of us. For we
know it an ordinary practice amongst men, cito data cito vilescunt, we account
it scarce worth the taking, that is not twice worth the asking. Therefore
before he grant, he would have us earnest with him indeed, and to awake him
with our prayers, if perchance he should seem to us to be asleep. For God
loves, and is especially delighted with an earnest suter, and therefore does
many times deny men their requests at the first, that he might find them more
fervent and constant in their prayers to him afterward.

But if God of his mercy be awakened by thy importunity, and has at length
heard thy prayer, or the prayers of others for thee, and has restored thee to
thy health again, ( For the Lord (says Hanna) kills and makes alive, 1.
Sam. 2.6.
he brings down to the grave, and brings up. And the Lord himself says
in Exodus: I am the Lord that heals thee, Exodus 15.26.
and again I kill and give life, I wound, and I make whole) thou have thy
desire, or rather perhaps not thy desire, seeing the holiest and best men of
all incline neither this way nor that way, but wholly resign themselves, as in
all other things, so especially in this case, to Gods good will and pleasure;
or if they determinately desire any thing, it is for the most part with the
Apostle, to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
which is best of all. But suppose thou desire to recover, and do recover
indeed, consider then with thy self, that thou have now received from God, as
it were another life; and know, that it is but for a short time, and therefore
spend it to the honor and glory of God, that restored it unto thee, and in
newness of life: let thy sins die with thy sickness, but live thou by grace
to holiness.

But then as thou obtainest thy desire, thou must perform thy promise which
thou made when thy body was grieved with sickness and pain even ready to
die, and when thy soul was oppressed with heaviness, pensiveness, and
sadness, Isal. 6.6.
when thou (with the Prophet) did water thy couch with thy tears. And what
was that promise? namely, that if it pleased God to grant thee life and health,
and add unto thy days some few years more, as he did to king Ezechiah; 2.
King. 20.6.
then thou would love him more sincerely, serve him more obediently, tender
his glory more dearly, pray unto him more heartily, repent more soundly,
follow thy calling more faithfully, hate sin more effectually, and live
hereafter more warily and religiously then ever thou did before. And if thou
have offended him with pride, to humble thy self hereafter; if with
dissolutones, to be more sober; if with swearing, to leave it; if with
profaning of the Sabbaoths, to make more conscience in sanctifying it; if with
uncleanness, to be chaste and unblameable; it with conuersing with the
wicked, to abandon their society, and to say unto them with the Prophet David:
Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, Psalm. 6.8.9.
for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, the Lord has heard my
supplication, the Lord will receive my prayer: Psalm. 119.115.
and again, Depart from me you evil doers, for I will keep the commandments
of my God.

Remember that thou have promised and vowed amendment and newnes of life,
defer not to perform the same. When thou vowest a vow unto God (says the
Preacher) defer not to pay it, Eccles. 5.4.5.
for he has no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou have vowed: for better
it is thou should not vow, then vow, and not pay. Again, When thou shall
vow a vow unto the Lord thy God (says Moses) Deuteronomy. 23.21.
thou shall not be slack to pay it, for thy Lord thy God will require it of
thee, and it would be sin in thee.

Thus, if these and such other like promises and vows thou will most
conscionably and constantly perform, then in a good hour (as we say) and in a
happy time thou did recover. And be thou not then the more secure and
careless in that thou art restored to health, neither (with the chief Butler)
be thou forgetful of thy promises, Genesis 40.23.
nor insult in thy self that thou have escaped death, but call thy sins and
faults to remembrance with the same chief Butler, Genesis 41.9.
and remember rather, that God seeing how unprepared thou wast, has of his
infinite mercy spared thee, and given thee some little longer time and space of
breathing and respite, that thou may perform thy vows and promises in the
amendment of thy sinful life, and in putting thy self in a better readiness
against another time, (and how soon thou know not:) for though thou have
escaped this dangerous sickness, (which many others have not) and then can
say with the Prophet, The Lord has chastened me sore, Psalm. 118.18.
but he has not given me over unto death, yet it may be that thou shall not
escape the next. It may be when a ship is come to the mouth of the haven, a
bl^st drives it back again, but there it will arrive at the last, so must
thou at length at the gates of death, though thou have escaped this.

Too too many there are that when God visits them with sharp diseases, that
wakens up their consciences, and then sick, sick, and then if God will
repriue them until a longer day, oh what Christians courses they vow to take,
God proves them they mend in bodies, years: in manners? no, no more then
Pharaoh after the plagues remoueall: for many in their afflictions and
sicknesses looking for death, how liberal are they in their promises? but
afterward how basely niggardly are they in their performances? they play
childrens play with God, they take away a thing as soon as they have given it.
When Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem, then the Jews made a solemn covenant
with the Lord to set free their servants: but no sooner had the king removed
his siege, but they retracted and repealed their vow, and brought back again
their servants into their former bondage, Ierem. 34.10. So fares it with these
kind of men, when God lays fiege to them by sicknesses or some other pinching
affliction, then covenants and promises are made concerning the putting away of
their sins, but no sooner does God begin to depart and slack his wrath, but
we return with the dog to the vomit, and with the so we to the wallowing in
the mire, like Pharaoh that dismissed the Israelites when death entered within
his palaces; but presently after in all have makes after them to fetch them
back again.

Consider therefore how fearful a reckoning thou had made before Gods
judgment seat ere this time, if thou had died of this sickness, and spend the
time remaining in such pleasing sort to thy gracious God, that thou may be
able to make a more cheerful and joyful account of thy life when it must
expire indeed. Therefore put not far off the day of thy death, though the
Lord for thy good (if thou use it well) has put it off; for thou know not
for all this how near it is at hand, and see that thou (being so fairly
warned) be wiser against the next time. For if thou be taken unprovided
again, thy excuse shall be the less, and thy judgment the greater. Thy
work is great which thou have to do, and thy time can be but short, and he
who will recompense every man according to his work, stands at the door.
Think how much work is behind, and how slowly thou have wrought in the time
past. The unclean spirit is cast out, Mat. 12.43.
let him not enter and come in again with seven worse then himself. Thou have
sighed out the groans of contrition, thou have wept the tears of repentance,
thou art washed in the poole of Bethesda streaming with five bloody wounds,
Ioh. 5.4:
not with a troubling Angel, but with the Angel of Gods presence, troubled with
the wrath due for thy sins; who descended into hell according to our Creed,
that is, the extreme humiliation and abasement of Christ in his manhood, under
the power of death and of the grave, being kept there as a prisoner in bonds
until the third day, to restore thee to saving health and heaven. Now
therefore return not (with the dog) to thy vomit, nor like the washed Sow to
wallow in the mire again, 2. Pet. 2.22.
and the filthy puddle of thy former sins; left being entangled and overcome
again with the filthiness of sin, (which now thou have escaped) thy latter
end prove much worse unto thee then thy first beginning.

Twice therefore does our Savior Christ give the same cautionarie warning to
healed sinners: Ioh. 5.5.14.
The first to the man cured of his eight and thirty years disease: the second
to the woman taken in adultery, go and sin no more: Ioh. 8.11.
hereby teaching us, how dangerous a relapse and falling again is into our
wonted and accustomed sins. And for this present mercy and health, Luke 17.15.
imitate the thankful Leper in the Gospel, and from hence forward tarry thou
the Lords leisure, because the Lord tarieth thine; he tarieth for thee, till
thou change thy evil life, tarry thou for him therefore until he crown thy
good life; and remember these two things to thy dying day, and thou sha^t never
do amiss: First, that there is about thee an all seeing eye, and an
all-hearing eat. He that planted the ear (says the Psalmist) shall he not
hear? Psalm. 94.9.
he that formed the eye shall he not see? go thou out? he sees thee,
returnest thou home? he sees thee: Psa. 139.11.12.
does the candle burn? he sees thee, is the candle put out? he sees thee:
be it light or darkness, he sees thee: he sees how thou do converse
with thine own heart, and how with other men. Therefore in this case the
counsel of the Philosopher is good: Sic viue cum hominibus quasi Deus audiat,
sic loquere cum Deo quasi homines videant: So converse with men as if God heard
thee, so confer with God, as if men saw thee.

But suppose that thou desire to recover, and yet neither thy self sees any
likelihood, nor God sees it good that thou should recover; then if thou have
inured thy self to repentance heretofore, and to prayer, it will be the more
familiar with thee now at this time. Fervent prayer, Psalm. 6.6.
hearty repentance, and watering thy couch with tears are most of all
necessary at this time, that the fear of death may not affright thee, but be a
welcome guest unto thee. For that being truly penitent at thy departure, thou
may be sure with Simeon to depart in peace. Luke 2.29.
And so God granting not thy will, but his will, may indeed grant both thy will
and his will; thy will, which is not simply to recover, but if God will; and
his will, which is not to have thee lie lingering and languishing any longer in
this short pilgrimage and warfare, but to triumph for ever in heaven.

Therefore when the pangs of death do come upon thee, and the worms of the
earth do wait for thee: it God gives thee then thine understanding, say thou
then inwardly to thy self, to thy sick soul, Now my pilgrimage is ended, my
harvest is inned, my journey is finished, my race is run, my houre-glasse
spent, my candle burning in the socket. Many of the godly are gone before me,
and I am now to follow after, 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course; I have kept the faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but to all
them also that love his appearing. And, O Lord, I thank thee, that I am a
Christian, that I have lived in a Christian Church, that I shall die amongst a
Christian people, and that I am going to a Christian society.

Exodus 33.14.15.16.
And whereas the Lord said unto Moses, My presence shall go with thee, and I
will give thee rest: let us at this time pray unto the Lord as Moses does, and
say, If thy presence go not with me at this time, then carry me not up hence.
For wherein shall it be known here that I have found grace in thy sight? Is
it not in that thou go with me?

And if we thus spend the time of our sickness in this sort, the Lord when he
calls for us by Death, shall find us either reading, or hearing, or
meditating, or counselling, or resisting evil, or doing some good, or
repenting or praying; and then we may be sure that God will be our guide even
unto death, Psalm. 48.14.
and will also send us his Ange^s to stand at our beds-head, Luke 16.22.
waiting for us, to carry our souls into Abraham's bosom, where we shall see
God the Father, behold God the Son, and look upon God the holy Ghost, where
we shall enjoy the fellowship of the Angels, the society and company of the
Saints, and where we shall live eternally, obey God perfectly, and reign with
him triumphantly. And besides all this, if we spend the time of our health, of
our sickness, and of our death in this sort, we shall leave a good name and
report behind us, Eccles. 7.1.
which is better (says the Preacher) then precious ointment, and is rather to
be chosen (says the Wiseman) then great riches, Prou. 22.1.
and it will be like the coats and garments which Dorcas made, Acts 9.36.
that will remain behind us after that we are dead and gone, for the good
example and encouragement of all others which are to follow us.

The end of the fourth Division.
THE FIFTH DIVISION, THE COMFORT AT OUR OWN DEATH.
THe Preacher says, Eccles. 7.1.
That the day of our death, is better then the day of our birth. In which
parcel of holy Scripture for our comfort at death, three points are to be
considered. First, what is death that is here mentioned. Secondly, how it can
be truly (that is here mentioned) said, that the day of our death is better
then the day of our birth. Thirdly, in what respect it is better.

For the first, Death is a privation of life, as a punishment ordained of God,
and imposed on man for his sin. It is a privation of life, because the very
nature of death is an absence or defect of that life, which God vouchsafed man
by his creation. I add further, that death is a punishment, more especially to
intimate the nature and quality of death, and to show that it was ordained as
the means of the execution of Gods judgment and justice.

Furthermore, in every punishment there be three workers, the ordainer of it,
the procurer, and the executioner.

The ordainer of this punishment is God, in the estate of man's innocency, by a
solemn law then made in these words. In the day that thou eatest thereof, Genesis
2.17.
thou shall die the death. The Executioner of this punishment is also God
himself, as himself testifies in the Prophet Esaias, in these words. I make
peace and create evil. And this is material or natural evil, Esaias 45.7.
to the latter of which, Death is to be referred; which is the destruction and
abolishment of man's nature created.

The procurer of this punishment is not God, but man himself, in that man by
sin and disobedience did put upon himself this punishment. Therefore the Lord
in the Prophet Osea says, O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, Hosea 13.9.
but in me is thy help.

Against this it may be objected, that man was mortal in the estate of his
innocence before the fall.

Answer; The frame and composition of man's body considered in it self, was
mortal, because it was made of water and earth, and other elements, which are
of themselves alterable and changeable; yet if we respect the grace and
blessing which God did vouchsafe man's body in his creation, it was
unchangeable and immortal, and so by the same blessing should have continued,
if man had not fallen; and man by his fall, depriving himself of this gift,
and the blessing, became every way mortal. And hereof it is that the Preacher
says, Lo this only have I found, that God made man upright, Eccles. 7.29.
but they have sought out many inventions. Again, before the fall, man's body
was but subject to death, and could not then be said to be dead, but after the
fall, it was then not only subject to death, but might also be said to be
dead. And therefore now in this respect the Apostle says, Romans 8.10
The body is dead because of sin.

Again, man's body in his innocence, was like unto the body of Christ, when
he was upon the earth, that is, only subject unto death, for he could not be
said to be dead, because in him there was no sin; and this was man's case in
his innocence before his fall.

Thus it appears in part what death is. And yet for the better clearing of
this point, we are to consider the difference between the death of a man, and
a beast. The death of a beast is the total and final abolishment of the whole
creature; for the body is resolved to the first matter, and the soul rising
from the temperature of the body, is but a breath, and vanishes to nothing.
But in the death of a man it is otherwise: For though the body for a time be
resolved and turned into dust, out of which it came, yet it must rise again at
the last day, and become immortal; but the soul subsisteth by it self out of
the body, and is immortal. The reason of which difference is, for that the
soul of man is a spirit or spiritual substance, whereas the soul of a beast
is no substance, but a natural vigor or quality, and has no being in it
self without the body, on which it wholly depends. The soul of a man
contrariwise, being created of nothing, Genesis 2.7.
it is said, God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and then man
became a living soul, and so as well subsisting forth of it, as in it. But
when God made the beasts of the earth, he breathed not such matter into them,
but their blood is as their soul, Leuit. 17.14.
and their life; for the life of all flesh is the blood thereof. Psalm. 49.20.
So that, when beasts die, they perish, as the Psalmist says, and that is
their end, and their spirit goes downward to the earth, Eccles. 3.21.
but the spirit of man goes upward, says the Preacher.

Saint Ambrose takes occasion by this difference, and from the shape of man's
body, to advertise our mind what our affections should be. It is well
ordained (says he) that man has only two feet with birds, and not four
feet with beasts, for by this he may learn to fly aloft with the birds, and
not with beasts incline and decline to the grosser and earthly things of this
world.

Here then we see, that since the fall of man, man is not: only subject to
death, but also may be said a dead man, because he shall as surely die, as if
he were dead already, whereas notwithstanding he has a form and show of
immortality. Other things, so long as they retain their form, so long they
do remain; A house falls not all the time that his form and fashion
lasts; the brute beast dies not, except he first forgo his life, which is
his form; but man has a form which never is dissolved, as namely, a mind
endued with reason, and yet he lives now but a very short time, in respect
that his body, by reason of sin and disobedience, is become mortal, whereby
man is the procuter of his own death and punishment.

Therefore it is a true saying of Saint Gregory, Man is the work of God, sin
is the work of man; let us therefore discern what God has made, and what man
has done; and neither for the error committed by man, let us hate man, whom
God made, nor for the man that is Gods work, love the sin that man has
committed. And again here note we must hate none in respect of his creation,
but in respect he peruerteth the use of his creation, for they bear the Image
of God which is lovely, but they deface and scratch it out to their own
damnation; so that we must hate not virum, but vitium, the wickedness of the
man, and not the wicked as he is man.

The kinds of death, as we have heard in the first Division, are threefold;
Natural, Spiritual, Eternal, but they may be reduced into two only, as the
kinds of life are, that is, bodily and spiritual. Bodily death is nothing else
but the separation of the soul from the body, as bodily life is the
conjunction of body and soul. And this death is called the first, because in
respect of time it goes before the second. Spiritual death is the separation
of the whole man, both in body and soul, from the gracious and glorious
fellowship of God. Of these two, the first is but an entrance to death, and the
second is the accomplishment of it: for as the soul is the life of the body,
so God is the life of the soul, and his Spirit is the soul of our souls.

Again, this spiritual death has three disti^ct and several degrees. The
first is, when it is alive in respect of temporal life, and yet it lies dead
in sin. Of this degree the Apostle speaks, when he says, 1. Tim. 5.6.
She that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives, and this is the estate
of all men by nature, who are said to be dead in sin. Ephesians. 2.5.


The second degree is in the very end of this life, when the body is laid into
the earth, then the soul descends into the place of torments, Luke 16.22.23.
as the soul of the rich man in the Gospel.

The third degree is in the day of Judgment, when the body and soul at the
resurrection of the last day meet together again and shall go to the place of
the damned, there to be tormented for ever. And this is called by the name of
the second death, Mat. 25.41.
which does belong only to the Reprobate.

Having thus found the nature, differences, and kinds of death, it is more then
manifest, that that place of the Preacher is to be understood, not of the
spiritual death, but of the bodily death, because it is opposed to the
nativity and birth of man. The words then must carry this sense, The time of
bodily death, in which there is a separa ion of the soul of man from the body,
either natural or violent (being called a bodily or worldly death) is better
to the child of God, then the time in which one is borne, and brought into the
world.

Now follows the second point; and that is, how this can be true which the
Preacher says, That the day of ones death is better then the day of birth. I
make not this question to call the Scriptures into controversy, which are the
truth it self, but I do it to this end and purpose, that we might without
doubting or wavering be resolved of the truth of this, which the Preacher
here avouches for the comfort of all the children of God at their death. For
there may be sundry reasons brought to the contrary of this, which the
Preacher here avouches.

Therefore let us now handle the questions, reasons, and objections, which may
be alleged to the contrary; which all may be reduced unto six heads.

The first is taken from the opinion of wise men, who think it the best thing
of all never to be borne. And the next, best to die quickly as soon as he is
borne. For Cicero an Heathen man, and renowned for his eloquence and learning,
complains that nature has brought man forth into the world, not as a mother,
but as a stepmother, with a body naked, weak and sickly, and with a mind
distracted with cares, dejected with fears, faint with labors, and addicted
to lusts and pleasures; And hence grew this common speech amongst the Gentiles
related by Aristotle, repeated by Cicero and Plutarch, and fathered upon
Sylemus, by all three, That the best thing in the world was, not to be borne at
all, and the next, best to die soonest. Now if it be the best thing in the
world not to be borne at all, then it is the worst thing that can be, to die
after a man is once borne. Answ. There be two sorts of men, the one that live
and die in their fins; the other, that do unfeignedly repent, and believe in
Christ, the one goats, the other sheep, the one good, the other evil. Now
this sentence and speech of those Heathen men may be truly applied and
avouched to the first sort, of whom we may say, as our Savior Christ said of
Judas. Mat. 26.24.
It had been good for that man that he had never been borne. But the saying
applied to the second sort, is most false. For to them that in this life turn
to God by true and unfeigned repentance, the best thing of all is to be borne,
because their birth is a degree of preparation unto all joy and happiness, and
the next best for them is to die quickly, because by death they do enter into
the possession and fruition of the same joy and happiness; for their birth is
an entrance into it, and their death the accomplishment of the same. And this
was the cause that made Baalam so desirous to die the death of the righteous,
and to wish that his last end might be like theirs. Number. 23.10.
And therefore in this respect the Preacher in this place preferres the day of
death before the day of birth, understanding thereby, that death which is
joined, coupled, and accompanied with a godly life; and this is called the
death of the righteous.

The second objection is taken from the testimonies of the holy Scriptures, and
namely these. Romans 6.20 1. Cor. 15.26.
Death (says the Apostle) is the wages of sin. Death is an enemy of Christ.
Death is the curse of the Law. Gal. 3 13.
Hence it seems to follow that in and by death men receive their wages, and
payment for their sins; and so thereby the day of death is become the
doleful day, in which the enemy preuailes against us, for that he which dies
is cursed. Answ. We must distinguish here of death: it must be considered two
ways; first, as it is in it self in his own nature; secondly, as it is
altered and changed by the death of Christ. Now death by it self considered,
is indeed the wages of sin, the enemy of Christ, and of all his members, and
the curse of the law, yea the very suburbs and gates of hell, and so it is
still unto the wicked; yet in the second respect it is not so; for by the
virtue of the death of Christ it cease to be a plague or punishment, and of
a curse is made unto us a blessing, and become unto us a friend, and a passage
or middle way between this life and eternal life; and is become as it were a
little wicket, entrance or door, whereby we pass out of this world into
heaven. And then in this respect this saying of the Preacher is most true; for
in the day of birth men are brought forth and borne into the vale of misery;
but afterward when the children of God go hence, having death altered unto
them by the death of Christ, they enter into eternal life and happiness.

The third objection is taken from the example of most worthy men, who (as it
should seem) have made their prayers against death, Mat. 26.39.
as our Savior Christ.

We read when our Savior Christ was borne, it was a joyful time; at whose
birth there was great joy and mirth. Simeon and Anna, Luke 2.10.13.28.38. Luke
19.41. Mark 16.10. Luke 23.28.45 Matthew. 27.51.
yea and the Angels of heaven did sing, and they bid the Shepherds sing,
because they brought them glad tidings of great joy, which should be unto all
the people. But when our Savior Christ suffered death, then it seemed that it
was a doleful time; for then there was as much lamentation and weeping. Our
Savior Christ himself wept (whom we read to have wept three times, at the
destruction of Jerusalem, John 11.35.
at the raising of Lazarus and in his agony) the disciples wept, the daughters
of Jerusalem wept, Heb. 5.7.
the Sun was darkened, the veil of the Temple was rent, the stones were
cloven in sunder. Yea all these and all senseless creatures in their kind did
weep and lament the death and passion of their maker. And so it should seem
that our Savior Christ prayed against death on this manner, Psalm. 6.4.5.
Father if it be thy will, let this cup pass from me. We read also that the
Prophet David prayed against death, Return O Lord (says he) deliver my soul,
O save me for thy mercies sake; for in death there is no remembrance of thee,
in the grave who shall give thee thanks? Again, Esaias 38.1.
we read that King Ezechiah prayed against death; for when the Prophet
brought him word from the Lord, that he should die and not live, this good
king at this news wept very sore, and prayed for further life.

Now by the examples of these most worthy men, yea by the example of the Son
of God himself, it should seem that this should not be true, which the
Preacher does here avouch, That the day of death should be better then the
day of birth, but rather that the day of death should be the most doleful and
terrible day of all.

Answ. We are here to understand, that when our Savior Christ prayed in this
sort as we have heard, he was in his agony, and he then, as our Redeemer stood
in our room and stead, to suffer and endure all things, which we our selves
should have suffered in our own persons for our sins, if he himself had not
vouchsafed to suffer for us: and therefore he did not pray simply against the
bodily or natural death, but against the cursed death of the Cross; for he
feared not death it self, which is the separating of soul and body, but the
curse of the Law which went with death, as namely, the unspeakable wrath and
judgment of God, which was due for our sins. The first death troubled him
not, but the first and second joined together. Therefore the Author to the
Hebrews says, Heb. 5.7.
That Christ in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him
from death, that he was heard in that he feared. By which place it appears,
that Christ did not pray simply against the natural death, but against the
cursed death of the Cross, which was the second death.

Concerning David's praying against death, we are to understand, that when he
made that sixth Psalm, he was not only sick in body, but also perplexed
with the greatest temptation of all, in that he wrastled in conscience against
the wrath of God, as appears by his own words. For he there says, Psalm. 6.1.
O Lord rebuke me not in thy anger, etc. Wherein we may see that he prayed not
simply against death, but against death at that instant, when he was in that
grievous temptation, for at other times he had no such fear of death. And
therefore in another Psalm he says, Psalm. 23.4.
Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
ill, etc. Wherefore he prayed against death only in that sixth Psalm, as it was
joined with apprehension of Gods wrath, as our Savior Christ did.

Lastly, touching king Hezekiah, we are to understand that he prayed against
death, not only because he desired to live, and to do service to God in his
kingdom, but also it was upon a further and more special regard, because when
the Prophet brought him this message of death he was then without issue, having
none of his own body to succeed him in his kingdom.

But then it will be objected, What warrant he had to pray against death for
this cause.

Answ. His warrant was good; for God had made a particular promise unto David
and his posterity after him, 1. King. 2.4.
that as long as they feared him, and walked in his commandments with all
their heart, and with all their soul, there shall not fail thee (says he) a
man on the throne of Israel. Now this good king Hezekiah at the time of the
Prophets message of death, remembering what promise God had made to David and to
his seed, and how that he for his part in some poor and weak measure had kept
the condition, in that he had walked before God with an upright heart, and had
done that which was well pleasing and acceptable in his sight, as he himself
says in the same place; Isay 38 3.
therefore he prayed against death, not for that he feared it, but he desired
to have issue of his own to succeed him according to the Lords promise to his
servant David. Which prayer of his was so well accepted of God, that he gave
him his request, and added unto his days fifteen years; and three years
after God gave him Manasses. Isay 38.5.


Again, beside these examples it will be further objected, that the godly have
feared death, 1. Kings 19.30.
or esse why did Eliah fly from it in the persecution of Iezabel, and Christ
teach his to fly it in the persecutions of men: Mat. 10.23.
and Christ himself (as we have already heard) did pray against the bitter
cup of it in his agony, Mat. 26.39.
and before his apprehension.

Answ. Those Saints did not, nor were to fly from death as it is the end of
life, and a most blessed end of a good life, but used the means of flight
only to prevent violent and hasty death till the hour appointed should come,
that they were to give their spirit in peace into the hands of him that made
it; and because such untimely death was enemy to the good they had to do, and
course they were to finish, therefore they went aside by flying for some time,
and till the time of their departure come, that they might do the good to
which they were appointed, and finish the course for which they were sent. For
if a removing or flying for thine ease in this respect may be effected by
shifting thy place, that may both be desired and used without sin. Isaak sent
his son Jacob away from his brother Esau. when Esau in his anger, had sworn
to slay him: David fled from the hand and iauelin of Saul, and shifted for
himself by removing from place to place, and conuayed all his fathers house
into the land of Moab from Saul's reach. The Lord Jesus oftentimes withdrew
himself from the rage of the Jews, and he gave his Disciples a rule for times
of persecution, saying, When they persecute you in this city, Mat. 10.23.
fly into another. And many honest men have removed their habitations to
avoid evil neighbors, and free themselves from being troubled by hem.

But where it is again alleged that Christ himself prayed against the cup of
death; for the further satisfying of this point, I answer further two ways:
First, that he prayed without sin against it, seeing that in his
supplication of tears, and much fear he submitted to his Fathers will
always. Mat. 26.39.42.
Nevertheless (said he) not as I will, but as thou will. And again, O my
Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be
done. Also death was not to him as it is to us; for to us the sting of it is
conquered, and the force broken, but to him it was in full power, he felt the
sting of it, and wrastled with the force of it in soul and body. Secondly I
say (as was said before) that it was not merely a bodily death (though
unsubdued, save where himself subdued it) that he trembled at, but by the
burden of our sins, which he was to undergo, in which he beheld the whole.
There he saw his Fathers countenance turned against him, and there knew that he
must bear his wrath, because he bare our sins. And besides, Christ feared
death, being clothed with our flesh, to show that he took our infirmities,
Isay. 53.4,5,6.
and bore our sorrows, and was perfect man.

And so death may in some case be feared, and at sometime prayed against; but
ever under the correction of Gods will. For the rod of death turned into a
serpent, made Moises fear; Exodus 4.3.
and the best have moderately declined and shrunk at the stroke of death, when
it came in some tempest; and who does not dread all Gods terrors, whereof death
is one, and fear that which is the punishment of sin, and curse of sinners,
and decline that, which is the ruin and destruction of humane nature, and
shrink at that which has made the strongest, the wisest, the greatest, the
richest to fall down flat before it.

Therefore the fear of death thus reproved, is not the natural fear of it,
which is in all, but the servile fear of it proper to evil doers, and common
to those who can have no hope in death, because they never cared to live, till
they were compelled to die.

The fourth objection is, that those who have been reputed to be of the better
sort of men, have oftentimes miserable ends; for some end their days
despayring, some rauing and blaspheming, some strangely tormented. It may
therefore seem that the day of death is the day of greatest woe and misery.

To this I answer first of all generally, that we must not judge of the estate
of any man before God by outward things, whether they be blessings or
judgments, whether they fall in life or in death. For as the Preacher says,
Eccles. 9.1.2.
No man knows either love or hatred by all things that are before them; all
things come alike to all, and the same condition is to the just and to the
wicked, and to the good and pure, and to the polluted, and to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the sinner;
he that swears, as he that fears an oath. Again the Preacher says,
Eccles. 8.14.
There is a vanity that is done upon the earth, that there be just men to whom
it happens according to the work of the wicked, and there be wicked men to whom
it happens according to the work of the righteous.

Secondly, I answer to the particulars which be alleged, in this manner;
First for despair: it is true, that not only wicked and loose persons
despair in death, but also godly and penitent sinners, who often in their
sickness testify of themselves, that being alive and lying in their beds,
they feel themselves to be as it were in hell, and to apprehend the very
pangs and torments of it; and I doubt not for all this, but that the child of
God which is most dear unto him, may through the gulf of desperation attain
to everlasting life and happiness. Which appears to be so by Gods dealing in
the matter of our salvation: For all the works of God are done in and by their
contraries. In the creation all things were made not of something, but of
nothing, clean contrary to the course of nature: In the work of redemption
God gives life not by life, but by death. And if we consider aright of Christ
upon the Cross, we shall see our paradise out of paradise, in the midst of
hell; for out of his own cursed death, he brings us a blessed life, and
eternal happiness. Likewise in our effectual vocation, when it pleases God
to convert and turn men unto him, he does it by the means of the preaching of
the Gospel, which in reason should drive men from God, for it is as contrary to
the nature of man, as fire to water, and light to darkness. For the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 1.21.22.23.52.
After that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. For the
Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom; but we preach
Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks
foolishness. And yet for all this, though it be thus against the nature and
disposition of man, it preuailes with him at length, and turns him unto his
God, it he belong unto him.

Furthermore, when God will send his own servants unto heaven, he sends some
of them a contrary way, even as it were by the gates of hell. For our way to
heaven is by compass, even as the Lord led the Israelites out of Egypt into
the Land of Canaan, not through the Land of the Philistims, Exodus 13.17.18
although that were near, For God siad lest peradventure the people repent,
when they see war, and return to Egypt, but God led the people about through
the way of the wilderness of the red sea. So God for many causes best known
to himself, does bring his children out of this Egyptian world unto the
spiriutall Canaan, which is the kingdom of heaven; not the nearest way, but by
many windings and turnings, and the furthest way about, even as it were through
the red sea of miseries and afflictions, that all Gods waves and billows may
go over them. Psalm. 42.7.


The Lord can (if he please) bring them, as he does many other of his children,
the nearest way to heaven, but this further way about is for Gods own glory,
and for his childrens own good. And God as a most wise Father, is not ever
kissing his child, but many times correcting him: and the same God that does
mercifully exalt us, by giving us a sweet taste, and lively feeling of his
grace, and the efficacy of it in us, does in much love many times for our
health humble us, when he leaves us without that sense and feeling in our
selves, and then does he cure us of the most dangerous disease of pride, and
confidence in our selves, settle in us a true foundation of humility, cause us
to deny our selves and depend wholly upon him, to cast our selves into the
arms of his mercy, to hunger for his grace, to pray more zealously and with
greater feeling of our wants, and to set an high price upon the sense of Gods
favor, to make more esteem of it when we have it again, and to kill and
mortify some special sin, for which before we had not seriously and heartily
repented. For when it is his good will and pleasure to make men depend on his
favor and providence, he makes them first to feel his anger and
displeasure, and to be nothing in themselves, to the end they might value and
prize their vocation and calling at an higher rate and estimate, and wholly and
altogether rely and depend upon him, and be whatsoever they are, in him only.

This point being then well weighed and considered, it is more then manifest,
that the child of God may pass to heaven even through the very depth and gulf
of hell. For the love, favor, and mercy of God is like to a sea, into which,
when a man is cast, he neither feels bottom, nor sees bank: For thy mercy
(says the Psalmist) is great above the heavens, Psalm. 108.4.
and thy truth reaches unto the clouds. So that touching despair, whether it
arises of the weakness of nature, or of the conscience of sin, though it
fall out about the time of death, it can be but the voice and opinion of their
sickness; and a sicke-mans judgment of himself, at such time, is not to be
regarded; and besides, it cannot preiudize the salvation of their souls, that
are effectually called: For the gifts and calling of God (says the Apostle)
are without repentance; Romans 11.29.
and those whom God loves, he loves to the end, and world without end. And
as for other strange events which fall out in death, they are the effects of
diseases. Rauings, blasphemies and idle speeches arise of the disease of
melancholy and phrensies, which often happen at the end of hot burning feauers,
the choler shooting up to the brain; the writhing of the lips, turning of the
neck, and buckling of the joints and the whole body, proceed of crampes and
convulsions, which follow after much euacuation; and whereas some in sickness
are of that strength, that three or four can hardly hold them without bonds;
it comes not always of witchcraft, as people commonly think, but of choler in
the veins; and whereas some when they are dead, become as black as pitch, it
may rise by a bruise or impostume, or by the black Iaundise, or the
putrefaction of the liver, and does not always argue some extraordinary
judgment of God; in the wicked it does, but in the godly not.

Now these and the like diseases with their symptoms, and strange effects,
though they do deprive man of his health, and of the right use of the parts of
his body, and the use of reason and understanding, yet they cannot deprive his
soul of eternal life and happiness, which with the soul of David is bound up
in the bundle of life, 1. Sam. 25.29.
with the Lord his God in eternal peace and blessedness. And all sins
procured by these violent and sharp diseases, proceeding from repentant
sinners, are sins only of infirmity and weakness, for which if they knew them,
and came again to the use of reason and understanding, they will further
repent, if not, yet they are pardoned and buried in the blood of Christ, and in
his death, who is their Savior and great Bishop of their souls; 1. Pet.
2.24.25.
for he that forgiueth the greater sins, will also in his children forgive
the less. And again, we ought not to stand so much upon the strangeness of
any man's end, when we knew before the goodness of his conversation and life.
For we must judge a man in this case, not by his unquiet death, but by his
former quiet godly life.

And if this be true that strange diseases, and thereupon very strange
behavior in death may befall the best child of God, we must then learn to
reform our judgments of such as lie thus at the point of death.

The common opinion is, if a man lie quietly in his sickness, and go away
like a lamb (which in some diseases, as in consumptions and such like lingering
diseases, any man may do) that then he goes straightway to heaven, though he
have lived never so wickedly. But if the violence of the disease stir up
impatiencie, and cause in the party frantic and unseemly behavior, then men
use to say, though he be never so godly, that there is a judgment of God,
serving either to discover an Hypocrite, or to plague a wicked man. But the
truth is far otherwise, for in truth one may die like a lamb, and yet go to
hell. For the Psalmist says, Psalm. 7 3.4.5.
There are no bonds in their death, but their strength is firm, they are not
in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued as other men. And again,
another dying in exceeding torments and strange behavior of the body, may go
to heaven; examples whereof we have in that holy and just man Job, as may
appear throughout his whole book; and in diverse others Gods dear Saints and
children. Therefore by these strange and violent kinds of sickness and death,
which do many times happen to the dear Saints of God: we must take great
heed that we judge not rashly of them in condemning them to be wicked and
notorious Hypocrites and offenders; for it may be our own cafe for ought we
know. This rash censuring and judging, was the sin of the wicked Barbarians,
as we may read in the Acts of the Apostles. Act. 28.3 4.5.6
This rash censuring and judging, was also the sin of the wicked Jews, as we
may read in the Gospel of Saint Luke, Luke 13.1.2.3.4.5.
wherein they did utter a secret corruption, naturally ingendered in all men,
that is, very sharply to see into the sins of others, and severely to
censure them; but in the mean time to flatter themselves, and be blindfold in
seeing their own; for these men thought, because the like judgments did not
fall on themselves, that therefore they were safe enough, and not so great
sinners, but rather highly in the favor of God; even as many in the world do
now adays falsely imagine and suppose that they are always the worst sort of
people, whom God does most strike and press with his punishing hand; having
forgotten that God does not keep an ordinary rate here below, to punish every
man as he is worst, or to cocker and favor him as he is best; but only takes
some example as he thinks good for the instruction and advertisement of
others, and to be as it were looking-glasses, wherein every man may see his
own face, yea, and his own cause handled, and that God is a severe revenger
of sin, that all men may learn by the example of some to tremble and beware,
lest they be constrained in their own turns to know and feel the punishment
they have deserved. Whereupon our Savior Christ is justly occasioned to
correct their erroneous and sinister judgment, and to teach them that they
must not rejoice at the just punishment of others. For this is the property of
the wicked, as appears in the book of the Lamentations, where it is said, All
mine enemies have heard of my trouble, Lam. 1.21:
they are glad that thou have done it; but he that is glad (says the Wiseman)
at calamities, Prou. 17.5.
shall not be unpunished: but he should rather be instructed thereby to repent.
And to all such barbarous, unchristian, and uncharitable censurers of the
children of God, the Lord by his Prophet says, Lo, I begin to bring evil
upon the City which is called by my name, Ier. 25.29.
and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ier. 49.12.
Ye shall not be unpunished. And again, Behold, they whose judgment was not
to drink of the cup, have assuredly drunken; and art thou he thou he that
shall go altogether unpunished? Thou shall not go unpunished, 1. Pet. 4.17.18.
but shall surely drink of it. And the Apostle says, The time is come, that
judgment must begin at the house of God: And if it first begin at us, what
shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? Therefore judge not
thus rashly of those that are thus grievously handled in this manner, but think
thy self as bad a sinner, if not worse, and that the like defects may befall
thee, and think some great temptation befell them, and that thy self
should be worse, if the like temptation should befall thee, and give God
thanks that as yet the like has not happened unto thee.

The fifth objection is this: When a man is most near death, then the devil is
most busy in temptation; and the more man is assaulted by Satan, the more
dangerous is his case; and therefore it may seem that the day of death is the
worst day of all.

Answ. The condition of Gods children in earth is twofold; some are not
tempted, and othersome are. Some are not tempted (I say) as Simeon, Luke
2.29,30.
who (as we read in the Gospel of S. Luke) when he had seen his Savior
Christ, brake forth into these words: Lord now let thou thy servant depart
in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation:
foresignifying no doubt, that he should end his days in all manner of peace:
And as Abraham; Genesis 15.15.
For thou shall go (as God said unto him) unto thy fathers in peace, and be
buried in a good old age. And as Josiah that good king. Behold therefore (says
the Lord unto him) I will gather thee unto thy fathers, 2. Kings 22.20.
and thou shall be gathered unto thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not
see all the evil which I will bring upon this place.

And as for them that are tempted (as diverse of Gods children are subject
thereunto) though their case be very troublesome, yet their salvation is not
the further off; for God is then more specially present by the unspeakable
comfort of his holy Spirit; and when we are most weak, he is most strong in
us, because his manner is to show his power in our weakness. An example whereof
we have in the Apostle S. Paul, who was greatly assaulted and tempted by
Satan. And lest I should (says he) be exalted above measure, 2. Cor. 12.7,8,9.
through the abundance of the revelation, there was given to me a thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above
measure. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from
me, and he said unto me my grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is
made perfect in weakness. And for this cause even in the time of death, the
devil receives the greatest foil, when he looks for the greatest victory.

The sixth and last objection is this: that violent and sudden death is a
grievous curse, and of all evils which befall in this life, none is so
terrible, therefore it may seem that the day of such a kind of death is most
miserable.

I answer: It is true indeed, that such death as is sudden, is a curse and
grievous judgment of God; and therefore not without good cause feared of men in
this world. Yet all things considered, we ought to be more afraid of an
impenitent and evil life, then of sudden death. For though it be evil as
death it self in it own nature, is, yet we must not think it to be simply
evil, because it is not evil to all men, nor in all respects evil: I say, it
is not evil to all men, considering that no kind of death is evil, or a curs^
unto them that are ingrafted in Christ, for that they are free in him from the
whole curse of the law. Reu. 14.13:
Blessed are they (says the Son of God) that die in the Lord, for they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them. Whereby it is signified that
they which depart this life, (being members of Christ Jesus, of what death
soever they die, yea though their death be never so sudden and violent) do
enter into everlasting joy and felicity. Psalm. 116.15.
Again, Precious in the sight of the Lord (says the Psalmist) is the death of
his Saints. Their death therefore (be it never so sudden or otherwise) must
needs be precious; yea, though death comes upon the children of God never so
sharply, Prou. 14.32.
and suddenly, yet the righteous (says the Wise man) has hope in his death.
Again, that sudden death is not evil in all respects, is apparent. For it is
not evil because it is sudden, but commonly it takes men unprepared, and
therefore evil, and so makes the day of death a black day, and as it were a
speedy downfall to the gulf of hell; otherwise if a man be ready and
prepared to die (as he ought always to be) then sudden death is in effect no
death, but a quick, easy, and speedy passage and entrance unto eternal life
and happiness. For why should thou, being the child of God unwillingly
suffer a short death, that will bring thee to the fruition of life eternal,
and all happiness? Rather persuade thy self that if thou live in the fear of
God thou shall do well, and so living, though thou die never so suddenly thou
shall do better; and that the worst hurt that sudden death can do thee (if
this may be called hurt) is to send thee but a little sooner then
(peradventure) thy frail flesh would be willing, Ioh. 14.2.3.
to thy Savior Jesus Christ, who is gone but a little before thee, through
great and manifold dangers and temptations, to prepare a place (as he himself
says) for thee, and to receive thee unto himself, that where he is, there
thou may be also; and remember that that worst is thy best hope. The worst
therefore of sudden death is rather a help then a harm.

Now all these objections being thus answered at large, it does appear plainly
to be a manifest truth, which the Preacher here says, That the day of death is
better then the day of ones birth.

Now I come to the third point, in which the reasons and respects are to be
considered, that make the day of death to surpass the day of ones birth; and
they may all be reduced to this one, namely, that the birth day is an entrance
into all woe and misery; whereas the day of death joined and accompanied with
a godly and reformed life, is an entrance and degree to eternal life and
glory. Which appears thus: viz. Eternal life has three degrees; one in this
life, and that is, when a man can truly say with the Apostle, Gal. 2.20.
I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives
in me. And this all such can say, as truly repent and believe, and that are
justified, sanctified, and have the peace of a good conscience, and are
furnished with the gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit, which is the earnest
of their salvation.

The second degree is in the end of this life, when the body goes to the earth
from whence it came, and the soul returns to God that gave it.

The third degree is in the end of this world at the last judgment, when body
and soul being reunited, do jointly enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Now of these three degrees, death it self (being coupled with the fear of
God) is the second, in as much as death is as it were the hand of God, to sort
and single out all those that are the servants of God, from amongst the wicked
of this wretched world. So that death is a freedom from all miseries, which
have their end in death; and which is the first benefit that comes by death,
and the first step to eternal life and glory. And the second benefit that
comes by death, is, that it gives an entrance to the soul, and makes way for
it, and does (as it were) usher it into the glorious presence of the
everlasting God, of Christ, of the holy Angels, and the rest of Gods Saints in
heaven. And this is a notable comfort against death; for as all other evils of
pain, are to a godly Christian changed into another nature, and of punishments
are become favors, and benefits; so is it also in this of death; for now it is
not a token of Gods wrath for sin, but an argument of his love, mercy, and
favor to his children. It is not properly death, but as it were a bridge by
which we pass to a better life; from corruption to incorruption, from
mortality to immortality, from earth to heaven; that is in a word, from
vanity and misery, to perfect joy and felicity, and a way thereby made for
the resurrection. Now who would not willingly pass over this bridge that is so
easy, whereby he goes from all cares and sorrows, to all delight and
pleasure, leaving all miseries behind him, and having all contentation and
happiness before him.

The gentiles taking it for granted, that either after death we should be
happy, or not be at all, concluded that at least death would free us from all
evil and misery, and thereupon did willingly embrace death, as a rich
treasure. The Egyptians also builded gorgeous Sepulchers, but mean houses,
because the one was to them but an Inn, the other, as they did think, an
eternal habitation, which freed them from all misery. And Seneca again
exclaimes, that our whole life is a penance, which the Thracians confirmed by
their practice, celebrating their childrens birth with weeping and lamentation,
but their death with great joy and mirth, as diverse ancient Writers record;
whereby insinuating, that our life is nothing but misery, and death the end of
misery. But they have been all greatly mistaken therein, for it is the godly
Christian only which enjoys these benefits by death, as namely the exemption
and freedom from all cares, troubles and miseries. For which cause the death
of the godly is called in the Scriptures by the names of Bed and Peace. Esaias
57.2.
He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds (says the Prophet).
It is called by the name of Rest, Reu. 14.13.
They shall rest from their labors (says the Son of God.) And the Author to
the Hebrews says, Heb. 4.9.
There remains therefore a rest to the people of God.

Again, the Scripture entitles death by the name of sleep, and speaks of the
dead, as of such as are asleep; and therefore the Prophet Daniel says, Dan.
12.2.
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame and contempt. And our Savior
Christ speaking of Iairus daughter which was dead, seeing all the people weep
and lament her, said unto them, Weep not, Luke 8.52.
she is not dead, but sleeps. John 11.11.12.13. Act. 7.60.
And touching Lazarus death, our Savior says, Our friend Lazarus sleeps.
And touching Stephens death, it is said, He fell asleep. For this cause our
forefathers called the place allotted for the burial of the dead, Dormitorium,
a bedchamber, wherein their bodies rest, expecting the joyful resurrection.
Homer calls sleep fratrem mortis, the brother of death. Diogenes awaked out
of a deep sleep by the Physician, and asked how he did, answered, Recte, nam
frater fratrem amplectitur, Well, (quoth he) for one brother embraces another.
The like is reported of Gorgias Leontinus: and the Poet says, Sleep is the
kinsman of death: Quid est somnus (says one) nisi breuis mors, What is sleep
but a short death? Et quid est mors nisi longus somnus, What is death but a
long sleep?

By beds, the Scripture understands the places, where the Lord bestows the
bodies of his servants after their death, whether fire or water, or the
paunches of wild beasts, or the chambers of the earth, sea, or air; and these
are called beds, because they shall rest quietly in them, as in their beds,
till the morning bell, or loud trumpet of the last great day, warning all flesh
to rise, shall raise them. And therefore it is such an usual thing in the
Scriptures, so soon as men dye to say they fall asleep, because thereby is
meant that they are laid in their beds of peace; and they are called beds of
rest, to put difference between these beds of our nights sleep and those of
our sleep in death: for here be our beds never so soft or well made, we often
take no rest, by reason of some distemper in our bodies, or fancies in our
head; but in these sleeping places, Psalm. 4.8.
which are called beds of rest, we may lay us down (says the Psalmist) and
sleep in peace, because the Lord our life being our keeper, will make us dwell
in safety.

Indeed in it own nature, the grave is rather an house of perdition, then a
bed of rest; but being altered to the Jews in promise, to us in performance,
by Christ's grave, who was buried in the earth, to change the nature of it, it
is made to us a chamber of rest, and bed of down.

These titles which are thus given unto death, is a sweet comfort to the
children of God against the terrors of death, for the graves of the righteous,
which by nature are the houses of destruction, and chambers of fear, are by
Christ and the grave of Christ made unto them chambers of safety, and beds of
rest. Christ by his burial has consecrated and perfumed our graves, making
them which were prisons to hell, gates to heaven. At night we take our
chambers, and lie down in our beds, so when death comes (which is the end of
life, as the night is of the day) we go to the chambers of the earth, and
there lie down in our beds, till the day of refreshing (which is the day of
rising) come, that comes from the Lord.

This is a confutation of that fancy, that has so long deluded the simple
world, which is, that dead bodies walk after their death, and appear unto
men. For how can that be, when the bodies of Gods children rest in their beds,
so soon as the breath departs, and the bodies of the wicked are in their
prisons, till the day of assise. Whereof, if any make a question, let him open
their graves, and see. And seeing the soul returns not, after it has left
the body, how can the body walk that wants a soul, or the soul be seen,
if it should walk, which has no body? Phil. 1.23.
or if death be a loosing of our souls from our bodies, how can there be any
death, when soul and body are not parted, and when the man is not dead, but
lives.

But this fancy came from Pythagoras, and is but a Philosophers dream, told
by him to the world, which was that the souls of men departed, did enter into
the bodies of other men, good souls into good, and bad into bad men's bodies.
The world then believed him; and since that time Satan, who can turn himself
into all forms, did in the dark night of Popery (to deceive that ignorant age)
change himself into the similitude of some person, that was lately, or had
been long dead, and was believed by such a transformation to be the party,
man or woman, that he resembled. So entered the error, that spirits did walk,
and that dead bodies came out of their graves, and haunted sundry houses in the
night, which were not the bodies of the dead, but the Devil in those bodies or
shapes, as it is to be seen in Samuels counterfeit shape, raised by the Witch
at Endor. 1. Sam. 28.14.15.
And this error, as it deceived the blind world, and somewhat troubled the
seeing, Mat. 14.26.
so is it still in the mouth and faith of credulous superstition at this day.
But God having given eyes to us to see his truth, Act. 12.15.
and the light of judgment to discern it: let us not walk in so great
darkness, as they that know not the truth, nor whither they go. But the
especial drift of the holy Ghost in the holy Scripture, by entitling death by
the names of bed, of peace, of rest, of sleep and such like (being all names
of singular commodity and benefit) is for the singular comfort of all Gods
children, signifying unto them thereby, that they shall feel no bitterness in
death, but rather joy, and rejoice in their deliue ance, as if they were going
to their beds, and their lives are not lost, but their bodies sleep, as in a
bed, most sweetly, until the resurrection.

How sweet is peace to them which have bin long troubled with wars and
tedious contentions; how pleasant is the bed, rest and sleep, to them that
have ouerwatched themselves. The Laborer is glad when his task is done, the
traveler rejoices when he comes to the end of his journey, the Mariner is
happy, when after a dangerous voyage he arriueth in his harbor. All men
shun pain, and desire ease, abhor danger, and love security. It were
madness then for a godly Christian to fear so aduantagious a death, and to
wish for continuance of such a wretched life.

Tertullian has a most excellent and elegant saying. That (says he) is not to
be feared, which sets us free from all that is to be feared, and that is death,
which puts an end to all fears and miseries. But the true Christian has
yet a far greater benefit by death, for it does not only put an end to evils
of pain, but also to the evils of faults, not only to the punishment for
sin, but to sin it self. Now the evils of faults are far worse then the
evils of pain; yea the least sin is more to be hated, abhorred and shunned,
then the greatest punishment for sin. How comfortable then and welcome should
death be unto us, that ends not only our sorrows, but also our sins.

As long as we live here, and bear about us these earthly and sinful
tabernacles, we daily multiply our transgressions and rebellions against our
gracious God, and sustain fiery conflicts and continual combats in our very
bosoms. O bondage of all bondages, to be in bondage unto sin!

The Gentile that apprehended vice only as a moral evil, could say that men
being in bondage to their lusts, were more cruelly handled by them, then any
slaves were by most cruel tyrants and monsters; how much more then should we
that feel sin as a spiritual evil, and groan under the burden thereof,
account that bondage more intolerable, and worse subjection, then can be to
the most barbarous and cruel tyrant in the world, from whose tyranny he that
should set us free, must needs be welcome. Which death, and only death can
do. What great cause have we then with all willingness to embrace death, and
be greatly comforted when it appproacheth?

But death does yet much more for us, then all this; for it not only frees us
from all evils, even sin, but puts us also into actual and peaceable
possession of all good things, and brings us to that good place, where (if
there were any place for any passion) we would be offended with Death for not
bringing us thither long before. And though the body rotte in the grave, or
be eaten of worms, or devoured by beasts or swallowed up by fishes, or burnt
to ashes, yet that will not be to us a matter of discomfort, not-onely because
(as we have heard before) they are at rest and do sleep in peace in their
beds till the last day, but also (if we do well consider the ground of all
grace) as namely our union and conjunction with Christ our head) it is indeed
a spiritual and yet most real conjunction and union. For we must not imagine
that our souls alone are joined and united to the body or soul of Christ, but
the whole parson of man both body and soul, is united and conjoined to whole
Christ. For we are united wholly to whole Christ (who is not divided) even
according to both natures, 1. Cor. 1.13. 1. Cor.3.21.
by which he is wholly our; but after this good order, as first to be united
to the manhood, and then by the manhood unto the Godhead of Christ. And when we
are once joined and united to whole Christ in this mortal life by the bond of
the Spirit, we shall so abide and remain eternally joined and united unto him.
And this conjunction and union being once truly made, can never afterward be
dissolved.

Hence it follows that although the body be severed from the soul by death,
yet neither the soul nor body are severed or sundred from Christ, but the very
body rotting in the grave, or howsoever else consumed, abide still joined and
united unto Christ, and is then as truly a member of Christ, as it was before
death. For look what was the condition of Christ in death, the same or the
like is the condition of all his members. Now the condition of Christ was this;
though his body and soul were severed and sundered for the time the one from
the other, as far as heaven and the grave, yet neither of them were sundered
from the Godhead of the Son, but both did in his Death subsist in his
person. Even so though our bodies and souls be pulled in sunder by natural
or violent death, yet neither of them, no not the body it self shall be pulled
or disioyned from Christ the head; but by the virtue of this conjunction and
union shall the dead body (howsoever it be wasted and consumed) arise at the
last day to eternal glory. For although the dead bodies of Gods Saints are
often mingled with the bodies of beasts, fowls, fishes or other creatures that
devour them; yet as the Goldsmith by his art can fever metals, and extract
one metal out of another: even so God can and will distinguish these dusts of
his Saints at the last day of the glorious resurrection.

In the winter season the trees remain without fruit or leaves, and being
beaten with the wind and weather, they appear to the eye and view of all men,
as if they were withered, and rotten dead trees; yet when the spring time
comes, they become alive again, and (as before) do bring forth their buds,
blossoms, leaves, and fruits; the reason is because the body, grain and arms
of the tree, are all joined and fastened to the root, where all the sap and
moisture lies in the winter time, and from thence by reason of this conjunction
it is derived in the spring to all the parts of the tree.

Even so the bodies of men have their winter also, and this i^ in death, in
which time they are turned into dust, and so remain for a time dead and
rotten. Yet in the spring time, that is at the last day at the resurrection, by
means of the mystical conjunction and union with Christ, his divine and
quickening virtue shall stream and flow from thence to all the bodies of his
elect and chosen members, and cause them to live again, and that to life
eternal. For the bodies of Gods elect being the members of Christ, though they
be never so much rotten, putrified and consumed, yet are they still in Gods
favor, and in the covenant of grace, to which, because they have right, being
dead, they shall not remain so for ever in their graves, but shall arise
again at the last day unto glory. And by reason of this union and conjunction
with Christ, we gain the prayers of the Saints yet living with us, the love of
the Saints glorified before us, the ministry of Angels working for us, grace
in earth, and glory in heaven. And in Christ, our gain is such, as that we
shall have all losses recompensed, all wants supplied, all curses removed, all
crosses sanctified, all graces increased, all hopes confirmed, all promises
performed, all blessedness procured, Satan conquered, death destroyed, the
grave sweetened, corruption abolished, sanctification perfected, and heaven
opened for our happy entrance. And as for death it self, we are to consider,
that it is chiefly sin that makes it so terrible unto us; for in it self,
and by it self, it is the wages of sin, and the revenging scourge of the
angry God, but unto those that believe in Christ, it is changed into a most
sweet sleep. For although the regenerate, and those that believe in Christ,
do as yet carry about the relics of sin in their flesh, from whence also
the body is dead, that is to say, subject to death, Romans 8.10.
for the sin that dwells in it, yet the spirit is life for righteousness,
that is, because they are justified from sin by true faith in Christ, and
resist the lusts of the flesh through the Spirit; therefore that sin which
yet remains in the flesh, is not imputed unto them, but is covered with the
shadow of the grace of God. Therefore by death the true and spiritual life of
the soul does not die in them, but does rather begin; to which death is
constrained to do (as it were) the office of a midwife. So that now we are
delivered from sin, in Christ, that it cannot hurt us, nay it is converted to
our own profit; and therefore death having her strength from sin, is not to
be feared, since sin, the sting of death, is overcome. What need we fear
the snake that has lost her sting, she can only hiss and make a noise, but
cannot hurt; and therefore we see that many having taken out the sting, will
carry the snake in their bosoms without any fear. Even so although we carry
death about us in our mortal bodies, yea in our bosoms and bowels, yet sin
which was her sting, being pulled out by the death of Christ, she can only
hiss and make a stir, and ordinarily look black and grimme, but can no
ways annoy us.

Which will be the more manifest, if we well weigh how Christ our head and
Captain has quelled and conquered this mighty Giant for us, whereby none
that are Christ's members need stand in fear thereof. Death (says the blessed
Apostle) is swallowed up in victory, and Christ was dead, and now lives, 1.
Cor. 15.54. Reu. 1.18.
and that for ever. And he has the keys of hell and death, as he testifies
of himself in the book of the Revelation. Now he that has the keys of a
place, has the command of that place. It is as much then as if it had been
said, he had the command of death, and power to dispose of it at his pleasure.
And will Christ then that has such an enemy at his mercy, let him hurt and
annoy his dear friends; nay his own members, and so in effect himself? Noe,
noe, he conquered death for us, not for himself, seeing death had no quarrel
to him.

By his unjust death then, he has vanquished our just death, as Saint
Augustine very excellently says, Death could not be conquered, but by death,
therefore Christ suffered death, that an unjust death might overcome a just
death, and that he might deliver the guilty justly, by dying for them
unjustly. Whereunto agrees that speech, The unjust sins, and the just is
punished; the guilty transgresses, and the innocent is beaten; the wicked
offends, and the godly is condemned; that which the evil deserves, the good
suffers; that which the servant owes, the master pays; that which man
commits, God sustaineth. For although, because he was man, he could die, and
did so, yet because he was just, he ought not to have died; and he that had
no cause to die for himself, in reason and equity should not die for others
unprofitably,; neither did he surely, but to the greatest purpose, that the
Son of God dying for the sons of men, the sons of men might thereby be
made the sons of God; yea that they of bad servants, might be made good
sons. And this glorious mystery of our Saviors Incarnation and Passion must
needs bring forth glorious effects: this strange and unspeakable love of God,
that his only Son should die for us, that the Lord should dye for
disobedient servants, the Creator for the creature, God for man, this strange
love (I say) must needs be of strange operation, as it is, even to make of
sinners just men, of slaves brethren, of captives fellow-heires, and of
banished persons Kings, and to make of death, as it were, no death, but a very
easy passage to eternal life: for the death of Christ is the death of our
death, since he died that we might live; and how can it be, but that they
should live, for whom life it self died?

Surely Death by usurping upon the innocent, forfeited her right to the
guilty, and while she devoured wrongfully, she her self was devoured. Yea
in that Christ has vanquished death, we may be truly said to vanquish it.
Romans 8.37. Ephesians. 5.30.
For in this (says the Apostle) we are more then conquerours through him that
loved us, he being our head and we his members, and where the head is
conqueror, the members cannot be captives.

Let us then rejoice, that we have already seized on heaven in Christ, who
has carried our flesh thither in his own person, as an earnest penny and pledge
of the whole sum that in time shall be brought thither. We may then boldly
say, that there is somewhat of ours above already, yea the best part of us, as
namely, our head, from which the members cannot be far; yea we may assure our
selves, that we being members of such a head, yea body to it, we are in
effect where our head is. For S. Augustine says, This body cannot be
beheaded, but if the head triumph for ever, the members also must needs triumph
for ever.

And that we have this benefit by Christ's ascension into heaven aforehand for
us, Bernard excellently shows. Be it (says he) that only Christ is entered
into heaven, yet I trow, whole Christ must enter; and if whole Christ, then the
body as well as the head, yea every particular member of the body. For this
head is not to be found in the kingdom of heaven without his members.

In a word, the head being above water, the body can never be drowned,
although it be never so much beaten and tossed in this world with waves and
tempests. Oh, but life is sweet and death is fearful, how then may I be
prepared against that hour, to undergo it in a Christian patience without
earthly passions? I answer, this is indeed the infirmity of our flesh, and the
property of our corrupt nature, that we are more desirous of this life fading,
then of the life to come that is not flitting; and hence comes that fear and
terror of death. John 10.28.
Death in it self, and out of Christ is (as we have heard) very dreadful, and
we have reason to fear it, as it is an effect of sin. But we speak not of
death considered out of Christ, or considered in it self, but of death altered
by the death of Christ; for so it is no dreadful thing, but much to be desired:
he is our Pastor, we need not fear to be taken out of his hands: our Advocate,
1. John 2.1. 1. Tim. 2.5. John 8.12. Psalm. 91.1. John 5.22.
therefore we need not dread damnation; our Mediator, therefore we need not
fear the wrath of God, our light, we need not fear darkness, our shadow,
we need not fear the heat of hell fire; our Judge, we need not fear that
sentence shall be denounced against us; our life, and therefore we need not
fear death. Well may the brute beasts fear to die, whose end of life is their
end of being: well may the Epicure fear and tremble at death, who with his
life looks to loose his felicity: well may the faithless and impenitent
sinner fear and quake, whose death is the beginning of their damnation: well
may the voluptuous worldling, (whose felicity consists wholly in the fruition
of these transitory things) greatly fear death as that which depriueth him of
his pomp and preferment, of his honors and high calling, robs him of his
jewels and treasure, spoileth him of his pastimes and pleasures, exileth him
from his friends and country, and utterly bereaueth him of all his
expectations, solace and delight. Which Jesus the son of Sirach noting, said,
Eccles. 41.1
O death how bitter is thy remembrance to the man that lives at rest in his
possessions, unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
prosperity in all things, yea unto him that is yet able to receive meat? Yea
it is for wicked and ungodly men to fear death exceedingly, because death in
them, is not joined with a godly and well reformed life, they have not done that
good for which they came into the world; and therefore it is for them to fear
to die. They apprehend death as a strong enemy, finding in it (through their
continual wickedness and infidelity) no likelihood of salvation, no sign of
peace; and therefore it is for them to fear to be dissolved, and to think
death to be no other change then a plague, death to them is a beginning of
eternal death, and no pathway to Christ, but a portall-doore to destruction,
and therefore they may justly fear death.

But seeing the Lord has vouchsafed you a penitent and believing heart, go on
boldly, Psalm. 116 9:
and receive your portion in the land of the living, and although the assault
of death be very violent, bitter and strong to the trial of your faith, yet
call to mind that our Savior Christ has overcome death and hell, (as we have
heard) he has broken the strength of this battle, confounded the Captain of
this host, and set up the songs of triumph to all true believers, that they may
have the fullness of joy.

So now it remains that you do as one that has his house on fire, burning
all in a flame, that it is impossible to be quenched, who will throw out from
thence and fetch his treasures and jewels, that so he may with them build
another house; even so must you do: Let your own ruinous house burn, let it
perish, seeing it may not be otherwise. Only think and bestirre your self
how you may save your treasure and jewels, I mean your soul, and that is by a
true and lively faith in Jesus Christ; that so at the resurrection of the just
you may come unto a new house that cannot fade nor perish, but remain
immortal for ever. Only let us be faithful and courageous, for so has our
Captain Jesus Christ been, who already is proved the Conqueror, and if we
faint not, nor turn back, he will also make us conquerors. Therefore let not
the violence and multitude of torments affright us, we have but one life, and
we can loose but one; and we shall find eternal life and blessedness by
loosing it.

1. Sam. 17.49. Judge. 16.30. 1. Sam. 4.18. 2 Kings 9.33. 2. Kings 4.19,20.
Judge. 9.53. Acts 7.59. Luke 16.22.
Goliath that mighty Giant was as much hurt by David's little stone, as Sampson
by the weight of a whole house. Ely had as much hurt by falling backward, as
Iezabel by falling down out of a high window. The Shunamites son had as much
harm by the headache, as Abimelech by a piece of a millstone cast upon his
head. And they that stoned Stephen to death, took no more from him then an
ordinary sickness did from Lazarus, and does daily from us all. One death is
no more death then another, and as well the easiest as the hardest take our
life from us. And therefore the four leprous men said one to another, 2. Kings
7.3,4.
Why sit we here till we die; If we say we will enter into the City, the
famine is there, and we shall die; and if we sit still here, we die also. Now
therefore let us fall into the host of the Syrians, if they save us alive we
shall live, and if they kill us, we shall but die.

And indeed our torments (how great and grievous soever) cannot be so great and
so grievous, as those which the Martyrs and Saints of God in former ages have
sustained and suffered.

Of the Fathers in the old Testament, the Author to the Hebrews says, That
some were racked and tortured, Heb. 11.35.36.37.38.
others had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings, of bonds and
imprisonments, etc. of whom the world was not worthy, etc. And of the Saints
and Martyrs of God in the Primitive Church in the ten persecutions, they were
thrust out of their houses, spoiled of their patrimony, loaded with irons,
locked up fast in prisons and dungeons, burned with fire, beheaded, hanged, and
pressed to death, roasted on spits, broiled on gridirons, boiled in hot oil and
scalding lead, thrown down from high and steep mountains upon sharp
stakes, torn with wild horses, rent in sunder with the violence of bowed
trees, condemned to toil in the metal mines, thrust through with spears,
brayned, racked, pricked with pen-kniues, their eyes bored out, their tongues
cut out, their bowels ripped out of their bellies, their bodies dismembered with
varitie of punishments, some whipped to death, others famished to death, some
stabbed in with forkes of iron, some drowned in sackes, some their skins
plucked off alive, some killed with cold, and left naked to the open shame of
the world. Cities lay full of dead men's bodies, and the blood ran streaming
in the streets, their torments were so great, that the lookers on were amazed,
and they were so mangled that the inward veins and arteries appeared, and the
very entrails of their bodies seen; they were set upon sharp shells taken out
of the sea; and made to go upon sharp nails and thorns, and rolled up and
down in vessels full of sharp nails, plates of iron were laid red-hot to
their arme-pits, they were torn and pulled in pieces, strangled in prisons,
gnawne with the teeth of cruel savage beasts, tossed upon bulls horns, their
bodies were laid in heaps, and dogs left to keep them that none might come
to bury them, they were put into bears skins, and baited by dogs, and yet
were not dismayed at any kind of torment or cruelty; the tormented were more
strong then the Tormentors, and their beaten and torn members overcame the
beating scourges, and tearing hooks, the tormentors were weary with
tormenting, and being overcome, were feign themselves to give over.

And in truth, what is it that we suffer, being compared with their sufferings?
Heb. 12.4.
even nothing in a manner: Ye have not (says the Author to the Hebrews) yet
resisted unto blood. And why then should we fear death in the least degree,
seeing all those holy Martyrs and Saints of God feared it not at the highest
degree? 1. Cor. 6.3.
Nay, why should we fear men, that are our selves feared of the Angels? for
we shall judge the very Angels. Luke 9.1.
We were feared of the devils, for over them God gives us authority; yea that
are feared of the whole world; 1. Cor. 6.2.
for we shall judge the world.

Let us therefore with our whole might arm our selves for this combat of
death. The persecuters, when they wound us most, are deepeliest wounded
themselves, and when they think most of all to be conquerers, then are they
most conquered. Ignatius going to his martyrdom, was so strongly ravished with
the joys of heaven, that he burst out into these words: Nay, come fire, come
beasts, come breaking of all my bones, rackings of my body, come all the
torments of the devil together upon me, come what can come in the whole earth
or in hell, so that I may enjoy Jesus Christ in the end.

One seeing a martyr so merry and iocund in going to his death, Luke 22.44.
did ask him why he was so merry at his death, seeing Christ himself swet
water and blood before his Passion? Christ (said the martyr) sustained in his
body all the sorrows and conflicts, with hell and death due unto us for our
sins, by whose sorrows and sufferings (says he) we are delivered from all
the sorrows and fears of hell, death and damnation. For so plenteous was the
passion and redemption of Christ, as, that faint and cold sweat that is upon us
in the agony of our death, the same he has sanctified by the warm and bloody
sweat of his agony, and making the grave a quiet withdrawing chamber for our
bodies, and death which before was so terrible to body and soul, is now by his
means become the very door and entrance into the kingdom of glory. And
hereof Blessed Hillary, who from the fourteenth year of his age served the
Lord in singlenes of heart, and in sincerity of life to his lives end, spoke
these words upon his deathbed. Go forth my soul go forth, why art thou
afraid? Thou have served Christ these seventy years, and art thou now afraid
to depart? Bishop Ridley the night before he did suffer, at his last supper,
invited his hostess and the rest at the table with him, to his marriage, for,
said he, tomorrow I must be married, showing thereby how joyful he was to die,
and how little he feared, seeing that he well knew he was to go to Christ
his Savior.

So by these examples we see what great troubles the Saints, and servants, and
martyrs of God endured, and how joyful they were as at a royal feast, in all
those troubles and sufferings of Christ, that they might enter upon that
comfortable death of the righteous. They were so far from fearing death, as
worldlings fear it, that they ran gladly unto it, in hope of the Resurrection,
and rejoiced in the welcome day of death, as in a day of the greatest good that
could befall them. Why then should we fear death at all, to whom many things
happen far more bitter and heavy then death it self, and yet nothing so
bitter and heavy, as happened to these Martyrs and Saints of God.

Therefore when thou come to die, set before thine eyes Christ thy Savior,
in the midst of all his torments upon the Cross, his body whipped, head
thorned, face spitted upon, his cheeks buffeted, his sides goared, his blood
spilt, his heart pierced, and his soul tormented, replenished on the cross
with a threefold plenitude, as true God, true man, God and man, gloria, gratia,
poena, full of glory and all magnificence, because true God, full of grace and
mercy, because God and man, and full of pain and misery, because perfect man,
a pain continuing long, various in afflicting, and bitter in suffering. One
says he continued in his torments twenty hours at the least; others say, he
was so long in pain on the cross, as Adam was in Paradise with pleasure: for
it was convenient that at what time the door of life was shut against the
sinner, in the same moment the gate of Paradise should be open to the penitent,
and at what hour the first Adam brought death into the world by sin, in the
same the second Adam should destroy death in the world by the Cross. Others
report that Christ slept not for fifteen nights before his Passion in
remembrance of the pain; yea from the first hour of his birth to the last
minute of his death, he did carry the cross of our redemption. In the
beholding of which spectacle to thy endless joy and comfort, thou shall see
Paradise in the midst of hell, God the Father reconciled unto thee, God the
Son and thy Savior reaching forth his hand toward thee, for to succor thee,
and to receive thy soul unto himself, and God the holy Ghost ready to embrace
thee, and thou shall see the Cross of Christ, Genesis 28.12.
as Jacobs Ladder set upon the earth, and the top of it reaching heaven, and
the Angels of God ascending and descending on it, to carry and advance thy soul
to eternal life and glory.

Then seeing we are thus graced by God both in our life and at our death, be
not thou afraid to die. And sure it is the will of God, Matthew. 20.22.
that you should drink of the cup that he has filled for you, and therefore
pray that you may suppe it up with patience, and receive great comfort thereby.

Again, there be three things that make death tolerable to every godly
Christian. The first is the necessity of dying; the second, the facility of
dying; the third, the felicity of dying. For the first, that which cannot be
avoided by any power, must be endured with all patience. Eccles. 8.8.
There is no man (says the Preacher) has power over the spirit to retain it,
neither has he power in the day of death. The first age had it, and therein
may plead antiquity; the second age felt it, and may plead, continuance; the
last, age has it, and may plead property in all flesh, till sin and time
shall be no more. Call it then no new thing that is so ancient, nor a strange
thing that is so usual; neither call it an evil properly thine, which is so
common to all the world. Will thou fear that to be done, which is always in
doing, I mean thy dying; and do thou fear to die in thy last day, when by
little and little thou dyest every day? Oh, well said the Apostle Saint Paul,
1. Cor. 15.31.
I protest by our rejoicing, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord I dye daily.
Then I may well say ye are always dying, and death is still in doing.
Remember my judgment (says Jesus the son of Syrach) for thine also shall be
so; yesterday for me, Eccles. 38.22.
and to day for thee. Solomon says, All things have here their time, you to
day, and I to morrow, and so the end of Adams line is soon run out. Death is
the Empress and Lady of all the world, it seaseth upon all flesh without
surrender of any, till the day of restoration, no place, no presence, no time
can back it; there is no privilege against the grave, Eccles. 41.4.
there is no inquisition in the grave, there is no pity to be showed by the
grave, there is no pleading with the grave: For there is no work (says the
Preacher) nor devise, nor knowledge, Eccles. 9.10.
nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go. And therefore antiquity never
made altar to Death, or devotion to the grave, because it was implacable, ever
found to be cruel, and never felt to be kind.

And here from the necessity of dying, we come to the facility of dying,
which makes it less fearful, and more tolerable, for that the sense of
death is of no continuance, it is buried in its own birth, it vanishes in its
own thought, and the pain is no sooner begun, but is presently ended. Though
the flesh be weak and frail, yet the spirit is strong to encounter the
cruelty of Death, and to make it rather a kind kiss, 1. Cor. 4.16.
then a cruel cross. We faint not (says the Apostle) for though the outward
man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. Our Savior Christ said at
his death and last farewell, John 17.1.
Father the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify
thee. Is there glory in death, and is death but an hour? It is of no long
abode, that abides but an hour; and little do I doubt, but that in that
hour the soul is more ravished with the sight of God, then the body is
tormented with the sense of death. Nay I am further persuaded that in the hour
of my death, the passion of mortality is so beaten back with impression of
eternity, that the flesh feels nothing, but what the soul offers, and
that is God, from whom it came, and whither it would (as Saint Augustine says)
with as great have as happiness. And therefore, whether you please to define
or divine of death, what it is, if it be rightly broken into parts and
passages, the elect of God shall find it a very easy passage, even as it were
but a going out of prison, a shaking off of our gives, an end of banishment, a
breaking off our bands, a destruction of toil, an arriving at the haven, a
journey finished, the casting off an heavy burden, the alighting from a mad
and furious horse, the going out of a tottering and ruinous house, the end of
all griefs, the escape of all dangers, the destroyer of all euels, Natures
due, Countries joy, and heavens bliss. And from hence do flow those sweet
appellations, by which the holy Ghost, which is the Spirit of truth, does
describe the death of the godly, in saying that they are gathered or
congregated to their people, that is, to the company of the blessed and
triumphing Church in heaven: to come to those which have deceased before them
in the true faith, or rather have gone thither before them. So that the holy
Ghost uses a most sweet Periphrasis of death; as speaking of the death of
Abraham, Genesis 25.8.
Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, Genesis 35.29. Genesis
49 33. Numb. 20.24. Number. 27.13.
an old man and full of years, and was gathered to his people. And of the
death of Isaac, And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto
his people: and so likewise of Jacob, of Moses, of Aaron, etc.

It is but the taking of a journey, which we think to be death, it is not an
end, but a passage, it is not so much an emigration, as a transmigration from
worse things to better, a taking away of the soul, and a most blessed
conueying of it from one place to another, not an abolishing; for the soul is
taken from hence, and transposed into a place of eternal rest; it is a passage
and ascension to the true life, it is an outgoing, because by it the godly
pass out of the slavery of sin, to true liberty, even as heretofore the
Israelites out of the bondage of Egypt into the promised land. And as S. Peter
terms it, it is a laying down of the tabernacle, 2. Pet. 1.14. 2. Cor. 5.4.
for so he styles our bodies. And as S. Paul terms it, it is an vnclothing or
putting off of it, and a removing out of the body from a most filthy lodging
to a most glorious dwelling. They are said to be loosed from a port or from a
prison, and to come to Christ, Phil. 1.23.
seeing they are led out of the Inn of this present life to the heavenly
Country, and out of the dregs of wicked men to the most blessed society of
Christ and his Saints in heaven. They are loosed by death out of the bonds of
the body: for even as cattle, when they have discharged the labor of the
whole day, at last about the evening are set free: and as they which are bound
in prison are loosed from their fetters, so the godly are led forth by death
from the yoke of their labors and sorrows of this life, and out of the
filthy prison of sin, and by a wonderful and most sweet translation are
carried to a better life.

Out of all which it clearly appears, Phil. 1.21.
how truly the Apostle has called the death of the godly advantage, seeing it
is advantage to have escaped the increase of sin, advantage by avoiding worse
things to pass to better, from labor and danger to perfect rest and
security, and which is all in all to eternal blessedness. All which
appellations of death, do teach us to be so far from being afraid of it,
that we ought willingly to welcome it, as the easy and joyful messenger of
our happy deliverance, and not sing loath to depart, as all worldlings do, who
tremble at the very name of it.

And thus I pass from the facility of dying, to the felicity of dying, of
which I may say as Sampson did of his riddle, Out of the eater came meat,
Judges 14.14.
and out of the strong came sweetness. Now the meat that comes out of this
eater, and sweetness that proceeds forth of this strong one, is a cessation
of all evil, and an indowment of all good, and by this door we have an easy
and ready passage to all blessedness and happiness, where God, and with him,
all good is. Man that is borne of a woman (says Job) has but a short time to
live, Job 14.1.
and is full of misery. O sweet death, that turns time into eternity, and
misery into mercy: so graciously has our Savior done for us, making
medicines of maladies, cures of wounds, and salues of sores, and to his
children producing health out of sickness, light out of darkness, and life
out of death. Psalm. 27.13.
This made David to dance in the midst of all his affliction and calamity,
when he said, I should verily have fainted, unless I had believed to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. This has supported the souls
of Gods Saints in the seas of their sorrows, when they thought upon the day of
their dissolution, wherein they should be made glorious by their deliverance.

For as our Savior Christ took his flight from the heaven to the Virgins
womb, from her womb to the world, from the world to the cross, from the
cross to the grave, from the grave unto heaven again: Even so from the womb
we must follow his steps, and tread the same path that he has traced out
for us. John 14.6.
I am the way (says our Savior) the truth and the life. He is the way without
wandering, the truth without shadowing, the life without ending; he is the way
in our peregrination, truth in deliberation, life in remuneration: the way
whereby our paths are directed, the truth whereby our errors are corrected,
and the life whereby our frail mortality is eternized. Therefore you may not
look to leap out of your mothers warm womb, into your fathers hot joy:
Matt. 10.24.25.
For the disciple) says our Savior) is not above his master, nor the servant
above his Lord: you must for a while endure death, that you may be dignified, I
had almost said, deified; and surely you shall be near it. John 1.13.
For we are borne of God (says the Evangelist) and we shall be fashioned like
unto the glorious body of Christ: for he shall change our vile body, Phil.
3.21.
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body: and we shall follow the
Lamb (says the holy Ghost) Revel. 14.4.
whithersoeuer he goes.

And now tell me in lieu of all I have said, if death does thus divide us from
all evil, and bring us into all good? if death be like unto the gathering
host of Dan, Numbers 2.31 Numb. 10.25. Joshua 6.9.
that comes last to gather up the lost and forlorn hope of this world, that
they may be found in a better? whether is it better to live in sorrow or to
die in solace?

Let Agamades and Trophonius assoile the doubt, of whom it is written by Plato
in his Axiaco, that after they had builded the temple of Apollo-Delphick: they
begged of God that he would grant to them that which would be most beneficial
for them; who after this suite made went to bed, and there took their last
sleep, being both found dead the day after; in token that the day of death is
better then the day of life, this being the entrance into all misery, and that
the end of all misery, yea our dissolution is nothing else, but aeterni
natalis, the birth day of eternity, as Seneca calls it more truly then he was
aware: For this dissolution gives to our souls an entrance and admission into
the most blessed society of eternal glory with God himself: for what other
thing is death to the faithful, but the funeral of their vices, and the
resurrection of their virtues. Christians therefore (one would think) need not
as pagans, consolations against death, but death should serve them as a
consolation against all misery.

But you will here object and say, me thinks I am called back too timely out
of this life, Psalm. 102.24:
God snatcheth me a way in the midst of my days. I might yet live longer, for
I am young and in my blood. I fear therefore lest this be a sign of the wrath
of God, Psalm. 55.23.
seeing it is written, Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half
their days. I answer there is no time now to consult with flesh and blood,
but readily to obey the heavenly call: And for your few years, Seneca says
well, He that dies when he is young, is like him that has lost a dye,
wherewith he might rather have lost then won; more years might have
ensnared you with more sins, and have hardened you in your impenitencie, to
the hazard of your life in this world, and your soul in another. And for the
flower of your youth, if you compare it with eternity, whether now you are
going, and ought to long after it, indeed all are equally young and equally
old. For the most extended age of a man in this world is but as a point or
minute, and the most contracted can be no less. And Jesus the son of Sirach
says, Eccl. 41.13.
A good life has but few days, nothing is too timely with God, which is ripe.
Long life truly is the gift of God, and the hoarie head a crown of glory
(says the Wiseman) if it be found in the way of righteousness. Pro. 16.31.
Yet short life is not always a token of the wrath of God, seeing God sometime
commands the godly also, and those that are beloved of him to depart timely out
of the house of this world, that being freed from the danger of sinning, they
may be settled in the security of not sinning, neither be constrained to have
experience of public calamities, more grievous oftentimes then death it self.

An immature and untimely death, for a man to be taken away before he be come
to the full period of his life, that by the course of nature, and in the eye of
reason he might have attained unto, is a thing that may betide good men, and
not be a curse to them. Esaias 57.1.
The righteous man perishes, and no man lays it to his heart, says the
Prophet, the merciful man is taken away, (namely, untimely.) For if they died
in a full age, it were not blameworthy for a man not to consider it in his
heart. Jacob knew this full well, that untimely death belongs to Gods
children, for when Iosephes party-colored coat was brought to him all bloody,
it is said that he knew it, Genesis 37.33.
It is my sons coat (says he) some evil beast has devoured him, Joseph
is without doubt rent in pieces. So Abiah, Genesis 44.28.
the son of Jeroboam, falling sick, Jeroboam sending his wife to the Prophet
Abiiah with presents, 1. Kings 14.1.2.3.6.12.13.17.18.
to tell her what should become of the child; when she was come, the Prophet
told her, that he was sent to her with heavy tidings. Arise thou therefore
(says he) get thee to thine own house, and when thy feet enter into the
City, the child shall die, and all Israel shall mourn for him; and bury him;
for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found
some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam.

Now this truth is confirmed unto us by two arguments, the one drawn from the
malice of the wicked against the godly, the other from the mercy of God to the
godly.

For the first, the wicked through their malice seek by all means to cut off
the godly, because their wickedness and sinful life is reproved by their
godly conversation, neither can they follow their sins so freely as they would,
nor quietly without detection or check. The Apostle says, Cain, 1. John 3.12.
that wicked one, cut off and slew his brother Abel; and wherefore slew he him?
because his own works were evil, Genesis 37.2.
and his brothers good. The Patriarchs sold Joseph their brother, and sent him
out of the house of his Father, because he was a means that they were checked
for their evil sayings. And this is that we have in the book of Wisdom.
Therefore the ungodly men say, let us lie in wait for the righteous, Wisd.
2.12.14.15.16.18.19.20
because he is not for our turn, but is clean contrary to our doings, he
vpbraideth us with our offending the law, and obiecteth to our infamy in the
transgression of our education. He was made to reprove our thoughts. It
grieueth us also to look upon him: for his life is not like other men's: his
ways are of another fashion. He counts us as bastards, and he withdraws
himself from our ways as from filthiness: he commends greatly the latter
end of the just, and boasts that God is his Father. For if the righteous man
be the son of God, he will help him and deliver him from the hands of his
enemies. Let us examine him with rebukes and torments, that we may know his
meekness, and prove his patience. Let us condemn him unto a shameful death:
for he shall be preserved as he himself says.

Genesis 19.16,17.
For the second, because in the goodness of God wherewith he affects his
children, he takes them from the evil of the plagues to come, as Lot out of
Sodom, and as good king Josiah: 2. Kings 22.20.
Therefore I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shall be gathered into
thy grave in peace, and thy eyes shall not see all the evil, which I will
bring upon this place.

Esaias 57.1.
The righteous man perishes (says the Prophet as we heard before) and no man
lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, and none consider that
the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. And though he says he
perishes, he means not simply that they were perished, but as Chrysostom
says of one, He sleeps, he is not dead; he rests, he is not perished. For
the Prophet speaks according to the opinion of the wicked, who were fixed in
the world, and therein had their felicity, and so judged them to be perished,
who were taken out of the world somewhat untimely and unseasonably, as it
seemed to their sense and judgment. But all this is in Gods mercy, from the
evils to come.

Wisd. 4.7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16.
To this purpose Wisdom says, Though the righteous be prevented by death,
yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which stands in
length of time, nor that is measured by number of years, but wisdom is the
gray hair unto men, and unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was
beloved of him, so that living amongst sinners, he was translated; yea speedily
was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or
deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness does obscure
things that are honest, and the wandering of concupiscence does undermine the
simple mind. He being made perfect in a short time fulfilled a long time, for
his soul pleased the Lord, and therefore hasted he to take him away from
amongst the wicked. This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid
they up this in their minds, that his grace and mercy is with his Saints, and
that he has respect unto his chosen. Thus the righteous that are dead shall
condemn the ungodly that are living, and youth that is soon perfected, the
many years and old age of the unrighteous.

Plotinus the Philosopher (as S. Augustine has it) saw in part this very
thing, that men are bodily mortal, and thought it an appurtenance to the mercy
of God the Father, lest they should always be tied to the misery of this life.
It is no less mercy to be taken sooner away, that they may see and suffer
less misery, which the length of their days would effect. Therefore the godly
man dies well, whether he die in a good age, or in the first flower of his
youth. By how much the more timely the heavenly General does call thee back
out of the station of this life, by so much the sooner does he place thee in a
place of rest, peace and victory. Again, it may be you will object and say, I
am loath and unwilling to die, because then I must leave my loving wife, my
dear children and kinsfolks. I answer, howsoever we be left and forsaken, or
rather sequestered and separated from our wives, children, kinsfolks and
friends by death, yet are we not forsaken of God, nor of his Son Jesus
Christ. But take heed that thou be not so careful for the bodily safety of
wife, children, kinsfolks and friends, that in the mean time thou neglect the
care of thy soul. Behold, he calls thee by death, take heed thou do not so
love thy wife and children, that therefore thou refuse to follow God calling
thee with a ready heart. The love of thy heavenly Father must be preferred
before the love of children: the love of our bridegroom Christ Jesus before
the love of thy wife, the benefit must not be more loved then the benefactor.
And we must consider that we, our wives, children, kinsfolks and friends are
all as it were travelers, going forth of this world, in a manner, we take our
voyage together; if we go a little before, 2. Genesis 24. Mat. 19.5.
they shall follow shortly after. Wherefore as at the beginning of our marriage
and acquaintance, God did appoint that we should leave father and mother, and
cleave to our wives, even so now in this case, it ought not to grieve us to
leave them when God will have it so, and to return unto him, who is better
unto us, then father, mother, wife, children, friends or any thing else: yea he
is worth ten thousand of them, 2. Sam. 18.3. 1. Cor. 15.28.
as the people said of David; yea he then shall be all in all to us. Therefore
let the godly ones fetch comfort from hence, that though by death they leave
the world, wife, children, and friends and kinsfolks, yet they shall be
gathered to their fathers, kinsfolks and friends.

I read of Socrates being but an heathen man, that when Crito persuaded him,
that if he would not regard his life for his own sake, yet for his wife,
children, kinsfolks and friends sake, which depended on him: he answered, God
will care for my wife and children, who first gave them unto me, and for my
kinsfolks and friends, I shall find the like unto them, and far better in the
life to come, neither shall I long want your company, for you also are going
thither, and shall shortly be in the same place: and they are not lost but sent
before us, Esaias 26.19.
neither are they dead, but fallen asleep, hereafter they shall awake, says
S. Cyprian, and they shall rise again, and we shall see one another, and
rejoice and sing.

Again, another objection: Oh, but my debt is great, if I die now, how can I
be comforted at my death, for after my death my creditors will come and seize
on all that I have, so cruel are they, and merciless, and so shall my poor
wife and children be undone for ever: and therefore I would to God I might live
to be out of debt, and to leave my wife and children free, though I left them
little or nothing besides. Alas, how shall I do, nay how shall they do? This is
it that tormenteth my heart, when I think of it: these careful thoughts go
to bed with me, lodge all night with me, and rise with me, and lies all day
in my bosom; these things considered, what comfort can I have in death, dying
in such a case?

Answ. Still be patient I pray you, and drink often of the Lords Fountain
some sweet water to refresh you in this case. I know this you speak of is a
very great grief, and biteth the heart, and that even this makes many a man
and woman more loath to die, then otherwise they would be, and because diverse
men have diverse means to rid their debts by, some by leases and livings in
reuertions, some by discharging every year a portion by such helps as
already they enjoy, every man wishes as his case is, some to live till those
leases and reuertions come to them and theirs, till they may by such yearly
parcels acquit the whole, and so forth, every one wishes life, trembling and
shaking to think on death till these things be so. To all which minds thus
grieved and pinched, I say this, you cannot commit your wife and children into
the hands of a more faithful guardian and ouerseer, then God is; for he will
take them into his charge and protection. And therefore hearken and give ear,
what the Spirit of comfort speaks, with great comfort in the first Epistle of
Saint Peter. 1. Pet. 5.6.7.
Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time, cast all your care upon him, for he cares for you. As if he
should say, I know your woe and careful thoughts, be not discouraged, nor
faint in fear under the Cross; you have care in your heart, cast it upon me,
and I will discharge it; what you cannot, I can, and of my will be assured, I
do care for you. O my God, what says thou? Do thou care for me? and shall
I remove it from my self to thy Majesty, and lay it all upon thee? So indeed
thou speak; mine eyes see, and mine ears hear. Why, then will I indeed
both believe and do (most dear Father) here grouelling in the dust before
thee, humble my soul, and bless and praise thee for easing me of so grievous
a burden; my care be hereafter (my sweet God) cast wholly upon thee, and as
thou have spoken, so do for me and mine, I hunbly beseech thee, for Jesus
Christ his sake.

Consider the Ravens (says our Savior Christ) Luke 12.24.27.28.29.
how they neither sow nor reap, which have neither storehouse nor barn, and
yet God feeds them. Psalm. 147.9.
He gives to the beast his food (says the Psalmist) and to the young Ravens
which cry. Psalm. 104.27.
These wait all upon thee, that thou may give them their meat in due
season. How much more (says our Savior) are ye better then beasts or fowls?
Math. 6.26.
Consider also (says our Savior) of the lyllies of the field, how they grow,
they neither labor nor spinne, and yet Solomon himself, in all his royalty,
was not clothed like one of these, etc. What concludes then our Savior
there? Surely even this, your heavenly Father knows, that you have need of
all these things. As if he should say, let this stay and strengthen you, and
satisfy and content you evermore, that God, yea God your heavenly Father
knows your case what you and yours from time to time and ever are in need of.
O strange and strong comfort drawn from Gods mercy, love and knowledge, how
ouerwhelmeth it all, that ever fearful and distrustful man can object? Genesis
32.10.
I am unworthy, it is true (for so we must acknowledge with the Patriarch
Jacob) that we are not worthy of the least of all Gods mercies. My debts be
great, be it so that they are ten thousand talents; the Creditors are very
cruel and merciless, yea so cruel as that merciless Creditor, which our
Savior Christ speaks of in the Gospel, Mat. 18.28,29,30. Psalm. 88.18.
my self void of friends, and the like. Be it so that all thy lovers, friends
and acquaintance are put far from thee; as the Prophet David complains in
the Psalm; yea let al thy brethren hate thee, as Joseph was of his brethren;
Prou. 19.7.
let all thy friends go far from thee, and be wanting unto thee; as it is in
the Proverbs, or whatsoever else it be, put it all off with this (says our
blessed Savior) that your heavenly Father knows the same, and despair you
of help, when he fails to know, and not before, I charge you, but take it
at my hands as a sequel sure; he knows, and therefore he will provide in fit
time for all things; and his care shall do, what yours never can, Psalm. 10.14.
Psalm. 68.5
both for you and yours, if you commit it unto him. It is God which calls
himself the Father of Orphans, and defender of the Widows; commmend them
therefore to his patronage and defense. Ever in such griefs as these are, we
should remember the promise of the Lord, which he made to Abraham and to his
seed. Genesis 17.7.
And I will establish my covenant between thee and me, and thy seed after thee
in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to
thy seed after thee.

All souls are mine (says the Lord) both the soul of the father and of the
son are mine. God which is thy God, Ezech. 18.4.
will also be the God of thy seed; thy children are not only thine, but also
Gods, yea more Gods then thine; therefore doubt not of the fatherly care of God
toward them. The Prophet of the Lord does testify that he has been young,
and also old, yet never did he see the righteous forsaken, Psalm. 37.25.
or his seed to beg their bread; not meaning that it was impossible that the
child of a righteous man should go a begging, but that it is a thing very
rare, and that he was now fourscore years old, yet did he in all his life
never see it; and so have many men lived till they have been of great years,
and yet seldom, or not at all, have they seen any such thing come to pass.
And again he says, Psalm. 112.2.
The seed of the righteous shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the
upright shall be blessed. God has promised to thy children the heavenly
treasures, he will not suffer them to perish for hunger, he has given them
life, and will not deny them maintenance for life: he has given them a body,
which he has wonderfully framed, he will also kindly sustain he will never
forsake his own, nor give over to nourish them whom he has created, and
hitherto by our selves through his blessing provided for. Therefore fear not
at Death, for if he take you away, he will give some other good means to
perform his promise by. He is your God and their God after you, and will not
fail them, for he has said it, I will never leave thee, Heb. 13.5.
nor forsake thee.

In the very matter we speak of, see the experience by a most memorable
example, and be comforted with it. The husband died being one of the sons of
the Prophets, 2. Kings 4.11.
and a man that feared God, he died much in debt, not by reason of any
prodigality or unthriftiness (as many do) but by the hand of God, and he
left his poor wife and children to the cruelty of the cruel Creditor, who
came in fierce manner to take away the children from their mother, to answer
the debt by bondage. This was a heavy cross to a man fearing God, to live in
debt and dye in debt, especially debt being so dangerous to his poor wife and
children: yet this it was, that we may not be discouraged our selves, or be
over headie to censure too far, 1. Sam. 2.7.
if the like befall any one of us. For the Lord does make poor, and the Lord
makes rich; he brings low, and lifts up. Prou. 27.24.
And as the Wiseman says, Riches are not for ever. Happily this man wished
that he might live till he had paid his debt, as you do, and with condition of
Gods good liking; 1. Tim. 5.8.
it was but well, if he did so. For a man is tied and bound to provide for his
own family. But it so pleased not God, for he died and left the debt unpaid,
and his Creditors will be answered with the bodies of his poor crying
children, which he left with a very sorrowful and heavy mother behind him;
how now shall this woeful widow and fatherless children do? Now see if God
fail to provide for that thing, he saw this poor widow had need of, to
relieve her self and her children? He directs his Prophet to bid her borrow
vessels of her neighbors, and himself by his powerful mercy, and merciful
power, so increased and multiplied that little oil, which she had in a cruse,
that it paid her Creditors, and yielded her further maintenance for her and
hers, to her unspeakable joy and comfort; you know the story. Thus then behold
and think of it, and write this in the palms of your hands that you never
forget it, Deuteronomy. 11.12. Abac. 2.2.
And write it upon the doore-postes of thine house, and upon thy gates; yea
write it, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run that reads it. God
is not the God of this man alone, or of his wife and children, which he left
behind him, but he is your God and our God yea, John 20.17.
he is a God most merciful to all those that do wholly rely and depend upon
him.

If you may live to free things your self, it is to be wished, and you may
with condition ask it, if it may stand with the good will and pleasure of God;
but if it please God to have it otherwise, then grieve not to depart, lest you
appear to tie God to your providence, life and means, when you see by this
example what he can do when you are gone; and not what he can do, but what
he will do, Iam. 1.6.
if you waver not but believe. God was to this Widow in stead of her husband,
and far better, so shall he be to your wife. God was to these children in
stead of their father, and better far, so shall he be to yours. God was the
Executor and paid this debt, and the ouerseer that all was well, friends were
not wanting to mother or children, but God was a friend in the greatest need,
that most fully, mercifully, and bountifully performed all, and suffered not
the care of his deceased servant to be vncared for, nor vncomforted.

Wherefore, let it not grieve thee to die, but thereby receive comfort, if God
will have it so, leave all to him, and remember his promises, together with
this practice, committing your wife and children to God, and he will protect
and provide for them. Therefore what is unpaid by thee, he will pay as shall be
best, and effect what you cannot think of, to give testimony of his mercy to
you and yours. So God is not tied to your leases and livings, when they shall
descend unto you, if he please he will use them, if not, he can well want them,
and yet pay all, 1. Sam. 2.8.
and set up the poor fatherless child even with the rulers of the people, as
he has done in all ages.

The end of the fifth Division.
THE SIXTH DIVISION, THE COMFORT AGAINST THE DEATH OF FRIENDS.
RIght well said Chrysostom of the word of God, Romans 3.2.
Have thou the Oracles of God? care not for any other teacher, for there is
none shall teach thee like them. So say I for comfort in this case, as
Chrysostom does for doctrine. Have thou the holy Scriptures? care not for other
comforters, for none shall comfort thee as these do, nay without these there
is no comfort to be had at all; and as David said to Abimelech the Priest
concerning the sword of Goliath, 1. Sam. 21.9.
so let us say of these holy Scriptures, There is none like unto this, give it
me. For if these will not serve, then nothing will serve. For whatsoever woe
wringeth, whatsoever sorrow nippeth, whatsoever cross grieueth, and whatsoever
loss troubles, there is for them all in the word of God most sweet comfort;
if it be diligently sought, and truly and carefully applied.

Genesis 27.38.
We read in the book of Genesis, that profane Esau mourned upon his father
Isaac, and cried out most pitifully to him, saying, Have thou but one blessing
my father? Not one, but many and infinite are the consolations of God our
heavenly Father; for the storehouse of his consolations can never be emptied:
he has not dealt with us niggardly or sparingly, but a good measure of
consolations pressed down: Luke 6.38.
and running over has he given to us in our bosom. For every cross and loss
he has several comforts and consolations in the holy Scriptures. 2. Cor.
1.3.4.
Blessed be God (says the Apostle) even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our
tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them, which are in any trouble,
by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. No marvel
therefore if Chrysostom says again in the true feeling thereof, Ever I
exhort, and I will never cease exhorting, that not only here in the Church of
God, you would attend unto those things, which are there said and taught, (and
to say as Cornelius said unto Peter, Acts 10.33.
Now therefore are we all here present before God to hear all things that are
commanded thee of God.) But at home also, that you would daily give your selves
with the men of Be^ea to the searching and reading of the holy Scriptures. Acts
17.11.
Search the Scriptures, (says our Savior Christ) for in them ye think to
have eternal life, and they are they that testify of me. John 5.39.
If you will not utterly war against all truth and reason, and even against
God himself, I know you will hearken unto these things. Consider (says the
Apostle) what I say, 2. Tim. 2.7.
and the Lord give thee understanding in all these things.

It is sufficient to weigh these matters with the waights of the Lords
Sanctuary, and not needful to try them by fetching helps of humane reason.
Yet to give them over measure, that will not rest satisfied with the comforts
which the holy Scripture does afford, let it be first considered what humane
wit and reason has said in this case.

And touching this matter which now is moved, I have read, and you may see
what Heathens by learning and natural light, have said to themselves and their
friends in such losses; but this did I never read, neither shall you find,
that all their comforts have counteruailed one promise out of Gods book. I
confess the books of heathen Writers do promise comfort in this case, but
(alas) they perform it not: but are like a brook that swells in winter when
there is no need of it, and is dry in Summer when the passenger faints and
pants for heat: no, if we will have good gold, we must go to Ophir: if good
balm, to Gilead: if good wine, to Christ at the wedding of Cana: and if good
tidings, to the book of God. They did say well in many things, but never like
this word that is from the Lord. John 7.46.
For never man spoke like this man, as the officers told the chief Priests
and Pharisees concerning Christ. They considered the necessity of death, the
miseries of life, the examples of great men that had gone before them, and such
like. But what are these to those that the word of God will show us; our safety
in Christ, our resurrection in immortality in the presence of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, with such like, yet both good unto a sanctified mind.

First the necessity of death is a true comfort against death, be it of our
selves, or of our friends; no living flesh but must die, as we have heard in
the first Division. What man is he (says the Psalmist) that lives and shall
not see death? Psalm. 89.48.
And shall we fear that in our selves, or bewail immoderatly that in our
friends, which cannot be avoided? This were with witless will to disturb the
peace of our whole life, and with a servile dread of the last hour, to bereave
of comfort all the rest of our hours that we are to live in this present evil
world, which in your judgment conceive how fond a thing it were.

The careful view of natures course, does show us degrees from age to age till
we come to a full, and a like decrease by step after step, till we come to the
change again. Youth follows childhood, and age follows youth by assured
necessity, if we live. But when we are children, we fear not to be men,
neither when we are men, to become old; but many rather wish it, why then
should we either fear in our selves, or lament in our friends, death to follow
age in his course appointed, more then age to follow youth, as was said before?
Surely the one must be received as well as the other without choice. And
whereas Christ said in the Gospel touching man and wife, Matthew. 19.9.
What therefore God has joined together, let no man put in sunder, it may be
more peremptorily said of this, What God has joined or coupled together no man
can separate nor put asunder. And therefore a wise content both in our friends,
and in our selves shall become us best. Who will not die, let him never live;
for we receive the one to endure the other when God appoints, and we must all
die both friend and foe: to wise men necessity is a comfort, and so (I hope)
to you.

Secondly, the miseries of this life is another head, from whence heathen men
have derived comfort against death, be it of our selves, or of our friends.
Consider then with your self from the first age unto the last hour, the
diseases incident to our bodies, to vex us with woe, according to their
several natures, some more, some less, and yet the least too much. All the
changes and chances of this most wretched sinful world; whereunto, whilst we
live we must lie open, will we nill we; from all which our death does free us,
and our friends. Therefore how should we either fear or sorrow for our selves
or for our friends, for that which does so befriend us? If we conceive hereof
as we ought, we must needs be of the same judgment with Seneca, and in some
sort approve his speech: O men most ignorant (says he) of their own
miseries, who praise not death as the best invention that ever nature had,
which includes felicity, excludes misery, finisheth the toils of age,
preuenteth the perils of youth; to many is a remedy, to some a wish, to all an
end, and deserves better of none then them, to whom it comes before it be
called. Yea we must confess (these things being well considered) that it
befalls to men concerning death, as unto young children concerning their
friends. Little children if their friends be disguised with some strange
shows, they are afraid of them, and crying, fly from them, Exodus 4.3.
as some that would hurt them; as Moses fled from his rod of death, when it
was turned into a Serpent. But take off these vizards that their friends may
appear as they are, and then by and by they are comforted and rejoice, and
embrace them gladly again: even so it is of death, when we are misled, it
appears unto us disguised and covered by ignorance of the truth, and his
approaching makes us shrink, but pluck off that vizard of supposed evil,
and behold it as it is to us in Christ, and it is then but a painted death, and
we see him then our great friend, that cutteth the third that we do weaue, and
then we neither fly nor fear any more, but are truly comforted, and embrace
him most willingly as we ought, and love him as Jonathan loved his friend
David, 1. Sam. 18.1.
as his own soul.

Thirdly, the heathen considered again the famous and worthy men that died
before them, and what they endured, and could not avoid; and thereupon thought
great shame either to fear or fly, to lament in themselves or in their
friends. The greatest lights that ever were amongst them died all; Socrates,
Demosthenes, Plato, Pompey, Caesar, Cicero, learned, martial, or whatsoever;
yea what wisdom and knowledge, what valor and prowess, what act, what
government soever they had, all gifts and graces, all pomp and power, all
empire and majesty, were it over thousands, or thousand thousands, yielded to
death, death had his place, when his time was come; and as well these great
lights and lofty gallants, as the lowest wretches and poorest worms, the high
oaks, as the small shrubs, drunk of deaths cup, when they were invited and
enjoined.

Shall it not then even in reason seem unjust and unequal, if any of less
merit, yea of no merit, in comparison of such men, shall grieve for themselves,
or any friend of theirs to endure that which these endured. Surely not only to
grieve, but not most willingly to welcome, what all these men embraced, is
tenderness, intolerable folly, unfitting, and a fault no way to be excused.
Yea the fault is so much the greater, by how much either you or your friend are
inferior to these men in service and use unto the common state.

Thus did the heathens seek to salve the sore which grew by death of any, and
to this end many things of like persuasion, they heaped up, which I pass over,
as hastening to the word of God, without all comparison the fountain of all
comfort. This only I say, and pray you to observe concerning the mention made
of the heathen, that it is meant only to show, that they were ashamed to fear
death in themselves, or immoderately bewail it in any friend, and will you
fail of the strength of an heathen? shall they fight better against foolish
affections by the light of nature, then you by the power of grace, and the most
bright Sunshine of Gods word? God forbid: and as you tender your credit to be
judged truly a soldier that answers the promise made in baptism, that you
would fight manfully under Christ's banner, and not yield to your foe, and Gods
enemy and yours: let not Satan overcome you in this to make you worse then an
heathhen, more passionate, more impatient, more subject to will, and less
subject to reason, nay more disobedient to God and of less reputation before
men, for government of your mind then they were. You know more, perform not
less then they did: you have seen a light that they never saw, nor many other
worthy men. Luke 10.23.24
Blessed are the eyes (says our Savior) which see the things which ye see;
for I tell you that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things
which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye
hear, and have not heard them. Walk therefore in that light as a child of
light, that you may be more comforted for the death of your friends, then the
very heathen were Seneca says, He that laments that a man is dead, laments
that he was a man. And now to come to the word of God, to the Law, Isay 8.20.
and to the testimony (says the Prophet) even to the sweet fountain of
Israel, that cooles indeed the scorching heat of all sorrows, and by name of
this, when God takes away any of our friends by death, if Moses and the
Prophets will not comfort us in this case, then (as Abraham told Dives in
another case) nothing can persuade, Luke 16.31.
nor prevail with us.

Many are the places of holy Scriptures, when comfort arise and flow, if they
be well and duly considered, but meaning only to give you a taste, some few
shall serve at this time, to which may be added (by your own diligence) some
more at your best leisure.

Job 1.21.22.
The Lord gave (says Job) and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the
Lord. Where, I pray you, consider well what Job lost, when he said thus, and
consider what you have lost now at this time, and you shall find your ca^es
far differing. Job had his Oxen and Asses taken away by strangers, and his
servants slain with the edge of the sword. This was his first news. The fire
of God fell down from heaven, and burnt up his sheep and his servants, and
consumed them. This was the second news, His Camels were taken by the
Chaldeans, and his servants slain. This the third news, all of them bitter
and grievous to happen at once. You will confess this was sore, and any one of
them falling by it self alone upon many of us in these days, would plunge us
very sore. Yet see far greater, his fourth and last news was, that his
sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brothers
house, and there came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote the four
corners of the house, and the house fell upon them, and they all died, yea all,
and all at once, by this sudden means, to the utter amazing and astonishing of
all that should see or think of it. Yet for all this (says the holy Ghost) Job
did not sin, to wit, by rauing and railing impatiently, nor did he charge God
foolishly, as dealing unjustly or cruelly with him; but considered with
himself, who had given, and who had taken, and weighed with himself that they
were Gods and not his, and should he forbid the Lord to do with his own what
was his good pleasure? Is it not lawful (says our Savior Christ in another
case) for me to do what I will with mine own. Mat. 20.15.
Therefore sweetly and meekely, patiently and peaceably he cast up his eyes,
his heart, his soul, his mind, his affections, and all unto the Lord, and
said, Blessed be the name of the Lord; of which Lord? surely of this Lord that
had thus dealt with him, and taken away all that ever he had.

God has not dealt thus with you, by many and many degrees with you at this
time; and will you then take on, and (as it were) bid battle to the Lord, by
weepings and wailings, by sobbings and sighings, by groanings and crying, by
mutterings and murmurings, and by such like testimonies of a discontented and
offended mind, above that which can stand with a dutiful childs behavior to
his heavenly Father? If your losses were as great as Jobs was, yet you see what
he did, and this was Gods Spirit in him, much more in a far less loss must
you do it, if you be endued with the same spirit. Think with your self (as
you see Job did) what estate you had in this friend of yours, that now you have
lost; you held him not in fee, but for a term, and what term? no certain
term, but during the Lords good will and pleasure. Now your term is out, and
the Lord will have his own again. Grieve not for the loss then, but be
thankful for the loan so long.

Again, I warrant you, Job did carefully ponder with himself, what the
Heathen, and strangers to religion about him would say. If he should be
impatient and outrageous, they would say, see even thus the man that feared
God, and was so religious, that he taught others, and rebuked many when they
did offend, that spoke so much of the Lord, and had his will so ever in his
mouth, that gave such testimonies sundry ways to the show of man of a reformed
life, now where is all become? Now see this man's practice, how it answers his
speeches, before he was tried; what do we see now in him more then in many
others that made not half the show? Is there but so much in him, as in many
Heathen that knew not his religion? Have they not taken patiently loss of
fathers, mothers, husbands, wives, children and friends etc. and never started
at it, in comparison of this man? O vain fable then of religion, that yields
no more patience nor quiet content of need. We will no such religion for our
parts, neither will we hereafter regard this man, as in former time, etc. What
a fearful fruit had this been of Jobs impatience? how could the Lord have
endured it at his hands, if he had in this sort opened the mouths of the
wicked against his holy fear. Therefore Job laid his hand upon his mouth, and
submitted himself wholly with all his affections to the Lords good will and
pleasure, without causing any one to speak evil by his means, to his praise,
and Gods good liking, as a memorial for all posterity. For as our Savior
Christ told the Disciples, touching the commendation of the woman that
anointed him with a very precious and costly ointment to his burial, saying.
Matthew. 26.13.
Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole
world, there shall also this, that this woman has done be told for a memorial
of her. Even so it may be said touching the commendation of the patience of Job
in this case. That wheresoever this story of Job shall be read and preached,
there shall also this that he has performed, be told for a memorial of him.
And therefore to this purpose the Apostle Saint James says, Ye have heard of
the patience of Job, Iam. 5.11.
and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful and of
tender mercy.

The case is yours at this time, in some sort and measure, you have lost a
loss, and men's eyes are upon you, you have loved the truth, and spoken of the
Lords fear before diverse; now they look for the power of it in your self;
and as they see you now to govern your affections according to the same so
happily will they think both of Religion, and of your self, while they live.

Therefore pluck up your heart in Gods name, and show patience and comfort,
and cause not the name of God to be blasphemed among the wicked and
irreligious, Romans 2 24.
through your impatience; but honor the Lord by blessing his name, as Job did
honor his truth, which you profess by a godly government and stay of a weak
nature, and as the Lord lives, he will honor you again, as he did Job, with
mercy and compassion, that shall counteruaile this loss, and far exceed it,
for all is the Lords that you enjoy, and this friend of yours was his also. He
has not taken all, but part, and left you much more then he has taken. Both
now and ever be content with his holy will, he gave, and none but he; he has
taken, and none but he, not mine, but his own, my time was out, and the right
returns to the true owner. I may not grudge a mortal man his own, when my
time is out; much less God, my dear God, my most merciful Father, that yet
sends me many mercies and comforts, though this be gone.

Secondly, to your comfort consider, what this holy man Job says again to his
impatient wife, she rages and stormeth, not only like a weak woman, but
like an ungodly woman, and coming to her husband in his greatest affliction,
increased now much more by Satan's malice upon his body, she said unto him,
Do thou still retain thy integrity? Job 2.9.10.
curse God and die. To whom this sweet and meek spirited man made this answer
unto her. Thou speak like a foolish woman, shall we receive good at the hand
of God, and not receive evil also? Not sinning yet for all this with his lips,
as the holy Ghost there says, but bridling his affections, that his tongue
through intemperancie did not once murmr against the Lord.

Now mark, I pray you, Jobs reasons to his wife: He tells her that both he
and she had, received many good things at Gods hand, and therefore they were
bound to welcome such woe as the Lord should send, without any wayward grudging
or repining at the change, because by good things, we are bound to take worse
things in good part, if the Lord do send them. As for himself he follows
this rule, and for the manifold mercies which he had received, he will now
endure with willing heart and quiet mind the misery which was present. Blessed
Job, thou man of God, for thy thus doing, how sweet was this argument in Gods
ears, that prevailed so little with thy wayward wife?

Apply this now to your own estate, and tell me, as you tender the truth,
whether God has not been so good to you many ways as unto Job? Cast up the
bills of your receipts, and call your selves to a Christian audit, and I warrant
you the summa totalis will amount very high, and yet you can never remember the
one half. Think then what Job said for his part, that he took himself bound
by the good, to endure the evil, and so if your case be not all one, you may
not gainsay it; and therefore unless you will wilfully fight against the
Lords good will and pleasure, you must yield as he did, and in effect of words
say with him. O my dear God and blessed Father, God of all comfort and
consolation, how many have thy mercies been upon me, and to me? How deep a
draught have I drunk of this sweet cup of thine? Now thou have taken one
comfort from me, shall I set the one against the other, as thy servant Job did?
Shall I receive good things of thine hand, and not evil? Shall I prescribe
unto thee what I will have? O far be it from me, I thank thee my dear God,
for thine infinite and manifold mercies, and in this change I humbly cast down
my self at the foot of thy Majesty, and let thy will be done, and not mine.
Lord make me content, and I am content as a weak wretch may be content. By my
loss thou have gained, and I doubt not, but that this friend of mine is
removed from me to dwell with thee, at the which I may not grudge; many
mercies I enjoy still, and they shall content and please me. Thus if you
reason, you shall please God, resemble Job here before your eyes, and that eye
of God that spied him, and was glorified by the patience of his servant, he
shall do the like to you, to your great joy and comfort. Comfort your self in
the Lord then, after this sort, and remember this speech of Job to his wife.
Job received good things, so have you: Job received evil, and so must you; yet
Job was patient, so ought you to be; which the God of patience grant unto you.

Romans 8.28.
Thirdly, I think in this case of the blessed Apostles words, which are these.
We know that all things work together for the best to them that love God. If
the dead belonged then to God, this was best for him to be released; and if
your self belong to God, it is best for you also at this time to loose him;
best, I say, in the wisdom of God, and to some end; (although not so in your
own reason, which sees not so far) and in all respects best. Now think
with your self thus much, if you had done good to one, and pleasured him much,
and all the friends he has, or any of them should cry out for it, would it
not grieve you? surely it would grieve you so much the more, by how much that
unthankful dislike should be more vehement and last long. So it is with God;
and therefore see what you do, and whom you move to anger. The Apostles words
are plain, All things work for the best unto them that fear God: if you
believe it, and also think of your dead friend and your self: God the holy
Ghost (who cannot lie) concludes that the same was best both for him and you,
which now is come to pass.

When good is done, we should not grieve, and when the best is done, much less
should we grieve; for God calls him out of this life, when he is at his best,
if he be good, that he turn not to evil; if evil, that he wax not worse.
Away then with sorrow and sour looks, and let the Lord for his mercy,
receive your thanks, from faithful content, and not murmuring and repining
from unbridled affections: not only good is done, but the best, even the very
best, by the best that only knows what is best; and it should appease and
satisfy you: God is no liar, neither can he be deceived, but if one hours
life might have been better either for him or you, then is not the best done;
and then the Apostles words are not true; but that were wicked once to imagine
so. Therefore no longer life would have profited him or you, but the very best
is done; blessed therefore be God for his goodness ever.

Fourthly, I consider what the same Apostle says in another place, I desire to
be loosed and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
which is best of all. And I ask of you, whether your self do not the like,
as you are able; if you do not, you are yet over earthly, and further in love
with this wicked and sinful world then you should be. If you do it, why then
grieve you that your friend has obtained that which you desire? this will
seem rather envy then love in you to conceive dislike for ones well doing.
What, again if your friend wish as the Apostle does, long before he obtained
his request, and now the Lord has granted, what he so heartily wished? this is
mercy to be rejoiced for, and not any misery to be wept for. A true friend
acknowledges a debt for the pleasuring of his friend, and is not moved with
anger or grief for the same: stay then your tears, if you will be judged a
friend, and neither grudge to God the company of his child, nor to the child
the presence of his God, because this is wicked. Think of the glory, company,
immortality, and joy, and comfort with the blessed Trinity, and all the host
of heaven, that now your friend enjoys, think of the woes and miseries in
this wretched vale of tears, from which he is freed, and then judge you if the
Apostle say not true, that it is best to be loosed and to be with Christ. If
this best be now at this instant fallen to your good friend by Gods good
mercy, bless God for it, and comfort your self, that your friend enjoys
such endless joy and comfort; and thereby shall you show your self a friend
indeed, and all that are godly and wise cannot but think well of you. Again,
the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5.6.8.
That we know, that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord: therefore we love rather to remove out of the body, and to dwell
with the Lord. From which absence from God your friend is freed, and by
presence and dwelling with God he is now blessed; a true cause, and a great
cause (as has been said) of good content. Then do not you provoke the Lord
with unthankful tears, sighs, and groans, but stay that course which
offends greatly; and tread the steps of all such as upon the like occasion
have walked rightly by their discreet mourning. Who are ever patient and
moderate in sorrow, repressing and ruling their affections, and gave them not a
loose reine, and so ought you. Again, in the first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, it is said; I would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning
them that sleep, that ye sorrow not, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
as they which have no hope. Read the place, and examine your own course,
whether you hope or no. First, that your friend is well, and then, that
Almighty God will supply his want to you some other way: for both these are
necessary; our friends are our comforts if they be good. But if I tie God to
them, and think all is gone when they are gone, where is my hope? what
pleasure to God, so to trust in him, that I trust more in my friends, and cry
out when they go? how shall I do? how shall I live? what joy can I now have?
Is this hope? is this trust? is this faith? fie, that ever affections and
passions should carry any good child of God so far from his duty, and from
true knowledge. I say again, our friends are our comfort, while the Lord
lends them, and when our friend returns to his earth, yet the Lord is in
heaven, where he ever was, (if I have lost my father) to be my father, mother,
sister, friend, yea all in all to me, whatsoever I want. Therefore while he
lives, which is and shall be for ever, I cannot be friendlesse, though my
friends die or depart from me, but that either for one, he will raise me up
another, or himself supply the place which is best of all. Mourn not then I
pray you as one without hope, but hearken unto the Apostle, and show forth
your faith, hope, and obedience unto God, to the glory of God and your own
praise.

Again, we read in the book of Leuiticus, Leuit. 10.3.
that the sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu were slain by the Lord in his
anger, for their sinful presumption in offering up strange fire, which the
Lord commanded them not, which was a fearful sight and spectacle to the
fathers eyes, to see two sons at once, and in such sort dead. Yet what did
Aaron; I pray you mark the text, I will says the Lord be sanctified in them
that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And Aaron
(says the holy Ghost there) held his peace. And what an example is this, if
any thing may move you to stay your affections for the death of your friends.
Again, it is said in the book of the Revelation, And I heard a voice from
heaven, Reu. 14.13.
saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth, yea (says the Spirit) that they may rest from their labors, and
their works follow them. Your friend is dead in the Lord, and therefore
blessed: will you then weep and lament for him? his works follow him, and the
Lord in mercy has crowned his obedience, according to his promise, and will
you look awry at it? God forbid. Again, consider with your self that your
friends walk with God, and are gone to their heavenly Father in peace, they are
gathered unto their people, they are not dead, but sleep, and their flesh
rests in hope, they are gone the way of all flesh, and do now behold the
face of God in heaven, and what cause of sorrow is this to any friend that
loves them? If your friend were discharged and released out of prison and
misery, and preferred to the palace of an earthly prince, and to his Court, to
his great and exceeding joy and content, would you show your love and
contentment toward him in bewailing the same? how much less then should you
lament his preferment into Gods everlasting Court and kingdom, to his
unspeakable joy and comfort?

Thus may you gather many places of holy Scripture, and on this sort meditate
on them. For sweet is the word of God against all sorrows and griefs, and by
name against this.

But it may happily be objected, it is your child that is dead, and it died
before it could well be baptized, this grieueth me more then otherwise it
would, and so you fear your child's estate.

Answ. God forbid that we should either speak or think so, seeing the Lord
never said so, but contrariwise the Scripture witnesses, that they are in the
Covenant of God, and so in state of salvation so soon as they are borne: and
Baptism does not make them Christians that were none before, but is the
Sacrament, the seal, the sign, the badge of them that are Christians before.
Besides it is not the want of the Sacrament, that depriueth a man of Gods
favor: for the children of the Israelites were not circumcised all those
forty years which they lived in the wilderness: the reason whereof was,
because they were ever to remove and journey whenever the pillar of the cloud
that was their guide, ascended and went forward, Numb. 9.18, etc. so that they
were always to attend upon the cloud both night and day, not knowing when it
would remove; and therefore could not circumcise their children in the
wilderness, as ye may read, Josh. 5.2, etc. but it is the contemning or
despising of the Sacrament, that depriueth men of Gods favor when they make no
more account of it, then Esau did of his birthright, Genesis 25.32. then Ahaz did
of the Lords help, Esaias 7. and it is also the neglecting of it, when God
offers time and opportunity that we might have it. Again, the Lord never
said, that whosoever died uncircumcised or unbaptized should be wiped out of
the book of life, but he has said, Genesis 17.12.14* that whosoever contemns,
or carelessly neglects the Sacraments, shall be cut off from among his people.
And so read you the notes upon that seventeenth chapter of Genesis, and I hope
they shall content you for this matter. God is not tied to the Sacrament, nor
ever was. The contempt hurts, but not the want, when it is against your will.

Object. Happily your child was of ripe years, and withal so toward, that it
could not be, but that he should come to some great place and preferment if he
had lived, both for the good of himself and his friends; and that he in his
youth and the flower of his age, should thus be taken away, is a great loss
say you.

Answer. True it is, that the loss is great in respect of the world, but what
is that if we consider God; God is also able to supply all that, some other
way, if we take it well. This is apparent, that what good or preferment could
have come to him any way or to his friends, if he had lived, the Lord for some
purpose as yet happily hidden, has prevented: but yet his arm is not
shortened, as I said, to do us good some other way, but it might perhaps
prove otherwise contrary to our expectation, if he had lived longer, and then
it would have been a great grief unto us. But admit that it would have been
as you hope if he had lived longer, yet he is more highly preferred even to the
highest heavens, and to the presence of God, and this no earthly preferment can
match. And except we be wholly earthly our selves, we cannot but savor this,
and not let his youth grieve us, for no youth nor age is too good for God, when
he is pleased to take them.

A fool or a child seeing a goodly cluster of grapes, thinks it pity to put
them into the press to deface them, but he that is wise knows that thereby
the liquour which is in them is preserved, and that this timely gathering is a
means to keep them from corruption. So we think sometime, Oh, it is great
pity such a one should die so soon, so towardly a youth, so good a creature
can hardly be spared; but God in his wisdom knows it to be good. And if he
cut off the life of that good and godly king Josiah, as it were in the middle
of the stem, 2. Kings 22.20.
doubtless it is for this cause, that his eyes may not see the manifold evils
to come. If you will be ruled to weigh things with reason, you may well see
mercy even in this timely death; for many are the perils both of body and
soul, that young men avoid when they are taken hence, false doctrine,
heresies, errors, and many grievous sins, wounding the very conscience with
a biting worm that ever gnaweth; public calamities, and ruin of state, many
private miseries great and grievous, which no man can think of beforehand,
more bitter to good men then any death: from all which this happy deliverance
in time of youth does free your child, and set him safe, that you shall never
mourn with him, nor for him that way. And herein we have David an example of
godly fortitude, who having a child sick, did while it lived afflict his
soul, besought God for the child, and fasted and wen^ (...), and lay all night
upon the earth, and would not be comforted. Thus while there was hope of
remedy, he gave way to the sorrow of his heart, 2. Sam. 12.16.
but when David perceived that the child was dead, then he arose from the
earth, and washed and anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came
into the house of the Lord, and worshipped, and after came to his own house,
and bad that they should set bread before him and he did eat. His sorrow
ended, when he once saw there was no hope of enjoying any longer the company
of his child. Now this course seemed unto his servants a new and strange kind
of Philosophy, that he should mourn in the danger of death, and yet rejoice, or
at least comfort himself with any content in death. And therefore his servants
said unto him, What thing is this that thou have done, 2. Sam. 12.21,
thou did fast and weep for the child while it was alive, but now he is
dead thou do arise and eat meat. And what reason had he for this strange
and unwonted behavior? He said, While the child was alive I fasted and wept,
for I said, Who can tell whether God will have mercy on me, that the child may
live, but now being dead, wherefore shall I fast? Can I bring him again any
more. I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me any more. Behold the
same thing that makes thee to mourn, namely, that thy dead shall not return
to thee, the very same consideration David made the ground of his quiet and
content. And thereupon he comforted his heart, and would not continue in
heauinsse for that which could not be helped. So that it is to a right
understanding man, ground enough to build content and quietness of heart upon,
that God has done his work which thy sorrow cannot revoke. But peradventure
it will be here objected, that afterward when David heard of his son Absolons
death, he did so greatly lament and bewail the same, that he would in no
sort be comforted quite contrary to that which before he practiced; for it
is said that he was much moved, 2. Sam. 18.33.
and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept as he went saying. O my
son Absolon, my son, my son Absolon, would God I had died for thee. O
Absolon my son, my son.

For the answering of this objection, and your better satisfaction herein, we
are to understand that David knew that he had a wicked and rebellious son, of
the estate of whose salvation he had great cause to doubt, because he died in
rebellion, which indeed may seem to be the principal cause of his exceeding
sorrow and lamentation, and not so much for the death of his son, as for that
cause. But of his child he believed that he died in the state of grace, and so
was made partaker of salvation, which was the cause that he was comforted
presently after his death, saying, that his son should not return, but that he
himself should go to him. Even so in like manner, if we fear the estate of
our child or friend that is dead, then indeed have we great cause to weep,
mourn and lament for him, as David did here for Absolon: but if we have no
such fear, and do hope well and the best of the estate of our child or
friend; then must we with David comfort our selves, and say, But now he is
dead, wherefore should I fast and weep? can I bring him back again, I shall
go to him, but he shall not return to me.

Let them mourn for their dead, that know not the hope of the dead, and
suppose them extinct that are departed. But let them that in the School of
Christ have learned what is the condition and hope of the dead* how their
souls do presently live with Christ, and that their bodies shall be raised up
in glory at the last day, let them rejoice on the behalf of their dead, Amos
8.10.
and throw off that burden of sorrow, which is so heavy unto them. But you
will say he was my only child, and therefore his death must needs be
grievous. Zach. 12.10.
Indeed the death of an only child is very great and grievous to parents, and
a cause of great heaviness and lamentation: yet remember that Abraham was
ready to have sacrificed his only son Isaak, Genesis 22.3.10.
the promised seed, at Gods commandment. John 3.26.
And God gave his only Son Christ Jesus to death for our salvation. And to
comfort you to the full, as Elkanah said to Anna, so also much more may the
Lord say to us, 1. Sam. 1.18.
Am not I better to you then ten sons? Then though he be your only child,
and all that you have, there is no just cause of complaint and grief, seeing
the Lord has taken but his own, and also seeing in his taking of him, you
give him but as your pledge and earnest, to bind unto you the right of that
inheritance, that you expect, or as your feoffee in trust gone before to take
possession, and keep a place for you in heaven.

Trust me now, or else the time will come when you shall trust me, that you
have cause, and cause again to lament and mourn, not for them, who dying in
the Lord, are happy with the Lord, and rest from all their labors and
miseries, but as Christ said in the Gospel to the woman that followed him,
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves and your children: Luke 23.28.
so we for our selves and our children; for having been safe by them, and
strengthened through them, they are taken away from the plague, we lie open to
it, and it comes the faster, because they which kept it from us, are removed.
And the greater our loss is, the greater is their gain, and the more cause
have we to sorrow for our selves, although to rejoice on their behalf, and to
lament for our sins, that have deprived us of their graces, goodness,
prayers and holy company; and let us follow them in their faith, virtue,
piety, godliness and good works.

And yet, if for all this, their loss, and the want of their presence be
grievous unto you, and that you still desire their presence, and would see
them: let me speak to you, as Chrysostom did to some that were so affected.
Do you desire to see them? then live a like unto them, and so you shall soon
enjoy their holy and comfortable presence, but if you refuse so to do, never
look to enjoy or see them again.

It is written of Jerome, that when he had read the life and death of
Hillarion, and saw that after he had lived religiously, he died most
comfortably and happily, said, Well, Hillarion shall be the champion whom I
will imitate: even so let us say with Jerome, Well, this godly friend of ours,
which is deceased, shall be our champion, whom we will imitate, we will follow
his chastity, justice, piety and godliness. And so, if you endeavor and
do, say and perform, you shall be sure to enjoy that in future time, which
he possesses in the present, that is, heavenly and eternal bliss and
happiness.

What Pilgrim does not make speed to return home into his own country? Who
hasting to sail homewards, does not wish for a prosperous wind, that he may
speedily embrace his long desired friends and parents? and what are we but
pilgrims on earth: what is our country, but Paradise, who are our parents, but
the Patriarchs? Why make we not have to run unto them, that we may see our
country, salute our parents? an infinite number of acquaintance expect us
there; our parents, brethren, sisters, friends, children, kindred, that are
already secure of their own immortality, but yet sollicitous for our
safety, what joy will it be to see, to embrace them?

Conclude then with your heart, that you will be strong against such losses,
and pray to the giver of strength that you may be strong, and leave your losses
to the Lord your God, that has gained them, blessed for them, blessed for you,
with many thanks for ever and ever.

The end of the sixth Division.
THE SEVENTH DIVISION OF THE CASES WHEREIN IT IS Unlawful, and wherein Lawful
to desire DEATH.
TOuching the cases wherein it is unlawful to desire death, they may be reduced
principally into three.

The first is, if God can be more honored by our life, then by our death,
then in such a case, it is altogether unlawful to desie death, but rather on
the contrary we are to desire and pray for life. For which purpose we have
diverse examples in the holy Scriptures to warrant the same, as of King David,
and king Ezechiah. David bewailed himself in many of his Psalms, that If God
took him away, he should lack occasion to honor and praise him, as he was
wont to do whilst he was amongst men; and therefore he desired longer life,
that he might set forth the honor of God amongst the people. Return O Lord
(says he) Psalm. 6.4.5.
deliver my Soul, O save me for thy mercies sake; for in death there is no
remembrance of thee, in the grave who shall give thee thank? Again, Psa.
30.8.9.10
I cried unto thee O Lord, etc. When I go down into the pit, shall the dust
praise thee? etc Again, Psalm 88 9 10 11 12.
Mine eye mourns by reason of affliction, etc. shall the dead rise and praise
thee? And again, Psalm 118.17.
I shall not dye but live, and declare the works of the Lord.

Ezechiah bewailed himself, Esa. 38.18.19.20.
when he heard the message of death, and prayed for longer life, knowing
thereby that God should be more honored by his life, then by his death: And
therefore says he, The grave cannot praise thee, etc.

And thus may every godly Christian desire life, and not death, to this end
only that God thereby may be glorified: But yet in this case, although it be
unlawful to desire death, so long as God may be glorified by our Life, yet in
praying for life to this end, we must refer all to Gods good will and
pleasure. Therefore if any will object and say, I might in my place by mine
endeavor (such as it is) for the time to come; further profit the Church of
God, and greatly honor him; for this end therefore, I could wish that the
space of a longer life might be granted unto me.

Answer. As the Lord said unto David, 1 King. 8.18.19.
Whereas it was in thine heart to build an house to my name, thou did well
that it was in thine heart. Nevertheless thou shall not build the house, but
thy son which shall come forth of thy loins, he shall build the house unto
my name. Even so it may be said to thee, that whereas it is in thine heart to
glorify God, and to profit his Church; and therefore thou could wish, that
the space of a longer life might be granted unto thee; to that end thou do
well that it is in thine heart to do so. Nevertheless, all this must be
commended to Gods disposing, that is, how long God will have thee to remain in
health and life for his glory, and for the good of his Church. For he that
has furnished thee with the gifts of teaching or exhortation, or any other
good gift for the glory of God and good of his Church, he does know how to
furnish others also with the same, when thou art gone; and as God would not let
David build his Temple, but did reserve it to be performed afterward by
Solomon; so God for some secret cause, will not have that good work furnished
by thee, but reserueth it for some other time, and some other person. Therefore
if thou art straightned with the Apostle, Philip. 1.23.
that thou do not know which of these thou should choose, having a desire
to be dissolved, and to be with Christ (which is better for thee) or to abide
in the flesh, which is more profitable for the church; Know that to dye, is
advantage unto thee; but to live, is advantage to the Church. No man of us
(says the Apostle) Romans 14.7.8
lives to himselsf, and no man dies to himself; for whether we live, we
live to the Lord, (to the end that we may glorify him, and gain more souls
to him in the Church) or whether we dye, we dye to the Lord, (that we may obey
his Fatherly will, calling us out of our Station.) Whether therefore we live or
dye, we are the Lords, (that most mighty, gentle, and merciful Lord, From
whose love, neither life nor death can separate us. Romans 8.38.39.


Thou have hitherto obeyed the will of the Lord most faithfully, spending thy
services on the Church militant; obey him further most readily, embracing his
will, that calls thee to the society of the Church triumphant.

Thou art rightly careful out of charity for the increase of the church,
notwithstanding thou ought out of faith to commit the care of governing,
teaching and conseruing the same unto God.

There is nothing here more wholesome, nothing better, nor more conformable to
piety, then for a man to resign himself wholly to the will of God; and to
commend the full power of disposing our life and death to him with godly
prayers. And one of these two things, we may undoubtedly hope for; that either
he will give us that which we ask, or that which he knows to be more
profitable; Delight thy self in the Lord (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 37.4.5.
and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart, commit thy way unto the
Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass.

Secondly, it is altogether unlawful to desire death through impatience, in
that we cannot have our own wills, wishes, and desires. Genesis 31.1
In which case Rachell offended, for seeing that she bare Jacob no children,
she envied her sister, Exo. 16.23.
and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or ^lse I dye. In like case also the
children of Israel offended, who murmured against Moses and Aaron in the
wilderness, and said, Would to God we had dyed by the hand of the Lord in the
Land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots. and did eat bread to the full.
Numb. 11.10.
In this case Moses offended who said unto the Lord; Wherefore have thou
afflicted thy servant and wherefore have not I found favor in thy sight, that
thou layest all the burden of this people upon me? Whence should I have flesh
to ^iue unto all this people? For they weep unto me saying give us flesh that
we may eat, I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too
heavy for me, and if thou deal thus with me, kill me (I pray thee) out of
hand, etc In this case King David offended, 2. Sam. 18.33.
when he hearing of the death of his rebellious and wicked son Absolon,
being much moved, he said mourning; Would to God I had dyed for thee O Absolon
my son my son.

In this case also the Prophet Jonas greatly offended, for when God saw the
works of the Nineuites, that they turned from their evil way at the preaching
of Jonah, Jonah. 3.10.
and that then God repented of the evil that he had said for their
destruction, and did it not. Jonah is so much displeased, Jonah. 4.1.2.3,
that he besought the Lord to take his life from him, saying, It was better for
him to dye, then to live.

Thirdly, it is al ogether unlawful to desire death, to be revenged upon our
own selves, which is most monstrous, barbarous, and most unnatural for one to
lay violent hands upon himself, to whom he is tied and bound by all bonds:
for one to rend his own body and soul in sunder (which God has coupled
together, and no man but he must separate) is a sin most horrible and
fearful, and breaks the bonds of God and Nature, and this no Beast (be it
never so savage and cruel) will do. Sometime they will tear, rend, and gore
one another; but no beast was ever in such extreme pain and misery, as to
rage and seek to deprive himself of life. For the cause that one grows to
this (more then beastly) rage and cruelty, against his own body, is first a
monstrous pride, that he will not be at all, unless he may be as he list
himself, he will not submit himself to Gods will Secondly, that he has not
any belief in God, nor ever looks for a good issue out of troubles. Thirdly,
it is noted of most impious and desperate persons, that who first were
barbarous, and cruel to others, at length they turned the point of cruelty
against themselves. And this was the sin of the heathen people which knew not
God; for they taught and practiced voluntary death, and selfe-murther, whereby
men might free themselves at their own will and pleasure from all evil of
pain. And yet some of them (as Plato that approached so near to a Christian
truth in many points) maintained also the self same murder; yet he did appoint
some public shame and infamy in the manner of burial, for those that kil^ed
themselves. Yea some others of them, having gone further (as Vergil) who seeing
the dangers thereof, (as namely, that it is punished in the life to come) has
placed those that offend in that kind in Hell, and that in such torments as
they wish themselves back again, and upon that condition, would be content to
endure all the torments, miseries and calamities incident to this life.

So that this selfe-murther is not to avoid misery, but to change misery;
yea, and to change the less for the greater misery, and (as we use to speak)
leap out of the frying pan into the fire; who are in a very woeful case after
this life, dying out of Gods favor, as they needs must that thus make away
themselves.

In the whole History of the Bible that contains the Records belonging to
the Church of God, and to the people that pretend to have any knowledge of
good; of how many has he heard or read that did so? and what were they? In the
first age of the world that lasted from the creation to the flood, sixeteene
hundred fifty and six years, we read of much wickedness, Genesis 4.8.23.
how Cain unnaturally killed his brother Abel, how Lamech transgressed Gods
ordinance for marriage, and gloried in his own cruelty. We read of the
carnal licentiousness of the men of the best line, Genesis 6.2.
how the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and took
them wives of all that they listed. Yea, of the whole race of mankind we read,
that the earth was corrupt before God, and their wickedness so vile in his
fight, that he repented that he made man, Genesis 6.11.12.
and he brought a deluge upon the earth, wherewith he destroyed all living
Creatures, in whose nostrels was the breath of life. And in all this time it is
not read, that any grew unto this height of wickedness to incroach so far
upon the right of God, as most unnaturally, and sinfully to kill himself.

In so many years the Devil that was a murderer from the beginning, could not
prevail so far amongst the most wicked, as to persuade any to lay violent
hands upon himself. This wickedness was then unknown from the flood to the
nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, for the space of two thousand, three hundred
and eleven years. We read of most horrible wickedness of bloody wars
among Nations, of the tyranny of Nimrod, of the building of Babel, of the
uncleanness of the Sodomites; of the slaughter of the Sichemites, of the tyranny
of Pharaoh, of the sin of the Cananites, of the rebellion of Korah, of the
covetousness of Balaam, of the fornication of Zimry, and of infinite
ungodliness in every age of man, in every generation; but of this kind of
unnaturalness, for men to lay violent hands upon themselves, we have very few
examples, 1 Samuel 3 1.4.5
of which Saul is one, who fell upon his own Sword, and killed himself, and
his Armor-bearer by his Lords example encouraged, did the like unto himself.
And not many years after, Achitophel the great Counselor, that followed
Abs^lon, 2 Samuel 17.23
upon discontent left Absolon, went home to his own house and hanged himself.
1 Kings 16,18
We read of a fourth, named Zinry, that being besieged in Tirzah, and not able
to defend himself and the place, went into the Kings Palace, and setting the
house on fire, burnt himself. And these are all that I remember mentioned in
the old Testament, that are guilty of this impiety. Judge: 16,30.
For we are not to number Sampson amongst them, whose purpose was not to kill
himself, but to execute the judgment of God upon the Philistines, which was a
work of his calling, in the faithful and zealous performance whereof, he
lost his life.

The History of Razis that fell on his sword, 2, Match: 14.41,42.
and slew himself, I wittinglie pass over, leaving the credit of that
History to the authority of the Writer; whom yet if you add to the former, the
number is not much increased by him. So few they were in so many years, with
whom the ancient murderer could prevail, to make them enemies of their own
lives. And if we consider what manner of persons they were, with whom he did so
far prevail; their wickedness will serve to warn any man that has any one
dram of piety, wisdom, or care of his credit, not to put himself in rank
with them. Saul was a man envious, traiterous, perfidious, cruel and profane,
who being bloudily minded against the Priests of God, and against David Gods
own anointed, he made his conscience so fierce and cruel, as that it set
upon himself, and he became his own Butcher. Whose Armor-bearer verified
the Proverb, Like Master, like man. As for Achitophel he was a great
Statesman, but withal a great Traitor; he was very wise in matters pertaining
to government, but therewithal very wicked; he assisted the subject against
the King, therein was treason; the Son against the Father, that was
unnatural; a wicked, ungodly, proud son against a godly father, even holy
David, therein most impious treason. Zimri likewise was a traitor, who slew Elah
his Lord and Master, and invaded the Kingdom of Israel.

Such were the men, with whom the ancient Murderer prevailed in three and
twenty hundred years; few in number, and men of most wicked hearts and lives.
And shall any imagine or think to match himself with such forlorn Wretches?
In wickedness so rare will he be so forward, and with men so vile will he
join?

For the time after the coming of our Lord Jesus in the flesh, we have record
in the scriptures for seventy years. In which time we read of much
wickedness, of the rage of the Jews, in crucifying and killing the Lord
Jesus, the Lord of life, of the persecution of Saul, wherein Stephen was
stoned; the persecution of Herod, wherein Saint James was slain with the
sword; of the malice of the Jews in every place, forbidding the Apostles to
preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, and of their endless malice against Paul
being converted, and become a witness of Jesus.

And amongst all the enraged sinners of this time, in whom the Prince of this
world exercised his power most imperiously; We read but of one that laid
violent hands upon himself, even Judas the Apostle, and he is marked out by
the names of a Traitor, a Devil* the Child of Perdition. So rare is this
iniquity in comparison of other sins, and so notoriously and incurablie evil
are those in comparison of other sins.

And shall any one sinner be so wicked, as resolved to increase this number,
and to match, if not exceed these men.

Let the rareness of the sin, (wherein the Devil seems to have some
modesty, as fearing to allure too many to such extreme wickedness and
madness) and the extreme incurable iniquity of the men, as if the Devil
thought it not fit to tempt any to so geeat wickedness, but such as had
already outrunne all his allurementes by their own forwardness in sin; Let
those things stay the resolution of any sinner, and make him fear to execute
this injustice upon himself. Whom loves he that loves not himself, whose
friend can he be that in this manner, and in this merciless measure is his
own enemy? Go then, and be more cruel then ever was murdering thief,
oppressing Tyrant, bloody Cain, Senacherib, ungracious Impes, go and be more
cruel, then any cruel beast, that though an enemy to other creatures; is yet
a resolved Defender of his own life. If thou strive for the name and shame of
most cruel, yea more cruel then man or beast, yea then the Devil himself:
(For the Devils study not to do themselves hurt) then go, and do that
violence that thou intendest against thy self; but if thou be willing to let
the cruellest of men, the fiercest of beasts, yea, the Devils themselves to go
before thee in merciless cruelty, then preserve thine own Life.

Besides, consider whose thy life is, who quickened thee at the first, who
preserved thy life hitherto, who has numbered thy days, and appointed thy
time, to whom the service of thy Life does belong to use while he pleases, to
whom the issues of Death do appertain; and who has the Keys of Hell and of
Death, and in whose hands the rule of all these things remains; so shall
thou discern whether thou have any power and authority or no, to meddle in
this business. Did thou appoint the beginning of thy own Life; Did
thou fashion and quicken the flesh in thy mothers womb? Does not the Prophet
say (speaking unto God,) Thine hands have made me and fashioned me. Psalm.
119.73.
He confesses God to be the workemaster, and himself to be Gods work;
wherein he does no more then the pot, which takes not his own shape, but
receives it from the Potter. Hereof he speaks more fully in another place.
Psalm. 100.3.
Know ye that even the Lord he is God, he has made us and not we oar
selves. And will thou pull the building down that God has set up? Go to
then, and pull down heaven, which God has spredde, roll it up in a bundell,
and cast it into the deep, scatter it in the air, in the water of the Sea,
and fling abroad the drops of it, until it be dry; pound the earth into
dust, and raise a mighty wind to scatter it, that the place of it may be found
no more. If thou have a purpose to destroy that which God has made, and
would oppose thy hand in destroying against the hand of God in building;
attempt some of these things, and try thy strength, that thou may survive
thy fact, and live to reap the glory of it. If these things be too great for
thee, then cease to hold this conceit, to attempt the pulling down of that
which God has built up; oppose not thy self against his Works, especially in
pulling down the frame of thine own Life, where thou must needs perish with
thy own Works; and not live to glory in that thou have done.

As God made thee at the first a living Wight; so it is he that has preserved
thee all thy time, in the feebleness of thine Infancy, in the carelessness of
thy youth, in the rashness of thy riper years, all which seasons of thy life,
made thee subject to many decays, through their proper fraileties. But God
made thy feeble Infancy strong with his strength, thy ignorant and careless
youth advised, and wise by his Wisdom, thy rash and bold manhood safe through
his providence; He that keeps Israel neither slumbering nor sleeping, he it
is that has kept thee. The Prophet speaks thus to God in one of the Psalms;
Thou did draw me out of the Womb, thou gave me hope, even at my mothers
breast, Psalm. 22.9*
I was cast upon thee even from the womb, thou art my God from my mothers
belly. By which words he gives us to understand, that the same God that
gave us life in our mothers womb, is he that keeps us from the womb to the
grave, he preuenteth dangers, he gives food; he heals our sickness, and
disappointeth our enemies; he is our guard to defend us, he is our shield and
buckler to save us from hurt. He has done this for thee from thy conception
to this day; and will thou in one hour attempt to overthrow, and destroy that
which with so much care God has cherished so long? Will thou make thy self
hateful by making opposition against his love; Will thou maliciously oppose
thy self against the work of his care, while in fatherly love he is desirous
to keep thee in safety; Will thou strive more then all the World besides, to
work thy own decay? The Angels in heaven understanding the care of God for
thee, do willingly pitch their tents about thee; and refuse not (for thy
safety) to bear thee in their hands, and keep thee in thy ways; the Devils
of Hell by Gods providence are kept off from thee, as with a strong hedge,
which they can neither clime over, nor break through, whereby to impeach thy
safety. Job. 5.23.
And while the Creator of all things remains thy keeper, the creatures are in
league with thee, and thou live in peace amongst them; and while the work of
God that preserves thy life, has this power amongst all Creatures, that the
creatures of heaven will not attempt thy hurt, the creatures of the earth do
not, nor dare attempt it, and the creatures of Hell cannot. Will thou alone
seek unmercifully to cross the care of God, in working thine own woe? Thou
art then worthy whom the heavenly Creatures should abhor, whom the earthly
creatures should forsake, and the hellish Creatures embrace, receiving thee
into their Company with this greeting. This is he whom God would have kept, but
against the love of the Angels of heaven, against the peace of the Creatures of
the earth, and beyond the power and malice of us the Angels of darkness, he
has destroyed himself. Besides, it is God that has assigned to every one of
us the measure of our time; he has appointed to us the number of our days;
our life did not begin, till he appointed the first day of it; and so long
it must last, until he say, this is the last day of it.

No man did set down for himself when he would come into the world, nor no
man may set down for himself, when or how he will leave the world. The
soul of man (says the Orator) before her departure from the body, does
oftentimes divine, but then it destroys not it self, for God sent us into the
world giving us life, and God must call us out by taking our life. It is the
saying of Job, Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth, Job. 7.1.
and are not his days, as the days of an hireling? The beginning and end of
man's time is appointed by God, he cannot lengthen it, when the end comes, nor
ought to shorten it before the time come. Saint Ambrose says, we are bound to
maintain our bodies, and forbidden to kill; our souls and bodies they are
married together by God himself, and those whom God has joined together, let
no man be so bold to put in sunder. Cogimur diligere vt sponsus sponsam, Adam
Euam, says S. Barnard. We must be so far from hating our own flesh, as
that we are commanded to cherish it, to love it entirely as the husband ought
to love his wife, Adam his Eve. We may employ it in labor, but we must not
slay it; and the more we shall employ it, the less hurtful and dangerous it
will prove unto us. His days are as the days of an Hireling; an Hireling is
entertained for so many days, longer then his covenant he may not stay; and a
shorter time, he may not stay. Such is the life of man, he is Gods hireling,
for so many days and years he has hired him in this world, as in Gods
Vineyard to work in some honest calling. When we have served out our time
here, we may stay no longer, and till we have served out our time here, we
may not depart. Thou will therefore be found to be a fugitive servant from
God, if thou depart his service before the time be full out, and that belongs
to God and not to thee to set down.

The Prophet David says of God in one of the Psalms. Psalm. 68.20.
To the Lord God belong the issues of death. To God it belongs, and not to
man, to set down who shall dye, when, and by what means he shall dye.
Sometime he uses the hand of the Magistrate, sometime the hand of the violent,
and so ends one man's life (as we think) by the counsel and work of
another man. But never did he give license to any man to kill himself; he
has forbidden murder by his commandment. Thou shall not kill. Exodus 20,13.
He condemned it in Cain from the beginning of the World, to whom (having
slain Abel) he said, Genesis 4,10.
What have thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries to me from the
ground; Now therefore thou art cursed from the earth, which has opened her
mouth to receive thy brothers blood from thine hand. And after the flood, when
he began again to replenish the earth with Inhabitants, he made a Law against
murder, to restrain both man and beast from committing it; saying, Gen 9.5.
I will surely require your blood wherein your lives are, at the hand of every
beast will I require it, and at the hand of man, even at the hands of a man's
brother, will I require the life of man. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed; for in the Image of God has he made man. So
offensive unto God it is, for a man without warrant and authority to kill any,
because man was made in the Image of God, a creature of understanding endued
with excellent virtues of knowledge and righteousness, with resemblance in
these virtues unto God himself, in making of whom it pleased God to show his
excellent power, his wisdom, and his mercy. Man is Microcosmos, says one, an
abridgement of the world; he has Heaven resembling his soul, earth his
heart, placed in the midst as a Center, the Liver is like the Sea, whence
flow the lively springs of blood, the brain, like the Sun, gives the light
of understanding, and the senses are set round about like the Stars; the
heart in man is like the root of a tree, the Organe or Lung-pipe that comes of
the left cell of the heart, is like the stock of the tree which diuides it
self into two parts, and thence spreades abroad (as it were) sprayes and
boughs into all the body, even to the arteries of the head; the head is
called the Tower of the mind, the throne of reason, the house of wisdom, the
treasure of memory, the Capitol of judgment, the shop of affections. And
concerning man, says another, God has made such diverse and contrary elements
to meet together in one and the self same body, and accord in one, fire and
water, air and earth, heat and cold, and all in one and the self same
place, and yet has so tempered them together, as that one is the defense and
maintenance of another. Nay more then this, says Saint Bernard, mirabilis
societas, in man he has made a wonderful society; for in him, Heaven and
earth Majesty and baseness, Excellency and poverty he has matched together.
What is higher then the Spirit of life, what baser then the slime of the earth;
his soul it was infused into him the Spirit of life; his body was made of the
dust of the earth. This was that which made Gregory Nazianzen to break into
that exclamation of himself; What great and wonderful Miracle was within
himself! I am little (says he) and yet I am great, I am humble and yet
exalted; I am mortal, and yet immortal; I am earthly, and yet heavenly;
little in body, but great in soul; humble, as being earth; and yet exalted
above the earth; mortal, as he that must dye; and immortal, as he that shall
rise again; earthly, as whose body was taken from the earth; heavenly, as
whose soul was breathed from above. Nay, more then this, says the Prophet
David in one of his Psalms; Ps. 8.4.5* 6.7.8.9.
What is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou
visitest him? for thou have made him a little lower then the Angels, and have
crowned him with glory and honor, thou made him to have dominion over the
works of thy hands. etc. Therefore no man, no beast can destroy this excellent
Creature in this fashion framed, and be innocent before God. It belongs
only to him that gave life, to take it away: Where he takes it away, none can
restore it, nor ought to take it away being given, but only by him that gave
it. So that the whole rule of life must remain in the hands of the Lord of
Life; who of himself says, I kill and give life* except thou can do both,
Deuteronomy. 32.39.
do not attempt to do either. First, make a living man if thou can, and
then kill him to whom thou gave life, thou shall then herein hurt no work,
but the work of thine own hands: but if thou can not give life, presume not
to take away life; thou shall therein violate the work of another. And if thou
may not kill another, thou may much less kill thy self. One God made
thee and them; and if thou shall be guilty of blood in killing thy neighbor,
thou shall be guilty of blood in killing thy nearest neighbor (thy self.)
When Elias was weary of his life, being persecuted by Iezabel, he said unto
God. It is enough, O Lord, take my Soul, for I am no better then my Fathers. 1
King. 19,4.
He was weary of his travels and dangers, and desired to be out of this
world; but he did not lay violent hands upon himself, or let out his own
Soul. He remembers that God had placed his soul in this earthly Tabernacle;
and he entreats God to set his Soul at liberty. He held his hands, howsoever
his heart was affected: So hold thou thy hands from any fact of violence,
lifting them up with thy heart unto God in heaven, desiring him to take thy
soul when he thinks good. When Saint Paul was in a straight between two,
Phil. 1:23.
and wist not whether he should desire life or death, because his life should
be profitable to the Church; but death gainefull to himself; he expressed the
inclination of his heart to death for his own advantage, in these words:
desiring to be loosed, and to be with Christ, which is best of all. His
reward was in heaven, which he desired to obtain, his Redeemer in Heaven,
with whom he wished to be. And because he could not come to enjoy the same,
except by death, he should pass out of this world; he was vvilling to depart,
and for that end to be loosed, and set at liberty from his flesh; but did he
incline to set himself at liberty, to loose the bonds of his own life, by
which his soul was tied, and fast bound to the fellowshippe of his body. No,
he desired to be a Patient, not an Agent, a Sufferer, not a Doer in this
business; his words are desiring to be loosed, not desiring to loose my
self; this he longed for, and in time obtained it.

In these men behold and see how to crave, and how to demean thy self. Learn
of Eliah and Paul to fear God, and not of Saul and ^udas. Learn not of wicked
men that went astray in their doings And tell me, if at any time thy life were
so vile in thy sight, and the glory of God so dear unto thee, that thou were
desirous or content to give thy life unto God, and to put it in hazard for his
name, and for his truths sake? Where have thou despised the threatenings of
Tyrants? Where have thou contemned the sword, the fire, or any other death?
have thou been cast into the fiery furnace? or into the Lions den, or
imprisoned, or stoned, or suffered rebuke, or loss of goods for the name of
Christ, as diverse the Saints of God have done before thee? In these cases if
thy life had been vile in thy sight, it had been honorable and
Christian-like, because thou do not take it thy self, but yield it up for
his sake that gave it. Wherein thou have the Prophets of God, and Apostles of
Jesus Christ to be thy Pattern; who were ever ready and willing to lay down
and loose their lives in the service of God; but did not kill themselves, to
be delivered from the fury of Tyrants; but they yielded themselus to the
cruel will of Tyrants, as Jeremy told them that went about to kill him for
preaching, Ierem. 26.14.
as God had commanded him. As for me, behold I am in your hand do with me as
you think good and right. It was all one to him, and equally welcome to dye or
live, so that he might faithfully do his office. Of the like mind was Saint
Paul saying to the Elders of Ephesus. Act. 20.22,
Behold I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, and know not what things shall
come unto me there, save that the Holy Ghost witnesses that in every City,
bonds and afflictions abide me: but I pass not at all, neither is my life
dear unto me, so that I may fulfill my course with joy* etc. Here was a most
godly contempt of frail life. If thou had resolution in any like quarrel,
to yield thy life, when there should be any attempt to take it; thou have the
Prophets of God, and the Apostles of Christ, thine example, and thou have also
the promise of the Lord Jesus, to recompense that loss of life with the gain
of eternal life, saying; He that will save his life shall loose it, Math.
10.39.
and he that loses his life for my sake, shall save it. That is, if any
shall to save his life deny to confess me before men, his life shall be taken
from him by some such judgment of God, as that he shall have no comfort in
the loss of it, but shall dye eternally; but if any constantly confess me,
putting his life in danger, either God shall most miraculously deliver him, and
save his life in this world, or for the loss of his life here (in which loss
he shall have abundant comfort) he shall have eternal life in the Kingdom of
heaven. Here are comforts for thee, if thou have, or shall come (in these
cases) into danger, if thou retain this resolution to lay down thy life for
God, and his glory; for Jesus Christ and his truth. But there was never in thee
any such resolution, thou did not love God so well, and thy self so ill as
to dye for the truth, for the glory of God, for the name of Jesus; thou did
never esteem the Gospel, true Religion, and Righteousness at so high a
price. O vile man, O unworthy sinner, would thou not gratify God with
contempt of life, and will thou gratify the Devil with it? Would thou not
loose it for him that is the Truth; and will thou loose it for the Father of
Lies? Was he not worthy (in thy sight) to be served with this manly
resolution, that gave thee this life, and for the loss of it, is ready to
recompense it with eternal life, and is he worthy to be served with it, that
was ever an enemy to it, and when he has spoiled thee of this life, makes
thee amends with a higher mischief, to plunge thee in eternal death? O
monstrous absurdity to be admitted amongst the professors of Christianity!
Pause a while, and consider of this point, that if it be possible, thou may
be recovered from this desperate purpose. Think what it is to have held God
off at the staves end, and never to have yielded in thine heart to dye for his
love; though he gave thee life, to lose one drop of blood for his sake, though
he filled thy veins, to have thy breath stopped for his glory; though it was
he that breathed into thy nostrels the breath of life, and made thee a living
soul; yet to embrace the Devil in thy bosom, as if he were thy God, to tell
him that he shall have thy life; thy blood shall flow for his sake, if thou
get a sword or knife; that thou will strangle thy self, and stop thy breath
for his love; If thou can get a halter. Where is thy wisdom that resoluest
so foolishly? thy Justice to resolve so injuriously, thy love to God, and thine
own soul (to whom thou owe thy love) to God, to procure his glory; to thy
soul, to procure the salvation of it, that do resolve so hatefully. For more
foolishly for himself, more injuriously against God, and more hatefully
against both himself and God. Did ever any man conclude and resolve in any
thing then thou do in this most foolishly determine for thy self, that
runnest into that destruction; from which thou should fly with all possible
speed, as the Israelites fled from the tents of Korah and his company, when the
earth swallowed them up; and most unjustly thou dealest with God to take that
which is his without his leave; for we are his, and not our own; they are the
words of the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 6.19.20.
Ye are not your own; and a little after speaking of our bodies and spirits,
he says they are Gods. And before his face without any fear or reverence of
him, to destroy them both at one instant. For thou destroyest the body in
killing it, and thou destroyest thy soul that must perish for that murder,
and most hatefully thou proceedest against God and thy self in this
resolution; hatefully against God, in destroying his Creature; and hatefully
against thy self, in destroying thy self. The Fact of the Philistines in
stopping up the wels that Abraham had dug, to the end that Isaacke his son
should not use them for his cattle, is interpreted to be an evidence of their
hatred; Isaacke saying unto them; Genesis 26.27.
Wherefore come ye unto me, seeing ye hate me? How much more must thy fact be
interpreted to be an evidence of hatred against God and thine own soul, that
fillest up and choakest the Well of life, that God dug and opened for thy
use, and desire to water at the pit of death and hell; where thou shall not
obtain one drop of water to cool thy tongue when thou art in torments. Luke
16.24.


How comes it to pass among deceived men, that when as in the case of
suffering for God, where death is accompanied with comfort, and rewarded with
glory, they shrink and fear, as for their lives withdrawing them selves,
which then are sweet unto them, and death bitter? and in this case of laying
violent hands upon themselves, where death is accompanied with terror, and
shall be rewarded with eternal damnation; here they step forth, and are
desperately bold, life being bitter unto them, and death sweet? This is a
dangerous error, wherein the Devil the ancient Murderer has been their
Counselor, the Giver of Life never persuaded thereunto, the very fact
bewrays from what head that sin came, even from him that labors by all
means the destuction of mankind.

Lay these things together, and I hope the thing that thou art resolved to do,
will appear so foul and odious before thee, that thy resolution will alter
and vanish away. And the most mighty preserver change thy mind by his
sanctifying Spirit, and bless thee from this fearful ruin.

case should make away himself! What may be thought of the estate of such a
one? Master Fox in his book of Acts and Monuments, Acts and Monuments, 1708.
1709.
in the lamentable Story of Master James Hales a Judge, says, that this judge
granting to something by the assault and crafty persuasion of Stephen
Gardener Bishop of Winchister, and of the rest of the persecuting Prelates,
being by their greatness and importunity overcome, did shortly after call
him self to better remembrance, and with extreme grief and anguish of heart,
he was ready with his Penknife to have killed himself in prison, and had no
doubt so done, had not the merciful providence of the Lord rescued him
miraculously at that time. After that Winchester hearing that he had sore
wounded himself, takes occasion thereby to blaspheme the Gospel, calling it
openly in the Star Chamber, the Doctrine of Desperation: But the said Judge
within a while after recovering of those wounds, and delivered out of prison,
gets himself home to his house in Kent, where he either for the greatness of
his sorrow, or for lack of good counsel or for that he would avoid the
necessity of hearing Mass, having all things set in an order, a good while
before that appertained to his Testament, casting himself into a shallow
river, was drowned therein; which was in January or February, 2555. which
unhappy chance of this so worthy a Judge (as M. Fox says) was surely the
cause of great sorrow and grief to all good men, and it gave occasion besides
to some Divines, to doubt with themselves whether he were reprobate or saved.
Of which matter says he, it is not for me to determine. Our Judge is his
Judge, who will lay all things open when the time comes. This in the mean
time is certain, that the deed of the man ought in no wise to be allowed; If
wittingly, I discommend his reason; if in a phrenzie, as one out of his wit,
then do I greatly lament, and pity his case. Yet notwithstanding seeing Gods
judgments be secret, and we be likewise in doubt upon what intent he did thus
punish himself; nor any man can be certain whether he repented or not before
the last breath, I think their opinion herein is more indifferent, who do
rather disallow the example of the dead, then despair any way of his
salvation. Otherwise, if we will adiudge all these to hell that have departed
the World after this sort, how many examples have we in the first persecutions
of the Church of those men and women, who being registered in the Works of
worthy Writers; have notwithstanding their praise and commendation. For what
shall we think of those young men, who being sought for to do sacrifice to
heathen Idols, did cast down themselves headlong and brake their necks to
avoid such horrible pollution of themselves? What shall I say of those Virgins
of Antioch, who to the end they might not defile themselves with uncleanness,
and with Idolatry, through the persuasion of their mother, casting themselves
headlong into a river, (together with their mother) did for do themselves,
though not in the same water; yet after the same manner of drowning as this M.
Hales did.

What shall I say of other two sisters, which for the self same quarrel did
violently throw themselves headlong into the Sea, as Eusebius does record? In
whom though perchance, there was less confidence to bear out the pains that
should be ministered of the wicked unto them; yet that their good desire to
keep their faith and religion unspotted, was commended and praised. Another
like example of death is mentioned by Nicephorus in another Virgin likewise,
whose name is expressed in Jerome to be Braessila Diraehima, who to keep her
Virginity, feigned her self to be a Witch, and so conuenting with the young man
which went about to deflowre her, pretended that she would give him an herb
which should preserve him from all kind of weapons, and so to prove it in her
self, laid the herb upon her own throat, bidding him smite, whereby she
was slain, and so by the loss of her life saved her Virginity.

Hereunto may be joined the like death of Sophronia, a Matron of Rome, who
when she was required of Maxentius the Tyrant to be defiled; and saw her
husband more slack then he ought to have been in saving her honesty, bidding
them that were sent for her, to tarry a while till she made her ready, went
into her Chamber, and with a weapon thrust her self through the breast, and so
dyed. Likewise Achetes biting off his own tongue, did spit it in the face of
the harlot. Which examples (says M. Fox) I do not here allege, as going
about to excuse or mainetaine the heinous fact of M. Hales, which I would wish
rather by silence might be drowned in oblivion. But yet notwithstanding, as
touching the person of the man (what soever his fact was) because we are not
sure whether he at the last breath repented again; for that we do not know,
nor are able to comprehend the bottomless depth of the graces and mercyes of
God, which are in Christ Jesus our Savior. We will therefore leave the final
judgment of him, to the determination of him, who is appointed the only Judge
of the quick and dead. And thus far, M. Fox.

Touching the Cases wherein it is lawful to desire death, they may be reduced
principally into five.

The first is, that if God can be more honored and glorified by our death
then by our life; then in such a case it is lawful to desire death. Judge.
16.28.29.30.
In which case Sampson desired death, knowing well thereby, that he should slay
more of the uncircumcised Philistines, the enemies of God, at his death, then
he slew in his life. In this case Moses the servant of God desired to dye; yea,
he went further; for he desired not a temporal but an eternal death for the
glory of God in the salvation of his people. For when Moses perceived that the
Lord was greatly offended with the people for making and worshipping the golden
Calfe, and that the Lords wrath waxed hot against them, and that he meant to
consume them for the same: Exodus 32.31.32.33.
It is said that Moses returned to the Lord and said; Oh this people have
sinned a great sin, and have made them Gods of gold: yet now if thou will
forgive their sin, and if not, blot me I pray thee out of the book which
thou have written, Also in this case the Apostle Saint Paul went as far as
Moses in desiring the same death, for the like cause as Moses did, which was
for the glory of God in the salvation of his people. Who being exceeding much
sorrowful for the Lords rejecting, and casting off the Jews, says, Romans
9.1.2.3.4.
I say the truth, I ^e not, my Conscience also bearing me witness in the holy
Ghost, that I have great heaviness and contin^al sorrow in my heart, for I
could wish that my self were accursed (or separated) from Christ for my
Brethren, my Kinsemen according to the flesh, who are Israelites, to whom
pertayneth the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of
the Law, and the service of God, and the promises, whose are the Fathers, and
of whom, as concerning the Flesh, Christ came, Who is over all God blessed for
ever, Amne. In this case also the holy Martyrs greatly longed after, and
desired death, and ran most joyfully and gladly unto it. Well knowing with
Sampson, that they should slay more at their death, then they slew in their
Life; as first, that they should slay their last enemy by death, which is not
slain but by dying: And secondly, that by dying they should kill the spawne of
all enmity, sin that causes death; and thirdly, they knew that God should
be more glorified, and honored by their death, then he could be by their
life, in that it would thereby be an occasion of daunting his enemies, and of
the increasing and flourishing of his Church and Children. For the death of the
Martyrs was the seed of Gods Church, Acts and Monuments. 113.
In which respect M. Fox in his Acts and Monuments says, that in old time
Martyrdom was more desired then Bishoprics be now.

Secondly, it is lawful to desire death in respect of the wicked, through
zeal to Gods glory, to the end that we may be freede from their society,
whereby we might not be eyewitnesses, nor eare-witnesses of their daily
blaspheming and dishonouring of God. In which case Rebecka desired death; Genesis
26.34.35.
for when Esau had taken ungodly wives, it is said, that they were a grief of
mind unto Isaac and her, because they knew that God was greatly dishonored
thereby: Genesis 27.46.
therefore Rebecca said to Isaacke, I am weary of my life, because of the
daughters* of Heth, and if Jacob take a wife of them, such as those that are of
the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me? In this case also
the Prophet Eliah desired death; for he seeing the Idolatrous practices of the
Israelites, and- the strange cruelties of Ahab and Iezabel against the Prophets
and servants of the Lord, and how they had forsaken the Lords covenants, 1.
Kin. 19.3.4.
cast down his Altars, and slain his Prophets with the sword, and that they
did also seek his life to take it away; therefore through the great zeal
which he had to the glory of God, that he might not see these abominations
wherewith the Lord was so much dishonored by them: It is said, That he
requested for himself that he might dye, and said it is enough now O Lord, 2
King. 2.11,12.
take away my life, for I am not better then my Fathers. And afterward (as we
read) God granted unto him more then he did desire; for the Lord took him
away up into Heaven in a whirlewinde, which taking up of Eliah after this sort
into heaven, was far better and more easy for him, then the ordinary and
common death of all men.

Who can express what a grief it is to the child of God to be enclosed and
compassed about with wicked and ungodly miscreants, by whom God is all the day
long blasphemed and dishonored? What a torture and torment it is to such as
fear the Lord, and are godly minded, to live in the midst of a froward,
perverse, and crooked generation, continually provoking Gods wrath by reason of
their wicked lives and deeds? It would make a man's heart to bleed to hear and
consider, how swearing, blaspheming, cursed speaking, railing, slandering,
quarrelling, contending, ieasting, mocking, scoffing, flattering, lying,
dissembling, vain, corrupt, filthy scolding, scurrilous, loose and idle
talking, that ouerflow in all places, so that men that fear God, had better
be any where, then in the company of most men. This made the Prophet David to
cry out and say; Ps: 120.5.6.7.
Woe is me that I soiourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar, my
soul has too long dwelt with him that hates peace. I am for peace, but when
I speak, they are for war.

Lot was fore vexed and grieved with the unclean conversation of the wicked:
and therefore it is said, that the Lord delivered just Lot, vexed with the
filthy conversation of the wicked, 2. Pet. 2.7.8.
for that righteous man dwelling amongst them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his
righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.

As the World in all ages heretofore has not known the pure and straight
paths of God, so in these present evil days of ours, the true and right
Profession of Christianity is counted of many Puritanisme and preciseness,
fantastical affectation of singularity, and popularitie, and hypocrisy.
True it is indeed, that as there are true Preachers, and true Believers, so
Satan stirs up counterfeits, that have an outward show and resemblance of
them, but are not purged from their inward filthiness. Pro. 30.12.
These are they that Worldlings stumble at, concluding thus; Even so are they
all; therefore their profession is but a kind of Sect, and to follow the common
course and practice of the world, is the surest and safest way. And here Satan
has his desire. Again, if any godly man that has always made conscience of
his ways shall offend, although of mere infirmity, or occasioned by some
strong temptation, but yet so, as he may justly be taxed; why then the matter
is out of all doubt, both he and all his rank are hypocrites, and none else.
Such is the blindness of the world, and their preiudicate opinion of the
children of God. But to you that are of this uncharitable opinion, give me
leave to speak thus much: You boast your selves to be the children of God,
and the true members of Christ, though careless of your ways; but as for
others, who make conscience of their ways, you make mockes on them with your
mouths, and you devise terms for them, to make them accounted factious,
sectaries, hypocrites, and I know not what; they are your gazing stocks and
taunting Proverbs; Concerning which sect, Act. 28.22,
we know, that every where it is spoken against; but where is your devotion?
where is your zeal, where is your repentance, where is your feruency,
sobriety, prayer, thanksgiving, humility? What fruits of the Spirit appear
in you, what love of God in zealous exercises of Gods worship? what contempt
of the worlds pomp, pride, pleasure, vanity in your moderate living and
conversation? What regard of the afflictions of Joseph? Yea, your bodies are
your Idols, and your souls like drudges do homage to your bodies; this
appears in your excessive fare, costly apparel, varieties of fashions, in
your curiosity in the putting on thereof, in your wanton sports, daliances,
pleasures, and such like. But for a conclusion, let me leave this as a bone for
you to gnaw on, That stumbling blocks shall ever be cast before the feet of
the wicked, yet shall the Lanthorn of Gods word shine unto them to guide them
without stumbling or erring: notwithstanding, stumble they will, and fall down
even to the breaking of their necks; for their own wickedness blinds them;
yea and they wilfully out of the hardness of their hearts close their eyes
against the ways of truth; because the ways of error, death and destruction,
are more pleasant unto them,

Furthermore, woe shall be to them that wrong by word or deed, or writing,
the least of Gods little ones, who are so dear to the Lord; as the apple of
his eye: Zac. 2.8.
Therefore let the scorners and enemies of good men remember, That Israel is as
a thing hallowed to the Lord, Ier. 2.3:
all they that eat it shall offend, Evil shall come upon them (says the
Lord). Men may dippe their tongues in venom, Reu. 22.11.
and their pens in poison, and keep the garments of such as stone Stephen:
but the Lord will avenge the cause of his poor ones; he will not always hold
his peace, nor hide his face.

Therefore in the mean time, till we can have our desire in this case; We
must take great care, that we delight not in their evil company; and if it be
our hap sometime to be amongst them, let us take heed we be not polluted and
defiled by their company: for it is a common, and a true saying, that he that
touches pitch shall be defiled therewith; so he that does converse with them,
must look to be defiled with their company. If a man that had wallowed in the
mire, and tumbled in the filthy channel, should offer to company with us, we
would loath and shun him, because he would else soon make his filth cleave
unto us. So wicked and ungodly persons; do set their sins as marks upon
those, with whom they company, and disperse and scatter their filth where they
come, and leave a print or badge of their profaneness behind them; and shall
we sit so close unto them, who have so plunged themselves in the mire of sin,
who should rather labor either to draw them out of filthiness, or withdraw
our selves, that we prove not as loathsome and filthy as they are? Should we
not rather say, If any will be filthy, let him be filthy still by himself; If
any will be unjust, let him be unjust still by himself: If any will be
beastly, let him be beastly alone. The filthy person and beastly man shall not
have me for a companion. Heb. 10.38
My soul shall have no pleasure in him. And as says the Proverbs of the
Ancients; Wickedness proceeds of the wicked, 1 Samuel 24.13
but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

We cannot always withdraw our selves, and avoid those that be such; yet we
must in affection separate from them, when we cannot in place; but not delight
to sit down with them on one stool, that is, we must not be as they are.
David had an eye to this blessed hope of being one of Christ's attendants
hereafter, and therefore would not be for all companies, but professed
himself to be a companion only of such as feared God. Psalm. 119.63.
I am a compani- (says he) of all such as fear thee, and of them that keep
thy precepts. He would not hazard his frail potsheard upon the rock of evil
company for any thing. And wherefore did David say in one of his Psalms, Psalm.
26.4.5.
I have not sitten with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers,
I have hated the congregation of evil doers; and will not sit with the wicked?
but because having fellowship with God, he feared to have any fellowship with
the contemners of God, and was persuaded that as God will not take the ungodly
by the hand (as Job speaks) so none of Gods company should. Job. 8.20.
Also he was loath to make them his companions on earth, of whom he could have
no hope that they should be his companions in heaven. We are more inclinable
to vice then to virtue; so vice is more strong in the wicked then virtue in the
good; whereby it follows, that the society of evil men is dangerous to the
good, and that as a hundred sound men shall sooner catch the plague from one
infected person, then he recover his health by them; so the good are more
often perverted by the wicked, then the wicked converted by the good, and for
this cause GOD loves not to see his children amongst the wicked: for this
cause he commanded his people to destroy the Inhabitants of the Country which
they were to possess, Numb. 16.26.
lest by their society they should be drawn into their sins, as afterward
they were indeed: He commanded also not to touch any creature that was
unclean, and that whosoever touches a dead body should be unclean; but no
Creature is so unclean as a sinner, no death like to the death of sin. And
therefore I will avoyde wicked men, as the most unclean of all living
creatures, and as the most loathsome of those which are dead.

I speak to the faithful, whom I would not have to go out of the world to
avoid the wicked that are in it, 1 Cor. 5 9.10 11.
but entreat by the tender mercies of ^od, and of Christ, to be as careful as
they can to avoid them, and their wicked assembly; and if they must use them
for necessity, not to use them as companions, neither to draw with them in any
yoke of affection; but rather to draw back when the wicked are in place, that
they may not be eye, or eare-witnesses of their daily dishonouring of God. We
are commanded in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
to withdraw our selves from every brother that walks disorderly. All this
may be done when we love the men, and hate the vices, when we suffer them to
have no quietness in their sins, and yet live quietly, and offer quietness
to themselves: He that will wholly abandon the company of them that are evil,
must (as the Apostle says) get himself out of the world; 1 Cor. 5.10.
and therefore Saint Ambrose says fitly to this purpose; We ought to fly
the company of wicked men, in respect of private fellowshippe, and not, in
respect of public communion, and that rather with our hearts and affections,
then with our bodies and outward actions; we may not hate our brother, but
love him; yet if we love the Lord, Leuit. 19.17. Psalm. 97.16. Romans 12.18.
we must hate that which is evil; where the Apostle says; If it be possible,
as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. We may have no peace with
the manners, yet we must live peaceably with the men. Thus then in a word out
of the words of the Apostle, the controversy may be decided: If it be
possible, so far forth as may stand with our faith and profession, as much as
lies in you, let us do our part, and perform our best endeavor to live
peaceably; if we cannot have peace, yet let us live peaceably with all men,
with the bad to reform them, with the good to conform our selves unto them,
with our enemies to shun them; with our friends to keep them.

And here is comfort for the children of God, whom the wicked thrust out of
their company; and would (if they could) thrust out of the world, because of
their conscience to God, Psalm. 38.20.
and because they follow the thing that good is. And hereof it is that the
Wiseman says, that He that is upright in the way, Prou. 29.27.
is abomination to the wicked. And hence it is also that the Prophet says;
He that departs from evil, makes himself a prey, and the Lord saw it, and
it displeased him. Esaias 59.15.
And though they be not accepted, where evil men bear sway (which is no
disparagement to them but glory, nor loss, but gain) yet they are esteemed
of the good, and admired of the evil, though not followed of them. Do the
wicked hate them? they shall loose nothing by such hatred, for God and good men
will love them. Will not the unrighteous have any fellowshippe with them? It is
so much the better for them; for they are in less danger of corruption, and
in more possibility of grace and goodness. And where me^ that be evil avoid
them, Christ and his thousands of Angels will stick close unto the^.

Heb. 11.38.
Those Worthies of whom we read in the Epistle to the Hebrews, were most
cruelly dealt with all, and persecuted in the World. Of whom the world was not
worthy; for the wicked did drive them out of their companies by sharp
persecutions into deserts, mountains, and holes of the earth. But they were
worthy, and had far better company, having a kind of fellowship with Christ,
and all the Saints that were gone before them. So, for the faithful that now
live, if the wicked and ungodly make no more of them then of the filth of the
World, and as of the of scouring of all things (as the Apostles speaks) it is
because they are too good to live amongst them, and too precious to be cast
before swine, 1 Cor. 4 13.
that so tread and trample them under their feet. And where they say, away
with such fellows from the earth, Math. 7.6.
for it is not fit that they should live. Christ will in his due time take
them from the earth by a blessed and most sweet death, Act. 22.22.
to have the company and fellowship with him, his Angels and Saints, and with
all the holy company of Heaven, and then they shall have their desire*

Thirdly, it is lawful to desire death in respect of our sins, to the end we
might not offend God any more by sinning. And what a misery and bondage it is
to be in subjection to sin, may appear by the most earnest and fervent prayer
of the blessed Apostle Saint Paul, who feeling the weight and heavy burden
thereof, 2 Cor. 12.7.8.9.
he desired God with earnest zeal and feruencie, and with deep sighs and
groans that he might be delivered from it. And again, after the long and
lamentable complaint that the Apostle made of the Law that was in his members,
striving against the law of the Spirit, and leading him captive into the law of
sin, he breaks forth into this most patheticall exclamation. O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death (or this body
of death) I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 7.24.25,
The Prophet David also feeling the heavy weight of his sins, makes his
grievous complaint and moan thereof unto God, saying; There is no soundness in
my flesh, Psalm. 38.34.
because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my
sins; for mine iniquities are gone over my head as a heavy burden, they are
too heavy for me.

If a man would invent a torment for such as fear God, and desire to walk in
newness of life, and to have part in the first resurrection; he cannot devise
a greater torment, then to be disquieted with this tyranny of sin, and with
this unquiet and unhappy Iebusite, even the rebellion and corruption of our
own flesh; and this heavy weight of sin that does cleave and hang so fast
upon us. O happy therefore and blessed death that discharges and freeth us
from so sore, combersome and cruel bondage, and from further offending of him,
who dyed for our sins. So that death freeth us from the necessity of sinning,
and also brings us to be with Christ; And to desire death in this case, is not
a loathing to live, but a loathnesse to sin. In which case Job desired death,
because of his sins, that he might not offend ^od any more; and therefore he
says; Job. 6.8.9 10.
O that I might have my request, and that God would grant me the thing that I
long for, even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose
his hand, and cut me off, then should I yet have comfort.

Now in the mean while, till we can have our desire in this case accomplished,
Romans 6.12.
we must resist and strive against our sins, that they may not reign in our
mortal bodies; and let all our endeavor and care increase against our sins,
that the force of them may be daily weakened, their number lessened, and all
occasions of sinning avoided.

Fourthly, it is lawful to desire death, in respect of the miseries,
calamities and troubles of this life; and for the preventing of the miseries to
come. And yet this holy desire must not be simple and absolute, but it must be
restrained with certain respects, and with these reseruations. First, it must
be desired so far forth, as it is a means to put an end to all our
miseries, to all the dangers of this life, to all the corruption of nature, and
to the necessity of sinning. Secondly, as it is a gate by which we enter into
the immediate fellowship with Christ and of God. And our desire also for these
ends must keep it self within these limits; wherein two Caueats must be
observed: First, it must not be immoderate, exceeding the golden mean;
Secondly, it must always be with a reservation of Gods good pleasure, and with
an humble submission, and subjection of our wills to the will of God. For if
either of these be wanting, the desire of death is defective, faulty and
dangerous. Death frees us from the miseries and perils of this world,
abolisheth all present, and preuents all future dangers, and brings us to be
with Christ. What man wearied with labor, desires not rest, what Mariner
tossed upon the seas, wishes not to come into safe harbor? What traveler
toiled with a tedious and perilous journey, would not willingly come to his
ways end? what sick man accepts not health? what slave imbraceth not
freedom? what prisoner does not entertain enlargement? what captive would not
welcome liberty? what husbandman would be ever toyling, and not at length
receive the fruit of his labor? what merchant is content to live ever in
danger by sea and by land, amongst Pirates and robbers, and not to come at last
safe home with his wealth? And lastly, what man having the reuersion of a
goodly kingdom, would be loath to receive the possession of it? And sure we
are all in this case by reason of the manifold miseries incident to us in this
world; that we have good cause to wish with a holy desire to be loosed from al
these miseries, and to be with our Savior Christ, and in the mean time, Luke
21.19.
till we can have our desire in this case, Let patience possess our souls.

Fifthly, and lastly it is lawful to desire death for the perfecting and full
accomplishment of that conjunction and union which we have in Christ Jesus our
head, that we might be where he is to enjoy his presence. For we are (says
the Apostle) members of his body, of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30.
and of his bones that is, we are most straightly coupled to Christ by the
spiritual band of our faith; which union is most admirable; For first we are
united to his Godhead, that is not by transfusion of the divine substance, but
by effectual working by the manhood; and secondly, we are one with his
manhood, that is really and substantially, Ioh. 15.5.
as appears by those Similitudes by which this union is expressed in holy
Scriptures; as namely, First of the Vine and branches, Ioh. 3.29. Romans 11.18.
Ephesians. 2.20. Ephesians. 1.23.
Secondly, of the Bridegroom and the Bride; Thirdly, of the Olive tree and the
branches; Fourthly, of the foundation and the building; Fifthly, and specially
of the head and members. Concerning which union Cyril has made this
resemblance, that as two pieces of wax moulten up together, do make up one
lump, so Christ's flesh with our flesh joined together, make up one body which
is his Church.

And this conjunction and union which we have in Christ, is also set down in
that heavenly prayer, which our Savior Christ made unto God his Father, at his
last farewell out of this world immediately before his passion and suffering;
John 17.
where he prays at large for the accomplishment of this union in us with
him. And if our Sauiour-Christ himself did pray unto his Father for the full
accomplishment of this union, that we might be where he is, for to behold his
glory, then it is lawful for us to desire the same. And this is true love
indeed unto Christ our head, to desire to be with him; for the property of
true love is an ardent and burning desire to obtain that which is beloved. And
as a woman that loves her husband unfeignedly, cannot be content with any love
token she receives from him in his absence, but longs and wishes, and
desires more and more till she receive himself; even so, the Soul which is
wounded with the love of Jesus her merciful husband, has continual desire to
be with him. I grant every token sent from him brings comfort, but no
contentment till she enjoy him. If the love of men compelled the Apostle to say
to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12:14:
It is not yours, but you I seek. How much more should the love of God compel
us to say to our Lord Jesus: It is not thy gift but thy self O Lord that I
long for; for thou art the portion of my soul, seeing I am nothing without
thee, let me taste the benefit of being thine, I desire thee, and not thine,
for thy self, not for thy gifts; I desire thee only, nothing for thee, Psalm.
73.25.
nothing with thee, nothing besides thee.

The godly Christian has some lively foretast and sweetness of this blessed and
happy conjunction and union with Christ, and therefore it is a grief unto him
to be holder from him, and a joy to remove unto him. But certainly he shall
never go out of this earthly body with joy, who lives not in this frail body
with grief for his absence from him. If thou desire that which thou have not
(which is heaven) then shed thou tears here on earth, that thou may
obtain it.

And hereof comes these and such like complaints, As the heart pants after the
water bro^kes, so pants my soul after thee O God, my soul thirsts for
God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God?

In this case Saint Paul desired death in respect of himself, For to me
(says he) to live is Christ, and to die is gain. But if I live in my flesh,
this is the fruit of my labor; Phil 1.21,22,23.
yet what I shall choose I wotte not, for I am in a straight between two,
having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better for me.
For the Apostle to have a desire, is more then simply to desire: for it
witnesses two things, first, a vehement, secondly, a perpetual desire to
pass to Christ his head, and this is a settled desire, which is a gift of Gods
grace peculiar only to the elect of God. In this case is also Simon desired
death; for when the holy Ghost revealed to him, that he should not see death
before he had seen the Lord Christ, after that he had seen him in the Temple,
He took him up in his arms, and blessed God and said, Luke 2,28:29,30.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. Wherefore hidest thou
thy face (says Augustine to God) happily thou will say, No man shall see me
and live; Oh then Lord, that I were dead, so I might see thee. Oh let me see
thee that I may die; even here I will not live; Dye I would, yea I desire to be
loosed and to be with Christ, I refuse to live, that I may live with Christ And
in this respect all the godly may desire death. Though he tarry, Heb. 2,3,
Heb. 10.37, Revel. 22.20
wait, for yet a very little while, and he that shall come will come, and will
not tarry. For he which testifies these things, says, Surely, I come
quickly, Amen, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus.

THE EIGHTH DIVISION, OF THE GLORIOUS ESTATE OF Gods Children after DEATH.
TOuching the glorious estate of the children of God after death, which way
shall I begin to express the same, when as the blessed Apostle says, Eye
has not seen, Ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of
man, 1 Cor. 2.9,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

I remember what is registered of a certain Painter, who being to express the
sorrow of a weeping Father, having spent his skill before in setting forth of
the said passions of his children, did think it best to present him upon his
Table to the beholders view, with his face covered; that so he might have that
grief to be imagined by them, which he found himself unable to set out at
the full. The like must I do in this case, for the glory of that glorious
estate which the children of God shall hereafter enjoy: I must commend to you
with a kind of silent admiration, that so you may with your silence suppose
that to be infinite, which you see that I will not adventure to express. What
hand can measure the bounds of infinite? What mind can number the years of
eternity? what hand, what mind can measure, can number the unmeasurable
measure, and innumerable number of the joys of Heaven? O that I had the
tongues of the glorious Angels in some sort for your sakes to utter, or rather
that you had the hearts of the glorified Saints, in some little small measure to
conceive of some part of this glory. But this glorious Sun does so dazell my
weak eyes, this bottomless depth so ouerwhelme my shallow heart; and the
surpassing greatness of these joy? do every way so ouercharge me, that I must
needs stand a while silent, amazed, and astonished at the serious
consideration of the exceeding, abundant excellency of this glory, which
requires rather the tongues and pens of Angels then of men to describe and
express the the same; yea rather it cannot be perfectly described and
expressed by Angels themselves. And therefore I must be content then darkely to
shadow it out, since lively representation of it is merely impossible. This I
may say in a word, that look what difference there is in proportion betwixt
the cope of heaven, and the earth, which respectively to it is but as a prick
in the midst of a center, the same and much more there is betwixt the glory
of all the Kingdoms of the world united together (if it were possible) into
one, and that which the Apostle calls the glory which shall be showed
hereafter: Better it is with a kind of silent astonishment to admire it, then
to take on us either to discribe it, or to comprehend it in particular.

Yet give me leave to set before you for the furtherance of your private
meditations, a little shadow or glympse thereof, even as it were but the
backe-parts thereof, which Moses was permitted to see; betwixt which and it,
notwithstanding, there is as much difference, Exodus 33.23.
as between one drop of water, and the maine Ocean sea.

A word fitly spoken (says the Wiseman) is like apples of gold, and pictures
of silver. Prou. 25.11
We read in the book of Deutronomy, that when Moses went up from the playnes
of Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, Deuteronomy. 34.1.2.3.4.
to the top of Pisgah that is over against Jericho, that there the Lord
showed him all the land of Gilead unto Dan, and all Nepthacy, and all the land
of Ephraim and Manasses, and all the land of Judah, unto the utmost sea, and
the South and the plain of the land of Jericho, the City of Palm trees unto
Zoar. And this is the land which I swear (says the Lord) unto Abraham* and
unto Isaacke, and unto Jacob saying, I will give unto thy seed, and I have
caused thee to see it with thine eyes, And this was that earthly Canaan, even
that promised land which is so much commended in the holy Scriptures. Even so,
if we will take a little pains to go up to the mountain of the Lord which
the Prophet Esaias speaks of, Esa. 2.2.
then there in in some small measure may we take a sight and view, not of the
glory of the earthly Canaan, but of the glory of the heavenly Canaan; and where
the Devil (as it is said in the Gospel) took Jesus up into an exceeding high
mountain, Mat. 4.8,
and showed him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them. Here
upon this mountain of the Lord, there is showed unto us the Kingdom of God,
and the glory of the same; All which, the Lord will give us (being the right
owner thereof) if we fear, serve and worship him; and we need not with Moses
to clime up to any earthly mountain, to see and behold the Kingdom of God, and
the glory thereof. Deuteronomy. 30.12.13.14.
It is not in heaven (says Moses in another case) that thou should say; Who
shall go up to heaven for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and
do it; neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, Who shall go
over the Sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?
But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart, and
there we may behold this glory. Search the Scriptures (says our Savior Christ
in the Gospel of Saint John) for in them ye think to have eternal life, and
they are they which testify of me. John 5.39.
And we may add further also, that they are they which testify of this
glorious estate of the children of God after death; Joseph gave his brethren
provision for the way: but the full sackes were kept in store until they came
to their Fathers house: God gives us here a taste and assay of his goodness;
but the maine sea of his bounty and store is hoorded up in the kingdom of
heaven.

It is an usual thing in the Scripture to represent spiritual and heavenly
things by bodily and earthly things, that therein as in glasses we may behold
heavenly things, although obscurely; which notwithstanding, we cannot
otherwise perceive, and see immediately being too glorious and vehement objects
for our eyes. Therefore as we can not behold the light of the Sun in the
Sun, but by reflection thereof in the Moon, in the Stars, in the water, or
other bright body, or else by refraction thereof in the mistie air; so the
soul while it is in the body hears, sees, understands, imagines with the
body, and in a bodily manner, and therefore is not capable of such hearing,
seeing, understanding* imagining as it shall be when it is separate from the
body; hence it is, that the Apostle says- 1. Cor. 13.12
We now see through a glass darkely. We conceive of heaven by a City, whose
walls, pauements and mansions are of gold, pearl, Crystal, Emeralds, as it
is described in the book of the Revelation, Revel. 21.10
which we shall afterward hear more at large.

And to begin first of all with the comfortes and benefits of this life,
even they (although miserable) do argue that a far better estate is reserved
for us in heaven. We see that God even here upon earth notwithstanding our
manifold sins whereby we daily offend him, and which may justly cause him (as
the Prophet speaks) Ier. 5.25.
to withhold good things from us;) yet he in great mercy vouchsafes us many
pleasures, and furnishes us not only with matters of necessity (who daily,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 68.19.
loadeth us with benefits) but also of delights. There is a whole Psalm spent
only in this matter, which is the 104. Psalm; Psalm. 104.
a Psalm worthy to be written in letters of gold, and as Moses speaks in
Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 11.20.
upon the door posts of thine house, and upon the gates, yea upon the Table of
thine heart (as the Wiseman speaks) Pro. 7.3.
for the admirable excellency thereof.

God causes (says Saint Ciprian) the Sun to rise and set in order, the
seasons to obey us, the elements to serve us, the winds to blow, the spring to
flow, the corn to grow, Ps. 147.18.
the fruits to show, the gardens and orchardes to fructify, the woods to
rastle with leaves, the meadows to shine with variety of grass and flowers,
And Chrysostowe very excellently handling the same point with Cyprian, further
shows, that God has in a sort made the night more beautiful then the day,
by infinite variety of bright and glittering stars, and that he has been
more mindful and merciful then man would have bin of himself, who through
the greediness of the World, would have ouertoyled himself; but that God made
the night of purpose for his repose and rest. In a word, he says (and that
truly) even of these earthly benefits and commodities, that although we were
never so virtuous; nay, if we should dye a thousand deaths, we should not be
worthy of them. And the very heathen Poet considering this, could not choose
but break out into an admiration, saying: O how many things has God created
for man's delight, and heaped joys upon him with a bountiful hand? Nay the
Prophet David considering this, could not choose but break out into this
wonderful admiration; Psalm. 144.3.
Lord what is man that thou take knowledge of him, or the son of man that
thou make account of him. And all this has God done (says Cyprian) to good
and bad, to the harmless and the harmefull, Eccles. 9.2.
to the religious and irreligious, to the holy and profane, to the swearer,
and to him that fears an oath. And he makes (as our Savior Christ says
in the Gospel of Saint Matthew) Mat. 5.4.5.
His sun to shine on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the
just and unjust, Whence we may well reason thus, that if GOD deals so
graciously with us on earth, he will do much more for us, and to us in heaven;
if he bestowed such benefits upon strangers, nay upon enemies; he has better
things in store for his own househould; yea for us, which are his friends* If
he deals so liberally and bountifully with slaves, he will be much more
liberal and bountiful to us which are his sons in heaven. Again, the
excellency of the creatures of God argues a greater; yea, incomparably greater
excellency in the Creator himself, as well does Barnard observe. Thou
wondrest (says he) at the brightness of the Sun, beauty in the flowers,
sauorie relish in bread, fertility in the earth, Now consider that all are the
gifts of God, and there is no doubt but that he has reserved much more to
himself for thee in heaven, then he has communicated and imparted to the
Creatures here upon earth. Again, we may conceive of these joys of heaven,
Luk 12.27.28
by taking a view of the inferior beauties. Consider (says our Savior
Christ) the Lillyes of the field; how they grow and flourish, I say unto you
that Solomon in all his glory was not like to one of these. All Salomons glory
not like to one Lilly? Has God put such glory and gladness upon the grass
of the field? has he so gorgeously attired them, which to day have a being,
and to morrow are cut down, and cast into the furnace? How much more then
shall be the glory and joy of you in heaven, O ye of little faith? Therefore
when we meet with any thing that is excellent in the Cteatures, we may say to
our selves, how much more excellent is he that gave them this excel^ency. When
we find admirable wisdom in men, how they rule al creatures, by cunning
overcome them that are far stronger then themselves, overtake them that are
far swifter then themselves, outrunne the Sun and Moon in discourse,
telling many years before hand what courses they must hold, and when they
shall be eclipsed, Let us say to our selves how wise is that God, which gave
such wisdom unto men?

Again, when we see any thing strong, as the Lion, or the Elephant, Act.
40.15.16 Job. 41.1. 1 King. 19.11.
whose strength is described in the book of Job, or the whale, whose strength
is also there described; or the wind which is said in the first book of the
Kings to be so great and strong, that it rent the mountains and brake in
pieces the rocks; or the thunder or such like, at the huge noise whereof (as
it is said in the book of Exodus) it made all the people in the Camp to
fear and tremble; Ex. 19 16.
Let us then say, how strong is that God, that gives this strength unto them?
Again, when we see rare beauty in men or women, or most glorious colors in
flowers, birds and other creatures; Let us then say, how far more beautiful
and amiable is that God, that gives this beauty and comeliness unto them? And
when we taste things that are exceeding comfortable and sweet, as honey, and
such like; Let us then say; how sweet and comfortable is that GOD that gives
that sweetness?

Now from all this let us conclude, that if the creatures can afford such
pleasure, comfort, contentment, and delight; what will the Creator himself
do? when we shall immediately enjoy his glorious presence after death? In thy
presence (says the Psalmist) Psalm 16.11.
is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Surely this world compared to the world to come, is as it were but a little
village to the greatest and most spacious City: nay, it is but as it were a
gatehouse, or Porters lodge to the most wide, glorious and magnificent Palace
of the greatest Prince in the World; and if the Gatehouse be so fair, how
fair and glorious is the Palace it self?

Moreover, consider what great ods there is between Gods mediate and immediate
presence to enjoy him in the creatures, and to enjoy him in himself. The
creatures, yea the most excellent creatures, are as it were but a veil or
curtain drawn between God and us, which veil or curtain being drawn aside,
we shall see God face to face; and then how glorious will that sight be? And
though we know not what it is to behold the face of God; yet herein consists
the highest degree of our happiness. Isa. 33.17.
Therefore are the joys of the Saints in heaven super superlatiue, because
their eyes do always behold their King in the excellency of his beauty and
glory. It is a pleasing sight and delightsome to the eye to behold the Sun,
but that is (says Bernard) the true and only joy indeed, which is conceived
from the Creator, not from the creature. John the Baptist leaped in his mothers
womb, Luke 1.41.
when but the mother of his Maker came near unto him. The Wise men rejoiced
exceedingly when they saw but his Star. The Bethshemites reioiced greatly at
the sight of the Ark. Math 2.10:
Were these causes of great and unwonted joy and gladness? 1 Samuel 6.13
the^ much more are the Saints of God ravished with joy in heaven, where they
shall continually see and behold God face to face.

We are to consider, that there is a twofold vision or sight of God; the one,
called by some of the learned visio viae, the sight of the way, and means that
brings home to God; the other visio patriae, the sight of the Country, where
God is, that is his home and habitation with his Saints and Angels.

They are happy that see the way, that brings and leads home to God, but
more happy, that are at home in heaven dwelling, never to be removed out of
his presence and Country. Of these two sorts of visions means the Apostle
Saint Paul: When he says; 1 Cor 13.12
for now we see through a glass darkely, but then we shall see face to face.

Touching the first kind of the sight of God, which is termed visio viae, or
(as Saint Paul) in a glass darkly, in a word this sight consists in true
faith and knowledge of God. And thus to see God by sound and saving knowledge
grounded upon his word, and by a true and lively justifying faith from this
knowledge arising: This I say, is only proper to Gods elect children, who in
time shall come to see him at home face to face in the fulness of ioies for
ever. And touching visio patriae, a seeing of God in his Country, or his home,
or heavenly habitation. Augustine writing upon Genesis says, That the blessed
shall have a threefold sight of God in heaven. To wit, they shall first have a
spiritual, or they shall see the blessed spirits and Angels; next, a body or
corporal sight of the blessed redeemer. And thirdly, a supernatural or
intellectual sight; and a fourth may be added, that they shall likewise see
the holy Chost.

For the first; their spirits and souls shall behold and see with great
comfort and joy the blessed Angels, and Spirits of all the faithful departed:
They shall see the bright Court of Angels, Math. 18.10.
Cherubins and Seraphins, always beholding the face of our father which is in
heaven, attending the Dyetie, and ever pressing to do his will, faithfully,
speedily, willingly, never weary of watching, because they are never weary of
well-doing. They shall see the fair assembly of the Saints of God, the
Patriarckes Prophets and Apostles, Luke 13.28.
with Abraham, Isaacke and Jacob in his glorious Kingdom; they shall be tied
up with them in the bundell of living; 1 Samuel 25.29.
never to be loosed any more. As they before them have done, so shall they
return into their rest, as into a retiring Camp after the day of battle.
This is the greatest joy upon the first sight. And if (as Chrysostom says) to
see the Devil and evil Spirits, be a horrible punishment, and a kind of
hell, then to see good Angels and good Spirits must be a great joy, and the
beginning and entrance into heaven.

Psalm. 45.1.
The second is that corporal and bodily beholding of our Savior Jesus Christ,
standing at the right hand of God the Father, 1 Pet. 1.12.
and his comfortable face and countenance fayrer then the sons of men, and
whom the very angels desire to behold, and whereby in their Spirits the
Saints, do presenly see the natural and humane body of Christ Jesus, at the
right hand of God the Father; from whose glorious sight does arise a greater
measure and degree of comfort and joy. Cant. 3.11,
Then come the godly to see in substance, that which was spoken (of the type)
by Solomon, Math. 12.42
Come forth O ye daughters of Sion, and behold the King Solomon with the
Crown. To see then this true Solomon, more great then Solomon, even our
Redeemer, thus standing crowned in glory, and have access to him, must needs
be a second, and higher measure of joy to the beholders. It is said, when
Solomon was crowned, 1 Kin 1.40.
the people reioiced exceedingly, that the earth rent with the sound of the^.
Oh what joy and greater joy is it then to see Christ Jesus thus crowned with
glory in Gods Kingdom at home?

When the Wisemen came a far journey, seeking Christ, anst found him newborn, lying most meanly and basely in a Cratch amongst the beasts; yet did
they rejoice, seeing him in the Cratch, and did offer to him.

Oh how much shall ye rejoice, Math. 2.10,12
seeing him that was in the Cratch, clothed with great glory, and wearing an
immortal Crown?

The third sight is that intellectual and glorious sight supernatural of Gods
essence face to face (as Paul names it) yea God himself of so great Majesty,
might, beauty, goodness, mercy and love, 1. Cor. 13.12.
as if a man were filled with all other blessings temporal and eternal, and
yet without this (as Plotin says) all were but misery and accursednes. And
this is such a sight, in such a manner, and after such a measure (which
notwithstanding shall be infinite) as is or can be possible, for the glorified
Creatures to behold the glorious Creator. And (as the Apostle Saint Peter
says) to be made partakers of Gods divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
far beyond that sight of Moses or Peter's, when being clogged with
mortality, they yet did see that was glorious to behold.

Of this sight of God, Job. 19.23.24,25,26.27.
the holy man speaks in his Book. Oh (says he) That my words were now
written, O that they were printed in a Book, that they were graven with an
iron pen, and laid in the Rock for ever. For I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see GOD, whom I
shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my
raines be consumed within me. Yet this sight shall exceed, and go beyond that
of our Forefathers before the fall, or that of the Apostle Paul's; for it is
said by him, that we shall see him face to face. And by the Apostle Peter
being made partakers of his divine nature, more then ever man could have
dreamed off, then shall the Elect see so^, as they shall be with him for ever,
yea and serve him continually, in singing praises unto him. Which sight is
called the spiritual life, not in respect of substance, but qualities, in so
far that after those sightes, the elect shall spiritually live, and that
without any natural or bodily helps or means, as in this present transitory
life.

In that Life shall be no need of meat, drink, light, artificial or
natural, Candle. Stars, Sun, or Moon; For God shall be all in all. By
which sight and supernatural knowledge, it shall come to pass, That Philip.
3,21
these our mortal bodies shall be like to his glorious body, Dan: 12,3,
and shall shine like the Sun in the firmament, and be made like Angels.

Fulgentius speaking of this most glorious and supernatural sight, says thus:
In a looking glass we may see three different things; the glass, our selves,
and what is near us: So by the glass of Gods divine clearenes, we shall see
him, our selves, Angels, and saints beside us; yea, we shall see God face to
face, not as now through the glass of his word; but we shall know him as we are
known of his Majesty. As a man standing upon the shore of the Sea sees not the
breadth or depth of it; so the Angels in Heaven, and the elect on earth may see
God really, and yet not comprehend the depth of his greatness, nor the height of
his everlasting essence.

The fourth sight is that we shall likewise see the Holy Ghost proceeding from
them both, and breathing upon our saved souls, like a gentle soft air upon a
garden, and more sweet then all the trees of Incense. Again, the Apostle
says, Now I know in part, 1 Cor: 13,12,
but then shall I know even as I am known. The Apostle is bold here to say,
that all the knowledge we have here, is as the knowledge and stuttering of a
young child, yea, that his own knowledge too, was such, although he were an
Apostle, and a principal Apostle; and thereby he insinuates that our
knowledge here is as far inferior to the knowledge we shall have there, as
the knowledge of a child that stuttereth and stammereth, and yet cannot speak
plain, is to the knowledge of the greatest Clearke in the world.

The very heathen thought this to be one great benefit, that men, especially
wise men had by death, that their knowledge was perefected in the other world,
and that none could possibly attain to perfect wisdom and knowledge, until
they came thither. How much more should we count this an inestimable glory
and benefit, that in the life to come we shall have the perfect knowledge of
heavenly things, yea, and of all things in the Kingdom of Heaven; yea, we shall
know God with a perfect knowledge, so far as Creatures can possibly
comprehend the Creator. We shall know the power of the Father, the wisdom of
the Son, the grace of the holy Ghost, and the indivisible nature of the
blessed Trinity. And in him we shall know, not only all our friends (who dyed
in the faith of Christ with us) but also all the faithful that ever were, or
shall be. For first, our Savior Christ tells the Jews in the Gospel of
Saint Luke, that they shall see Abraham, Isaacke and Jacob, Luke 13,28,
and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out.
Then if the wicked shall know the godly, much more shall we know them.

Genesis 2.23.
Secondly, Adam in his Innocence knew Eve, so soon as he awaked out of his
sleep to be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; much more then shall
we know our kindred and friends in the faith, when we shall awake, and be
perfected, and glorified in the Resurrection.

Mat. 27.52.53
Thirdly, the Apostles knew Christ after his resurrection, and the Saints which
arose with him, and appeared in the holy City, Mat. 17.4.
as is recorded by the Evangelist S. Matthew, therefore we shall know one
another then.

Fourthly, Peter, James and John knew Moses and Elias in the transfiguration of
Christ, much more shall we know one another in our glorification.

Luke 16.23.
Fifthly, Dines knew Lazarus a far off in Abraham's bosom; much more shall one
child of God know another in the Kingdom of God.

Sixthly, our Savior Christ in the Gospel of S. Matthew says unto Peter, Mat.
19.28,
and the rest of his Apostles, verelie I say unto you, that ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, when the son of man shall sit on the throne of
his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. But this place of Scripture being somewhat obscurely uttered, Our
Savior Christ there alluding to the present state of things, the number of the
twelve Tribes of Israel, and of the twelve Apostles, the Apostle Saint Paul in
his first Epistle to the Corinthians expresses more plainly and clearly,
applying it in general to all the faithful under the New Testament,
Affirming, that the Saints shall judge the World, 1 Cor. 6,2,3,
Yea, even the Angels, (that is to say) Wicked, and Ungodly men, and wicked
and ungodly Spirits. And hence Tertullian notably comfort and encourages
the Martyrs that were in durance, daily expecting the Judges coming, and to
receive sentence of death perhaps (says he) the Judge is looked for, yea, but
you shall judge your Judges your selves. But here by the way we are to
understand, that the authority of judgment does not belong either to the
Apostles or Saints; and that in their manner of judgment they resemble
Justices, who at an Assise are in a manner Judges, and yet give no sentence,
but only approve the sentence that is given. The Judges for the time have the
whole authority, the Justices on the Bench are but Assistants and witnesses;
the definitive Judgment is proper to our Savior Christ, Acts 10.42.
who is the supreme Judge himself; For he it is, 2. Tim. 4.1.
(says the Apostle Saint Peter) that was ordained of God to be the Judge of
the quick and the dead: and he it is (says Saint Paul) that shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing, and in his kingdom; The Apostles and
Saints are not Judges, but as Judges having no voice of authority, but of
consent. So that although our Savior Christ our head, principally and properly
shall be the Judge, yet we that are his members shall have a branch of his
authority, and shall be, as it were, joined in commission with him; so the
Bench, and not the Bar, is our place there in heaven, which is part of our
glory and joy. Then if the Saints shall be assisting in judging wicked men and
wicked spirits; it then follows that they shall know the wicked from the
good, the goats from the sheep; and then much more shall they know their
fellow-Iustices and Commissioners. And the Apostle Paul confi^meth this in
these words before alleged, saying, But then shall I know, 1. Cor. 13.12.
even as I also am known. And Augustine out of this place comfort a widow,
assuring her, as in this life she saw her husband with external eyes, so in
the life to come, she should know his heart, and what were all his thoughts and
imaginations. Then husbands and wives look to your thoughts and actions, for
all shall one day be manifest.

Seventhly, Genesis 25.8. Genesis 35.29. 2. King. 22.20.
The faithful in the old Testament are said to be gathered to their Fathers,
therefore the knowledge of our friends remains.

Eighthly, The Apostle Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 13.8.
That love never falls away; therefore knowledge one of another being the
ground thereof, remains in another life.

Romans 2.5.6.
Ninthly, The Apostle says, That the last day shall be a declaration of the
just judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his deeds.
Eccles. 12.14.
And the Preacher says, That God shall bring every work to judgment with
every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. And in the book of the
Revelation it is said, Revel. 22.12.
Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man
according as his works shall be. Then if every man's work shall be brought to
light, much more the worker. Matt. 12.36.
And if (as it is in the Gospel) wicked men shall account for every idle word,
much more shall the idle speakers themselves be known; for if the persons be
not known, then in vain shall their works be made manifest and known; then
if the wicked shall be known as well as their wicked works, much more shall
the Saints know one another.

Tenthly and lastly, it is said in the book of Wisdom, Then shall the
righteous man stand in great boldness, Wisd. 5.1,2,3,4,5,6.
before the face of such as have afflicted him, and made no account of his
labors; when they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and
shall be amazed at the strangeness of his salvation, so far beyond all that
they looked for; and they repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall
say within themselves, This was he whom we had sometime in derision, and a
proverb of reproach: We fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be
without honor. How is he numbered among the children of God, and his lot is
among the Saints? Therefore have we erred from the way of truth, and the light
of righteousness has not shined unto us, and the Sun of righteousness rose
not upon us. Out of which place it may be gathered, that if the wicked
themselves shall know the children of God after death, whom they have derided,
mocked, scoffed, and wronged; nay, if the wicked shall at that day know Christ
himself, as it is testified in the book of the Revelation, Revel. 1.7.
where it is said, Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him,
and they also which pierced him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail
because of him, then much more undoubtedly shall the Saints of God know the
same, and their Savior Jesus Christ, and they shall also know one another; but
the full and certain truth hereof shall be revealed unto us in the last day;
and therefore it is not good to approach nearer this holy flame of Gods secrets,
lest we be therewith consum^d; nor diue any deeper into this bottomless depth,
for fear of drowning: we herein must not be over curious, but be wise to
sobriety, and especially labor to know those things that more concern us in
this life, and that are more evidently discovered unto us, that we and our
children may do them: it is a learned ignorance not to know that which God
would have us to be ignorant of; but it is a pernicious contempt not to be
willing to know that which God would teach us: true wisdom and modesty in the
children of God, consists in opening the ears to learn, when Christ opens
his mouth to teach, and in not desiring to learn that which he is unwilling
to reveal unto us: the holy Scripture is the school of the holy Ghost,
wherein, as there is nothing omitted that is necessary to salvation, so is
there nothing taught, but what is requisite for us to know. Again, cast thy
conceit earnestly upon the description of the holy City, new Jerusalem, Revel.
21.10.
come down from heaven as a Bride prepared for a husband, a City of solace,
whose ports are ever patent, whose streets are paued with gold, and garnished
with all manner of precious stones; ever splendent shall this City be, and
there is represented unto thee a place full of all glory, pleasures and
excellencies that heart can imagine, and those perdurable even for ever.

The first point is to consider what manner of place it is that the blessed
Saints do inhabit; 1. King. 8.27.
it is the heaven of heavens, or third heaven, called Paradise, 2. Cor. 12.2.4.
where Christ in his humane nature ascended far above all visible heavens,
which by the firmament, as by an azured curtain, spangled with glittering
stars and glorious planets, Psalm. 19.5.
is so hid, that we cannot behold it with these corruptible eyes of flesh. This
place therefore (the holy Ghost framing himself to our weak capacities)
describes by things most glorious, which no man can estimate, by things of most
value, in the account and estimation of men; and therefore he does liken it to
a great and holy City, named the New, holy and heavenly Jerusalem, Reu. 21.1.2.
where only God, and his people who are saved and written in the Lambs book,
do inhabit and dwell, all built of pure gold, like unto clear glass or
Cristall, the walls of Jasper stones, the foundations of the walls with
twelve manner of precious stones, having twelve gates, each built of one
pearl, three gates toward each of the four corners of the world, and at each
gate an Angel, as so many porters to keep it, that no unclean thing may
enter into the same. It is four square, therefore it is perfect. The length,
the breadth, the height of it are equal, twelve thousand furlongs every way,
therefore it is spacious and glorious. Through the midst of the streets there
ever runs a pure river of the water of life, as clear a Crystal; therefore
it is wholesome. And on either side of the river is the tree of life ever
growing, which bears twelve manner of fruits, and yields fruits every month,
and therefore fruitful. And the leaves of the tree are health to the nations,
and therefore wholesome. There is therefore no place so glorious by creation,
so bewtifull with delectation, so rich in possession, nor so comfortable for
habitation; for there (as Saint Augustine says) the King is verity, the Law is
charity, the dignity is equity, the place felicity, and the life eternity.
It is in sight most high, in space most ample and large, in matter most
sumptuous, in show and beauty most spetious and glorious, there is no night nor
darkness, for the Sun of righteousness which knows not to be hid, does
ever send his beams into it. It is a place of holiness and purity, for no
unclean thing shall enter into it. Reu. 21.27.16. Reu. 22.
It is a place of brightness and beawtie, for it is as clear as Crystal. It
is a place of roomth and largeness, therefore it is said in Baruch, Baruc.
3.24.25
O Israel how great is the house of God, and how large is the place of his
possession? great and has no end, high and unmeasurable. And into this pure,
bright, and large place of glory, shall all the Saints of God enter and
possess it. So that it is wholly pleasant, wholly desirable, removed from all
evil, and replenished with all good. In which (as Augustine says) there is a
life prepared of God for his friends, a secure life, a quiet life, a beautiful
life, a clean life, a chaste life, a holy life, a life that knows not death,
a life without streitnsse, without necessi ie, without sorrow, without
corruption, without perturbation, without variety, without mutation, a life
full of beauty and honor. Where (as Bernard says) there is nothing present
that offends, nothing absent that delights.

Now if the Fabric of this world, which is as it were but a stable for
beasts, a place of exile, and valley of tears to men, has so much beauty and
excellency, that it strikes him into admiration that does contemplate it, and
does astonish him, and such plenty of good things that no senses can desire
more, such variety of beasts, birds, fishes, fountains, towns, provinces,
cities, disegreeing in institutes, manners, and laws, such choice of all
precious stones of value, gold, silver, and exquisite silks natural and
artificial: if (I say) this building of so small a frame of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars shine with such brightness, what shall then our heavenly country do,
not now the habitation of servants, but of sons; not of beasts, but of
blessed souls? Where is the hall of the great King of kings, the omnipotent
God, who can and will perform to his beloved children much more then they can
conceive? And doubtless so far as this wide world exceedes for light and
comfort the narrow and dark womb of the mother, wherein the child was
wrap^ed before it was borne; so much* and much more does that other world
(whereinto a^l the faithful after this life are recei^ed) exceed this world.
What things will not the eternal God frame in his most glorious palace for
his Saints? Luke 13.29.
What joy shall there be, when (says the Evangelist S. Luke) they shall come
from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and
sit down in the kingdom of God?

Again, contemplate of that blessed society of most pure minds in their
several Quires described, Angels, Archangels, Principalities, Powers,
Dominions, Virtues, Thrones, Cherubins, Seraphins, whereof there is such a
multitude, that the Prophet Daniel says, Dan. 7.10. Reu. 5.11.
Thousand thousands ministered unto him; and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him. Behold with these so many holy souls of men and women,
Patriarchs, Apostles, Prophets, Martirs, Virgins, Innocents, even so many, Reu.
7.9.
that John said, they could not be numbered. Behold the beauty of every one,
and with so great love and charity, that they no less rejoice of another
glory, then of their own.

Again, conceive what is the exercise of these blessed souls; first to know
the divine essence in three Persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
with which knowledge they are so illuminated and inflamed, that incessantly
they sing, Reu. 4.8. Esaias 6.3.
Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, is, and is to come, the whole
earth is full of his glory. And they do not only see God, and know God, but
do also love him with a vehement love, a full love, a perfect love, with all
the heart, with all the strength, and in loving, they enjoy him; and in
enjoying, with an inexplicable joy are ravished: No cessation of praises,
admiration, thanksgiving, and joy, which they receive by the presence of God,
whom with all reverence and rest they assist; and by that society of so many
Saints, with whom they see themselves in glory, in a place so sublime, secure,
and pleasant, do eternal rejoice together.

Again, consider withal the multitude and fullness of these joys; so many,
that God can only number them; so great, that only he can estimate them; of
such variety and perfection, that this world has nothing comparable to them.
In some they are most free, most pure, most beautiful, most infinite: They are
so great (says one) that they cannot be measured; so long, that they cannot
be limited; so many, that they cannot be numbered; so precious, that they
cannot be valued; yet we shall see them without weariness, love them without
measure, and praise them without end.

Again also, the joy which the Saints conceive of their security, is very fit
for meditation, seeing themselves to have escaped the deceits of the world, the
flesh, and the devil, and safe from the jaws of hell, into which they see so
many miserably plunged. How do they rejoice of the occasions of sin they
have declined, of their industry in vanquishing the assaults of their
spiritual enemies, of restraining the appetites and desires of the flesh, of
ouercomming all difficulties in this life in the way of virtue and obedience to
God? With what praises shall fasting, prayer, mortification of the flesh,
repentance with faith (the mother of all these) as also all the holy counsels,
and happy examples of others (whereby they have been stirred up to virtue,
and helped in the way to salvation) be extolled?

Again, think upon the eternity of this glory. 2. Cor. 4.17* 18.
For our light affliction (says the Apostle S. Paul) which is but for a
moment, does cause unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory;
while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which
are not seen are eternal. Affliction shall be rewarded with excellent glory,
light affliction with a weight of glory, and momentarie affliction with
eternal glory. Who will then for the short space of time which is granted us
to live, nay for many ages of worlds refuse to suffer adversity, to repent in
sackcloth and ashes, to beat down the rebellious body, that we may at length
arrive at the haven of this glorious eternity? And the more to inflame us
hereunto, let us know for ertaine, that (as Gregory says) it is but
momentanie, whatsouer it be in this life that can delight us, but is for ever
and ever that will ^orment us? Our delights live and die in a moment, but the
punishment is interminable and endless. By faith (says the author to the
Hebrews) Moses, Heb. 11.24,25,16.
when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the children of God, then to
enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ
greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the
recompense of the reward which was eternal.

Again, men account it a great benefit to live only, though it be in misery:
To live well then and happily is more, but to live well, happily, and for ever,
is most of all, and more then this world can afford, and yield to any man
either to live happily, or to live for ever. Therefore in the Scripture, Rom
6.23. 1. Tim. 6.12. 1. Ioh. 5.11.
that life to come in the other world, is called everlasting or eternal life.
It is so called, because by life is signified the greatness of the happiness
and glory, and by eternal or everlasting the infinite greatness and
perpetuity of it. It is incomprehensible for the greatness, and infinite for
the eternity. For there our life is a communion with the blessed Trinity, our
joy the presence with the Lamb, our exercise singing, our dittie Alleluhiah,
the quire Angels and Saints; wh^re youth flourishes that never waxes old,
beauty lasts that never fades, love abounds that never cools, health
continues that never slacketh, and life remains that never ends. For there
shall be health without sickness, youth without old age, liberty without
bondage, satiety without loathing, fairness without deformity, abundance
without want, knowledge without ignorance, glory without ignominy, joy
without heaviness, security without fear, peace without perturbation, light
without darkness, mirth without sadness, wealth without poverty, credit
without disgrace, beauty without blemish, ease without labor, riches without
rust, blessedness without misery, life without inconvenience or end of
happiness, and consolation that never knows end; there shall be full
accomplishment of true life, both in body and soul united unto Christ as
members to their head, 1. Sam. 1.18.
and by Christ unto God, the fountain of all happiness and felicity. And by
this most blessed union we shall have community with Christ of all fullness of
good and glory* where we shall be filled with joy, and for ever and ever freed
from iniquity, necessity, calamity and mortality, enjoying secure quietness,
quiet ioyfulnesse, joyful blessedness, blessed euerlastingnesse, and
everlasting happiness. Where is also certain assurance, perfect deliverance,
assured eternity, eternal quietness, quiet happiness, happy pleasure, and
pleasurable joy and glory: the happy Trinity, and Unity of Trinity, and Deity
of Unity, and blessed sight of Deity: this is the Masters joy; oh, joy above
all joy; besides which there is no joy! And what can we imagine that may
delight us, Mat. 13.43.
that we shall not have there in infinite fullness? Would thou have sweet
music? there shall thou enjoy the harmonious melody of the heavenly Saints
and Angels which sing day and night before the throne. Would thou have beauty
and excellency of body? there thou shall be like to the Angels, and shall
shine as the Sun in the kingdom of thy Father. Would thou have pleasure
and delight? there thou shall be abundantly satisfied (says the Psalmist)
Psalm. 36.8.
with the fatness of Gods house, and he shall make thee drink of the rivers
of his pleasures. Would thou have wisdom? there thou shall enjoy the full
view and sight of Wisdom it self. Would thou desire concord, unity and
friendship? there thou shall love God above thy self, and God shall love thee
better, then thou can love thy self; and there all the Angels and Saints
shall have but one will and one mind, and shall be of one accord, and that shall
be agreeing with Gods will. Would thou have power? Luke 19.17.
there thou that have been here faithful of a little, shall be made ruler over
much. Would thou have honor? there thou shall come to honor by inheriting
of a kingdom; and in this kingdom the Lord will honor thee with his own
attendance. Would thou have blessed company? there shall thou enjoy the
blessed society and company of his Saints and Angels, and the presence of
Christ, Psalm. 17.15.
and of God; and shall (as the Psalmist says) behold the face of God in
righteousness, and shall be satisfied with his Image and likeness. Again,
ever splendent shall the habitation of Gods Saints be, it shall not need Sun,
for the Lamb is the light of it, the Saints that are saved shall walk in the
light of it, and the Kings of the earth shall bring their honor and glory unto
it, the gates of it shall not be shut by day; for there shall be no night there,
and the glory both of the Jew and Gentile shall be brought unto it.

What should I say more? as I could, so have I told; let the heart conceive the
rest; and yet so as a most pleasant place, and most joyful presence, a most
happy estate of blessedness, shall be your portion in an endless glory. I
cannot speak as I would, and yet my heart is full, break it will, if I may not
vent it; pardon me therefore a while to beat back these fearful passions of
your mortality, with further impression of your eternity; and consider then
how great and glorious this change and alteration will be.

There shall be tranquillity without storm, liberty with out restraint, joy
without interruption, eternity without cessation, ye shall have eyes without
tears, hearts without sorrow, souls without sin. Your knowledge shall be
without doubting or discourse, for ye shall see God and all goodness all at
once; your love shall level at the highest, nor shall it fail to fall upon
the lowest of his Saints: ye shall have what you can desire, and ye shall
desire nothing but what is good; for as one has truly said, he is not blessed
who inioyeth not all he will, and yet wills nothing but what is good: ye
shall hear melodious songs, even the songs of Sion, Revel. 5.13.14
Psalms, Hymns and Praises, more sweet then the harmony of the heavens,
when all that celestial host shall fill that holy vault with an Halleluiah to
the Almighty, Revel. 19.1.
and say, Honor, Glory, Majesty, Power, Dominion and Might, be ascribed to him
that sits upon the Throne, both now and for ever. And here (as the blessed
Apostle says) God shall be all in all unto us, meat to our taste, 1. Cor.
15.28.
beauty to our eyes, perfumes to our smell, music to our ears. What shall I
say more, but as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 87.3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee O City of God. Selah. Again, all this and
all the former joys shall be for ever, and without interruption; and of this
kingdom (says the Evangelist Luke) Luke 1.33.
there shall be no end. The King hereof is Christ, ^he Law is love, the
subjects are the Saints, Reu. 10.6*
and the bounds of this Empire are endless, tied to no return either of term
or time, for time shall be no more. Divines are wont to shadow out Eternity
by the similitude of a little bird drinking up a drop of water ou^ of the sea,
if every thousand thousand years the bird should come, and drink up but one
drop* yet the sea might be dry at length: But yet this lasting of the sea is
nothing in comparison to the lasting of the glory of heaven.

And for your speedy passage out of this world into that endless glory; ye
shall go, nay, ye shall fly (as Saint Augustine says) with as great haste
as happiness. Luke 23.47. 2. John 2.18. 1. Cor. 15.52.
This day (says our Savior Christ) even now (says Saint John) In the
twinkling of an eye (says the blessed Apostle Saint Paul) all shall be
changed at the day of Doom, and why not at the day of Death. For if the body
shall be where the mind will, when it is glorified, why shall not the soul be
where and when God will, when it is delivered? I say, Romans 8.21.
delivered out of the bondage of corruption, wherein it is, into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, where it should be? The silly eye of flesh and
blood may happily demurre upon the distance, and think how it can be possible
that the soul should pass with such speed from this earthly house of clay to
that high, glorious, and heavenly habitation and dwelling, the eight Sphere (as
some write) being distant from the earth every where twenty thousand
Semidiameters, which calculated aright, and numbered with our miles, makes a
million of Germane miles, which is one thousand thousand. Surely I dare
determine of no particular, but say in general, as Balaam did of Israel in the
book of Numbers, where he says, Numb. 23.10.
Who can count the dust of Jacob and the number of the fourth part of Israel?
So who can tell the distance of the heavens? Prou. 25.3.
The heaven for height (says the Wiseman) and the earth for depth, and the
hearts of Kings are unsearchable. Howbeit, be the distance never so great, and
the room never so close, where the party dies, yet speedy may be the souls
passage to this glory, when it is done by the power of God, Mark 10.27.
with whom all things are possible, as our Savior Christ says in the Gospel.

Again, we may roue at the glorious estate of the children of God after death,
by that high price which was set on the^. Our Savior Jesus Christ the Son
and only Son of God, not by adoption, but by nature, loving and best beloved,
bought them not with money, but with blood, and not with the blood of Goats and
Rams, but with his own blood, and not with the blood of his head, hands or
feet, but with his own heart blood. And as he prayed soundly for them
himself in his last prayer, which he made unto his heavenly Father a little
before his suffering, as appears in the Evangelist Saint John, John 17.1.
so has he prised them unto his friends and children, and none can enter into
them but by many tribulations: Acts 7.59:
For we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.

They did cost Paul a beheading, Peter a crucifying, Stephen a stoning,
millions of Martyrs racking, burning, torturing, tormenting, and a thousand
other kinds of deaths, and our dear Savior Christ himself a suffering:
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, Luke 24.26.
and so to enter into his glory? 1. Cor. 10.13.
God who is faithful and true (as the Apostle speaks) has not deceived his
Son, nor ouer-sold his joys unto his Saints and children; and therefore
unspeakable are those joys which Christ has purchased, and his children
obtained through a world of miseries.

Again, we have a resemblance of these joys in Christ's transfiguration upon
the Mount, Luke 9.28.29.30.31.32.33.
when as the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment was white
and glistering, whereby we learn what glory our bodies shall have in the day
of the resurrection, when (as the blessed Apostle Saint Paul tells us) that
as we have borne the image of the earthly, we shall also bear the image of the
heavenly, 1. Cor. 15.49.
and be like the Son of God in glory.

Again, we may make conjecture of these joys, by reflecting our eyes upon
those innumerable perils, which we have here escaped: For if such as are
delivered from the dangers of the sea, do wonderfully rejoice, when they come
safe on shore, much greater then is the joy of those, who having been tossed
in the waves of this troublesome world, troubled with sins, with Satan, with
frailties of the flesh, with the fear of hell (whose dangers (says Gregory)
appear by the multitude of those that perish) are now arrived at heaven for
their haven, and are wholly freed from all their calamities and miseries And as
Saint Augustine well speaks, the more dangers escaped, the more joys
increased, as the most doubtful battle makes the most joyful victory.

Again, we do read in the book of Hester, Hester 6.6.7.8.9.10.11.
that when Haman was by King Ahashuerosh willed to speak, what shall be done to
the man whom the King would honor; he supposing that the King had no meaning to
honor any but himself, said this: Let them bring forth for him royal
apparel, which the King uses to wear, and the horse that the King uses to
ride on, and that the Crown Royal may be set upon his head, and that his
apparel and horse be delivered to one of the Kings most noble Princes, that
they may array the man withal, whom the King delights to honor, and bring
him on horseback through the streets of the City, and proclaim before him;
Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King will honor. Then the King said
to Haman, Make haste, etc. Even so shall it be done unto them, whom the King of
kings, and Lord of lords will honor after death.

First, there shall be put upon them royal apparel, Reu. 3.4 5.
even long white roabes, which are such as Jesus Christ the King of glory
himself is described to wear. Secondly, they shall sit upon Jesus Christ his
own horse, Reu. 19.11.
which is said in the book of the Revelation to be a white horse: for John
there says, I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse, and he that sat
upon him was called faithful and true. To him therefore (says the Son of
God) that overcomes, Reu. 3.21.
will I grant to fit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
on my fathers throne. Thirdly, the Crown royal shall be set upon their
heads. Be thou faithful unto death (says the Son of God) and I will give
thee a crown of life. Reu. 2.10.
And this is that most excellent glory which the Saints have in heaven,
shadowed out unto us by a kingly crown, which of all earthly things is most
glorious.

Fourthly, this glory shall be furthered by the hands of the king of heavens
most noble Princes, Mat. 24.31.
He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall
gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.

Fifthly and lastly, the Saints shall be entered into the full fruition of their
inheritance, with such joy and triumph in the glorious assembly of all the
Saints and holy Angels, as the like was never seen in the world, no not in
Jerusalem that day when king Solomon sat down in his father David's throne: 1.
King. 1.40.
But all that is nothing comparable to this joy, triumph and glory of Gods
Saints. And it shall be as it were proclaimed before them: Thus shall it be
done unto them whom the King of glory will honor. And this honor (says the
Psalmist) Psalm. 149.9.
have all his Saints.

There is no king on the earth can produce so ancient right to his Crown as the
Christian effectually called, can to these joys of heaven: no man on the earth
can be acknowledged his fathers heir upon such sufficient warrant as the godly
Christian. No freeholder so surely infeoffed in his lands, having so many
confirmations of his right, as has the justified Christian, who upon his gift
has received the earnest, the pledge, the seal, and the witness of the great
king of glory. We do read in the first book of the Kings, that when the
queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, 1. King. 10.11.
concerning the name of the Lord, she came from a very far Country to prove
him with hard questions, and she communed with him of all that was in her
heart, and Solomon told her all her questions, and there was not any thing hid
from the king, which he told her not. And when she had seen all Salomons
wisdom, and the house which he had built, and the meat of his table, and the
si^ting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their
apparel, and his Cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up into the house
of the Lord. It is there said, that there was no more spirit in her. And she
said to the king, it was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thine
acts, and of thy wisdom, how be it I believed not the words until I came,
and mine eyes had seen; and behold the one half was not told me; thy
wisdom and prosperity exceeds the fame which I have heard. Happy are thy
men* happy are these thy servants which stand continually before thee, and
hear thy wisdom.

Now if the queen of Sheba could say so much, that the one half was not told
her, and that his wisdom and prosperity exceeded the fame which she before
had heard of him, then much more may the child of God truly say, when he
comes in his own person to behold a far greater then Solomon, nay, Mat.
12.42.
not so much as one quarter of the glory and joys of heaven was told him, and
that the glory and joys thereof far exceed the report, fame, and description
which he has heard. For all the joys which we have heard, or can hear of,
when they are put all together, they are all but as one poor drop of water to
the maine Ocean sea, in comparison of the joys which the Saints of God shall
behold and enjoy in their own persons in the kingdom of glory. For no man
knows them, but such as enjoy them, according to that which is said in the
book of the Revelation: To him that overcomes, Reu. 2.17.
I will give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white stone, and
in the stone a new name written, which no man knows saving be that receives
it.

Let me but show you now what S. Augustine speaks of the joys of heaven: We
may sooner tell you (says he) what they are not, then what they are. And
hence it is that the euangelical Prophet Esaias says, Isay 64.6.
That since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the
ear, neither has the eye seen (O God) besides thee, what he has prepared
for him that waits for him. For there we shall see light that passes all
lights, which no eye has seen; there we shall hear a glorious sound or
harmony, which passes all harmonies, which no ear has heard; there we
shall smell a most sweet sent and savor, that passes all sweet sents and
savors, which no sense has smelt; there we shall taste a most pleasant and
delightful taste, that passes all pleasant tastes, which no tongue has
tasted; and there we shall find such pleasure and contentment, as passes all
contentments and pleasures, which no body ever had. Nay I can not hold my heart
for my joy, yea I cannot hold in my joy for my heart, to think upon this joy
and glory, and to think that I that am now a silly poor worm upon earth,
shall hereafter be a glorious Saint in the kingdom of glory, where is not
only true happiness, but perfection of happiness, not sound joy only, but
fullness of joy, which are so absolute and strange, that neither eye has
seen, to wit, eye mortal; nor ear has heard, 1. Cor. 2.9.
that is, ear of man has not heard the like, neither can they enter into our
heart, (though all our hearts were as large every one, 1. King. 4.29.
as the heart of Solomon, which God gave unto him, even as large as the sand
that is on the seashore) to conceive and understand them, if they were told
us, which are revealed by the spirit, and but lisped out by S. John in those
earthly similitudes of gates, of pearls, of walls of jasper, Reu
21.18.19.21,22.
and of a street whose pauement is gold, as we heard before.

Dan 12.3.
But it may be here objected, But in heaven (says the Prophet Daniel) they
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that
turn many unto righteousness, shall be as the stars for ever and ever. Now
the firmament has not so much light as the stars, which lighten it, and the
stars have less light then the Sun that lightneth them, from whence
therefore it seems that in heaven also there should rather be some want, then
such fullness of heavenly joys and glory? I answer, though in this condition
of our heavenly life there may be degrees of glory, ( In my fathers house,
says our Savior Christ, John 14.2.
are many mansions,) yet there shall be no want of glory: some may be like the
sky, some the stars of the sky, yet all shall shine: some vessels may hold
more, some less, and yet all be full: so one may have more joy then another,
and there are sundry measures of more or less glory in heaven. There is one
glory of the Sun, (says the Apostle) 1. Cor. 15 41:
another of the Moon, and another glory of the stars, for one star
differs from another in glory: but no measure shall lack his fullness of life
and glory there, where shall be a measure of joy heaped up, shaken together,
pressed down and running over. And (as Bernard very excellently speaks) Luke
6.38.
a measure without measure, where we shall be filled with joy; yet being
filled, we shall still desire, lest our fullness procure a loathing, and in
desiring we shall always be filled, lest our desire beget a grieuing; neither
can God give more, nor man receive more then we shall there enjoy; for there we
shall be replenished and satisfied with such a fullness of life, glory, and
happiness, so as we shall not be able to desire, or to have any more; even
as vessels cast into the water, being so filled with water, that they can
desire or hold no more; and he that has least, shall have enough. The reasons
hereof are these: Hell is contrary to heaven; In hell there is a fullness of
torment, in heaven therefore there must be a fullness and perfection of glory
and happiness. Secondly, earthly kingdoms, and the kings thereof have as great
an absoluteness, as earth can afford and give them, and shall we think that
heaven which can give an entire, will give an impefect crown of righteousness
and glory? Will the kings of the earth dwell in base cottages, and not in royal
Courts and Palaces? and shall these kings of a far better kingdom want joy
and glory, whereas mortal kings have so great glory and power? Princes on the
earth dwell in royal palaces, sometimes of Cedar and Iuorie, but they whom the
Son of God has made kings and priests unto God his Father, Reu. 1.6.
(as it is in the book of the Revelation) shall reign in a glorious city and
palace, whose twelve gates are twelve pearls, Reu. 21.18.
whose wall is of Jasper, and building of gold, and whose streets shine as
clear glass. So said he that saw all this glory but darkely, or as Moses
saw the land of Canaan in a very short map or card afar off, as it does
appear in the book of Deuteronomie. Deuteronomy. 34.1,2.3.4.


We see but the outward wall of this heavenly Court and City, and yet how
glorious is it? and how decked with stars as with sparkling Diamonds? What would
we say, if we could see into it, Mat. 17.1.
and behold (though with Peter, James and John at a glance or blush
superficially) the goodly pauement of heaven within, whose floor is of gold,
and wall about it garnished with precious stones? Mat. 4.8.
And what is a kingdom here, where all the kingdoms of the world and the
glory of them were showed in the twinkling of an eye, Luke 4 5.
as it is in the Gospel? if there were not hope of a better kingdom; where all
shall be kings, and reign with Christ eternallly. And they which here have
reigned as kings upon the earth, shall lose nothing, but gain immeasurably by
the change: yea kings and queens which have been nursing fathers and nursing
mothers to the Church of God (as the Prophet speaks) when they come thither,
Isay 49.23.
shall cast away their Crowns as Elias, 2. King 2.13.
when he went up by a whirlewind into heaven, let his cloak or mantle fall
from him, and they shall repent nothing there, save that they came no sooner
thither* and when they shall compare their earthly and heavenly kingdoms
together, they shall say as S. Peter said of the mount, Mat. 17.4.
bonum est esse hic, It is good to be here in heaven, but for the earth, they
shall be as loath to look back unto it, as Moses to go back into the land
of Egypt. For their palaces shall then seem prisons, their golden chains
golden fetters, their crowns crosses, and all their earthly honors but
burdens, and vexations. But when they shall look upon the face of God, they
shall say to him with triumph as it is in the Psalm, With thee is the well of
life, Psalm. 16.11.
in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures
for evermore.

Thirdly, if Adams paradise and garden was so delightsome and pleasant, how
pleasant and glorious is Gods own seat of his own residence? He spoke it with
a wondering tongue, whose heart could not comprehend so infinite an excellency,
in saying (as we have heard before) How glorious things are spoken of thee O
thou city of God! Psalm. 87.3.
For though in the letter, this worthy Prophet spoke of that earthly heaven,
which he confessed to be in the material tabernacle, because of Gods presence,
and the godly exercises of Gods people performed there, yet his meaning was
under the cloud of the phrase to direct Gods children to a higher tabernacle
and house of greater glory then that which was earthly, and under the doom of
time.

Again says the blessed Apostle, 2. Cor. 3,7,8,9,10,11.
If the ministration of death written and engraven in the stones was glorious,
so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses
for the glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done away, how shall
not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious? For if the ministration
of condemnation be glorious, much more does the ministration of righteousness
exceed in glory. For even that which was made glorious, had no glory in this
respect, by reason of the glory that excels. For if that which was done
away was glorious, much more that which remains is glorious. And if the
preaching of the Gospel whereby God gives his quickening spirit, working the
life of grace in his elect, be glorious then much more shall the true
professors of the Gospel be made partakers of far greater glory in the
kingdom of heaven.

Again, we do read in the first book of Samuel, 1. Sam. 18.23.
that when David was persuaded by Saul, by the means of his servant to become
the Kings son in law, it is there said by David, Seems it to you a light
thing to be the Kings son in law, seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly
esteemed? Then if it be accounted a great honor and glory to be a son and
child to an earthly King, much more honorable and glorious it is to be the
son and child of the King of heaven. Behold (says Saint John) what manner
of love the Father has bestowed upon us, 1. John 3.1.
that we should be called the sons of God? Which glory all the tongues of
men and Angels (as we have heard before) can in no wise express, as
witnesses the blessed and glorious Apostle Saint Paul himself, who was in it,
2. Cor. 12.1,2,3,4,5.
and saw it; and therefore he says, I knew a man in Christ above fourteen
years ago, whether in the body, I cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I
cannot tell, God knows; such a one caught up into the third heaven, and heard
unspeakable words, which it is not lawful or possible for a man to utter. So
great and infinite are the glory and joys of the kingdom of God, as they
cannot enter into us: and therefore it is appointed, that we must enter into
them. Therefore it is said, Matthew. 25.21.
Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a
few things, I will make thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord.

Now if the Queen of Sheba (as we heard before) pronounced the servants of
King Solomon happy, 1. King. 10.8.
for that they stood continually before him, and heard his wisdom, then much
more happy are the Saints and servants of God, who do continually with his
holy Angels, stand and behold the glorious presence of one which is greater
then King Solomon, Matthew. 18.10.
even the God of glory himself. In which respect Saint Ambrose on his death
bed said, We are happy in this, that we serve so good a Master, Yea happy is
the people (says the Psalmist) that is in such a case, Psalm. 144.15.
yea happy is that people, whose God is the Lord. Yea blessed and happy are
all those, which so live in this world, that departing hence they may be
assured to come into so glorious a place and presence. We see by experience;
when a Countryman has been trained up sometime in the Court, he forgets
his clownish kind of life, and becomes a Courtier: let us therefore leave
the speeches, habit, fashion and manners of this wicked world wherein we live,
and inure our selves with the customs and course of the Court of heaven: let
all our thoughts, words and communication testify, that (in spirit) we are
already there: Let my mind (says Augustine) muse of it, let my tongue talk
of it, let my heart love it, and my whole soul never cease to hunger and
thirst after it.

In the mean time, till thou come into this glorious place and presence, ask
of God by hearty and faithful prayer, to give thee grace entirely and from
the bottom of thy heart, both to understand and desire the joys and glory
thereof, and so to be affected and ravished with the delight thereof, that ever
and every where thou may be stirred up to serve so good a Master in
pureness and newness of life, that thou may be made partaker thereof;
Psalm. 37.24.
and pray with the Prophet that the Lord would guide thee with his counsel,
and afterward receive thee into his glory. John 16.24.
Ask and ye shall receive (says our Savior) that your joy may be full. And
also labor and endeavor to bring as many as thou can to this glory, Dan.
12.3.
For they that be wise (says the Prophet Daniel) shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as
the stars for ever and ever.

Lift up your heads O ye heavenly gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting
doors, that the King of glory may bring us in. Psalm. 24 7.
I might much further amplify and enlarge this matter; but the work growing
bigger then I thought it would, I forbear; but as Painters, when they have
many millions and armies of men to set down in a small map, use only to
draw out some number of heads of men and set them together, leaving the whole
number of heads and all the other parts and lineaments to the meditation of the
beholders; even so am I constrained through abundance of matter, to propound
only some general heads, and to leave the amplification of them to your private
meditations: and I hope wise man will not refuse precious Jewels, though they
be brought in a plain and homely receptacle.

Jude 1.24,25.
Now unto him (says the holy Apostle Saint Jude) that is able to keep you
from falling, and to preserve you faultlesse before the presence of his glory
with exceeding joy; to the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty,
Dominion and Power, now and for ever, Amen.

Psalm. 72.18,19.
Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things.
And blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let the whole earth be filled
with his glory, Amen, Amen.

To the which most blessed place of glory, the Lord bring every one of our
souls, at the day of our death and dissolution, and that for Jesus Christ his
sake, to whom with God the Father, and God the blessed Spirit, three glorious
Persons, but one immortal God, be ascribed all honor and glory, both in
heaven and earth, this day and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
An admonition to the Reader.
ALthough the Printer has been very careful, yet has he sometimes failed
not only in mis-pointing, or not pointing, omitting or adding sometimes a
letter, which the Readers judgment and diligence must help, but in omission,
or alteration of words obscuring the sense in some few places, which the reader
shall do well to correct before he read the Book, as they stand here-vnder.

Page 2. line 5. for causes read cases. p. 9. l. 20. r. consequence for
consequently. p. 15. l. 11 r. unhappiness for happiness. p. 22. l. 22. r.
Conqueror of all Asia. p. 26. l. 28. r. peasant for pleasant. p. 70. r. still
for skill. p. 77. l. 30. r. proclus for produs. p. 82. l. 26. r. faltereth for
flattereth. p. 101. l. 2. r. unwholesome for wholesome. p. 125. l. 5 r. waining
for wayings. p. 133. l. 10. of the use of reason. p. 146. l. 3. r qualmes for
quauers. p. ibid. l. 7. r. moderately for immoderately. p. 186 l. 4. for hem r.
them. p. 216. l. 35. for remuneration r. renumeration. p. 235. l. 4. put out
with you. p. ib. l. 36. r. in time of need for of need. p. 238. l. 7. r see for
so. p. ibid. l. 14. r. shall I not. p. 270. l. 3. r. win for shun. p. 284.
l. 9. r. bodily for body.


