THE LIFE and DEATH of Thomas Wolsey Cardinal.

Divided into three parts:

His Aspiring, His Triumph, and His Death.
By Thomas Storer Student of Christ-church in Oxford.

At London Printed by Thomas Dawson. 1599

To the Worshipful M. John Howson, Chaplain to her Majesty.
BAse Vulcans crown with Laurel to adorn,
That still stands plodding by his Anuills side,
Would make the seely smith be laughed to scorn,
And wiser heads the foolish gift deride.
Even so some Thrasoes fancy to have fed,
With Muses flowers that know not what they be,
Had bin to bring Silenus Ass a bed,
That understands a rhyme as well as he.
Which made me consecrate this verse of mine
To him, that can with judgment read the same,
Yet stand not too praecize on every line.
But rather such a web as I could frame
In slender lines, yet slender as they be,
My Muse Arachne-like presents to thee.
Ad Thomam Storerrum de suo Tho: Wolsaeo Hendecasyllabi.
DUm tu trina tui Storerre fata
Wolsaei triplici canis libello,
Ortus quis celebrem tulit Iuuentam,
Incrementa viristetere quanta,
Occasus Seen qualis est potitus:
Quaeres cunque bonum queant in vsum
De quois hominum statunotari,
Pertrectare tuum satis videtur
Diuerso vnum elegans stylo Poema.
Quid dicam? magis es Storerre vates,
Tutam magnifico pius parenti?
An Wolsaee tuus cinis beatus,
Quem tot post hyemes recens tepentem
Hic nostro genitus poeta in aeuo,
Grata mente, sacra reponit vrna,
Argento meliore, item lapillis,
Et gemmis pretiosiore, ferro,
Nec non aere perenniore cuncta
Mausolaea supra; Poesis vrna est
Non de fossa ferens humo recondi,
Nec per secla situ premi futuros
Informi metuens apud nepotes.
Haec est, ingenij memor character,
Aeterna haec notaposteris dicata
Qua serinimium licet priorem^
Wolsaeum recolent tamen recenti,
Fama, par meritis quod est duorum:
Et Thomae scio Maximi Patroni,
Et Thomae reor optimi Poetae,
Plusquam corpore, sic valentis art.
VT NOS VNDA.
Prosopopoeia Wolseij.
FOrtunae auspicibus nostrae non immemor ipse
Templa Deo, Musis maenia constitui.
Iusta nec abrupti surgunt in culmina muri,
Contigerat summum vita nec ipsa gradum.
Par eademque mei est aeuique operisque ruina;
Par iterumque mihi vita operique datur.
Musa quidem haec nostras imitata est pene ruin^^,
Et iacuit longo semisepulta situ.
Nunc tamen eripuit foedis me, seque tenebris.
Haecque Amphionio maenia forte modo
Restituat, Citharam si intenderet altius; at quae
Speret ab ingratis proemia temporibus?
Ruderibus sed viue tuis domus inclita viue
Vate tuo, and truncum toll sub astra caput.
Nulla tuam valeat premere inde ruina ruinam,
Nulla meam. Cineristant been facta suo.
Eduardus Michelborne.

De Wolseide, and Momo.
LEgerat Aoniam nuper Wolseida Momu*;
Cumque nihil toto viderat esse libro,
In quo liuenti genuinum frangeret ore,
Talibus ora ferox soluit hiulca modis;
Ha male! Quem versu morientem inducit, eundem
Aeternum versu vtuere Musafacit.
Thomae Wolsaei and Reginaldi Poli Cardinal. Angl. comparatio.
LIs erat an mayor Polus, an Wolsaeus vterque,
Magnus, Cardinei splendour vterque chori:
Tempora purpureo redimitus vterque Galero,
Infula cum lauru cinxit vtrique comam:
Ausonia triplici cingendus vterque Tiara,
Si suus ex merito quemque maneret honos:
Hinc cumulos Wolsaeus opum; Polus inde parents,
Hic Proauum lauds iactat, and ille suas:
Alter Romanos, patrios habet alter honores,
Ingenio Vlsaeus mayor, at art Polus.
Tu litem, Storere, secas, super alta ferendo
Sydera Wolsaeum laud, superque Polum.
Carolus Fitzgeofridus Latiforensis.

COnceits true Storer, when I viewed of late,
Thy newborn Wolsey, while he did remain
As in the matrice, yet inanimate,
An imperfected embrion of thy brain.
O how my fearful thoughts misaugured,
Least Wolsey like the work himself did frame,
Should ever thus stand inaccomplished,
Which none dare end, save who began the same!
But now, although thy work be so perfected,
As that no prowder vaunting Muse can mend it,
And though the stately frame by him erected,
Lies still imperfect, while no hand dares end it.
Yet thine thus ended does with his agree,
That thine, like his, shall never ended be.
Aliud.
WHile Fortune yet did Wolseys state uphold,
Living he fram'de himself a costly toombe:
To girt with marble crown, the longing mould
Proud of the treasure that it should enwombe.
Yet never did that monument inuest
The naked temples of his bare-head grave:
And death which him of life first dispossessed,
Was dispossessed of what it self should have.
But wherefore did the heavens his ghost this wrong,
Thus of his duest honor to deprive him?
They knew his grave should not obscure him long,
There should a Muse, they had in Store revive him.
Toombes are for dead men; not for Wolsey then,
Whom thou have made immortal with thy pen.
Charles Fitz-Geffrey.

WHen Wolsey died me seems the sun did set,
And that his glory with himself did waine;
But since his death another did beget,
Which lendes him help, his life to reobtaine,
One sun did set, but two do rise again:
Cease you that wont admire the stars alone,
Your eyes have now enough to gaze upon.
Shine Wolsey; cause the world to wonder still,
And thou true sun of great Apollo shine,
The world with thy conceited volumes fill,
Smoothe Tasso, and the famous Petrarcke
Florentine,
Their garlands now to thee do both resign,
Laura that green has slourish'd all this while,
Lies blasted now at the thunder of thy style.
Thomas Michelborne.

To the Author, of the life and death of T. W. Cardinal.
THus long a slave to Silence have thou seru'de,
Break out (O Muse) into thy first assayes.
Was therefore this mine infant verse reseru'de,
In fatal darkness to record thy praise,
O Wit divine, that have so well deseru'de
The fruitful garland of eternal Bays?
Then let thy Fame erect my drooping eyes,
And by thy praise begin my self to rise.
Let me while Eagle-wise thou mountes on height,
Be as thy shade with lowly carriage,
And whiles above thou spread'st with piercing flight
Proud Wolseys life; let me in humble rage
Condemn the world below, that wanting light,
See'th brightsome candles burn upon her stage,
Till vital humor fails to sustain them,
Yet (Niggard!) gives no matter to maintain them.
There was a time, when Laureats in their cell,
Divinely ravished, wrate those tragic plays,
That after should in lofty Buskin swell;
Whiles they with huge applause, and frolike bays,
(Their learn'de ambitious brows beseeming well)
Sat prowdly tickled with the peoples praise:
And from the indulgent Consuls wondering hand,
Extort a rich reward, and Laurel band.
It was the worlds first youth that ware the Socke,
And wanton Myrtill ensign of her sport,
That had the force to move a senseless block
To gentle laughter, and by force extort
Sweet tears of mirth, even from the stubborn look,
Of men obdurate and unfeeling sort:
So sharp and piercing were those wits of old:
"No whetstone giue's a better edge than Gold.
Uirgil that with his twofold oaten reed,
Then with his thrise-admired Cornet sings,
Had great Augustus patron of his deed,
And sweet Mecoenas sprung from grandsire Kings,
Whiles he their names from death, they him from need,
With mutual freedom one another brings:
"Where Virtue does for Learning honor frame,
"There thankful Learning adds to Virtue fame.
Our age, an aged world, even doting old,
That like a miser with a curelesse gowte,
Hugges on those heaps that never may be told:
So mong that greedy and promiscuous rowte,
Ere one Mecoenas spread the salve of gold,
Our bleare-eyde Horace's may look them out:
A speech long said, but not performed before,
That Homer and the Muses stand at door.
Great patrons give us leave their brass to guilde,
And from deserved grave dead names to raise,
Crowning Minerua for her spear and shield
With golden wreathe, her book with only bays,
Because they think that fitter for the field,
And men of learning well repaide with praise:
They give the spur of praise, but add the rain
And curb of want, to check them back again.
And so with spur of praise are Poets paid,
Their muse, their labor and industrious art,
That rightly spur-galled they may be said.
But if in equal balance of desert,
Gentle ungentle, men with men were wayde,
Not poizing men by birth, but by their parts:
Their virtues of their mind, their wit and words,
Kings were but Poets, Poets more then Lords.
And thou sweet Storer that in golden twine,
Have lively portraide out our Cardinal,
Showing the course of providence divine,
That lets high mounters catch the greater fall;
Worthy was he to change for that of thine,
And thou for thy desert his priestly pal:
Thou his, for well employing of thy Muse,
He thine, for his great fortunes great abuse.
As if a second Nemroth came to rear
Proud Babel towers, that in their ruins lie,
His buildings taught (as his ambition) were,
To have none end nor measure till the sky:
Had Wolsey laid his first foundation there,
And made his turrets spire to God on high,
His name, himself, his virtuous deeds and all,
Had not been subject to their hideous fall.
O see how widdow-like (poor soul!) she stands,
That college he began with curious frame,
So left, (though not without demaine and lands)
As bush or ensign of her builders shame;
Which though he rearde, with his ambitious hands,
I dare not call him Founder of the same:
How can he be of Christchurch Founder deemde,
That of Christ's church no member is esteemde?
And yet as though to recompense the fall
And want of walls, that never were erect,
See how the greatest Architect of al
Rebuildes the same, and in a dear respect,
Has placed a reverend steward, that does call,
The painful builders, and their work direct:
By whom true labors have their due regard,
And well-deseruing letters finds reward.
And so the ruins that our house before,
So deeply blemished with defect of stones,
Now far more glorious, far triumphant more,
Is made by sweet supply of learned ones,
That daily takes increase by daily store
And careful noursing of her toward sons,
So flourish still, and still increase thy fame,
And make thy self by deed, thy self by name.
Among the Series of this learned train,
O Storer live, and grace them with thy wit:
Redeem thy name, nor enuiously contain
Thy thoughts, that with applause thou may commit
Unto the press; so thine admired vain,
Shall keep thee from thy grave and darksome pit:
When (as thy Wolsey) volumes thou shall frame,
That shall (thou dead) immortalize thy name.
May therefore this be propagated well,
Then bless posterity, and sow the seed,
And use thy sweeter Muse, that then shall smell
Full like a Rose, in midst of many a weed,
And sound abroad thy praises as a bell,
Unto those posterne ages, that shall need
Another Storer, in their wanting times,
To tell the worth of these thy piercing rimes.
Johannes Sprint aedis Christi.

Wolseius aspirans.
Between two Muses in the deep of night,
There sat a reverend Father full of woe,
They gazed on him, and from that dismal sight,
A kind remorse was willing them to go,
But cruel Fortune would not have it so:
Fortune that erst his pride had overthrown,
Would have her power by his misfortune known.
Where fruitful Thames salutes the learned shore,
Was this grave Prelate and the Muses placed;
And by those waves he builded had before,
A royal house with learned Muses graced,
But by his death imperfect and defaced,
O blessed walls, and broken towers (quoth he)
That never rose to fall again with me.
To thee first sister of the learned nine,
Historians goddess, Patroness of Fame,
Entombing worthies in a huing shrine,
Celestial Clio, Clio peerless dame,
My stories, truth, and triumph I will frame:
My stories simple truth, if ought remain,
Enrich my legend with thy sacred vain.
The sad discourse of my untimely fall
(O tragique Muse) shall pierce thy sullen ears
Melpomene, though nothing can apall
Thy heart obdurate in contempt of fears,
My my laments shall make thee write in tears,
If mong thy scrolles of antique majesty,
Thou deigne to place a Prelates tragedy.
Perchance the tenor of thy mourning verse
May lead some pilgrim to my toomblesse grave,
Where neither marble monument nor hearse
The passengers attentive view may crave,
Which honors now the meanest persons have:
But well is me where e're my ashes lie,
If one tear drop from some religious eye.
Yet when by means of Princes gracious doom
I ruled the Church, where aged Wainflet lay,
Zealous I was unto my Founders toombe;
My thankful love did faithful tribute pay
To him now dead, whose living was my stay:
His ancient relics were as dear to me,
As Princes looks, or parents love might be.
Thrice sweet remembrance of that holy man,
Reverend erector of those stately tow'res,
That worthy College where my youth began,
In humane Arts to spend the watchful hours;
That fruitful noursery, where heavenly show'res
To me poor country-plant such grace did yield,
As soon I proved the fairest of the field.
As rightly called, as royally comprised,
For that repentant woman's name it bears,
Who meekely for our Saviors feet deuis'de
A double bath of ointment and of tears
Wherewith she washed, then wiped them with her hayres:
With precious savor here for aye endures
And tempred spirits with holy breath repures.
Still flourish O our Athens second praise,
Full of religion, and of pregnant wits,
That to high place of dignity do raise,
So many a sweet divine that mitred sits,
In sacred see as men of God befits:
"For Arts best nurse is Honors chaste desire,
"And Glory sets all studious hearts on fire.
This greedy flame together with my youth,
(Two never fit companions for advice,)
No'r teaching right from wrong, deceit from truth,
Nor shows from substance, toys from things of price,
Laid down my heart a living sacrifice
On Honors altar where it burned bright,
Like Uestaes fire with an eternal light.
This silver tongue (me thought) was never made,
With rhetoric skill to teach each common swain,
These deep conceits were never taught to wade,
In shallow brooks, no'r this aspiring vain,
Fitto converse among the shepherds train:
I could not girt me like a worthless groom,
In courser garment wouen of country loome.
Just cause I saw my titles to advance,
Virtue my gentry, Priesthood my descent,
Saints my allies the Cross my cognizance,
Angels my guard, that watched about my tent,
Wisdom that vsher'd me where ere I went:
These are our honors, though the world withstand,
Our lands and wealth are in another land.
Yet as through Tagus fair transparent streams,
The wandering Merchant sees the sandy gold,
Or like as Cynthia'es half obscured beams,
In silent night the Pilot does behold
Through misty clouds and vapors manifold:
So through a mirror of my hop'te for gain,
I saw the treasure which I should obtain.
Then did I my poor country charge resign,
Where I had lived disgraced and discontent,
Wronged by a Knight, for no desert of mine,
But when he deemed my torch of malice spent,
I made my cleargy-scorning Knight repent:
For Nature framed my memory quick and strong,
But most intentive to revenge a wrong.
Forth as I went, when my desires were ti'de,
I was perplexed with thousand sundry minds,
The swelling Ocean in a stormy tide,
Was never so tosst with self resisting winds,
As now my heart it self tormented finds:
Naught left but Hope, to ease my troubled soul,
And even that Hope Despair did thus control.
Wolsey, are these the hopes of thy deserts?
Are these the fruits of wit? is this to know?
O vain Philosophy, and bootlesse arts,
Such seeds of learned ignorance to sow,
Where Skilles disgrace, and Wisdoms folly grow!
Grow where you list, in me your roots unknit,
A settled brain is worth a world of wit.
In Court who ever heard my name before?
Or hearing it, none knows it I am sure:
Suppose they do; who cares for me the more?
Or grant they did; how long will that endure?
Admit it should; what good may care procure?
O rather on that homely seat rely,
Where known and car'de for, thou may live and die.
Seek'st thou for fame? he is best that least is known,
Or Princes favors? that is no common grant:
Seru'st thou for wealth? a Courtier knows his own:
Or for degree? preferment waxes scant:
Wantst thou to live? no hell to Courtiers want:
O rather yet embrace thy private lot
With honest fame and riches purely got.
Each perfect sense must things repugnant do,
Thy eyes must watch, but never seem to see;
Thy tongue must brave, but learn to flatter too;
Thy ears must hear, yet deaf and careless be;
Affection fast and loose, thoughts bond and free:
Vain, yet precise; chaste, but to maidens kind;
A Saint in sight, a Machiuel in mind.
Thy present calmes these stormy waves surpass,
As pearls indeed the things which precious seem,
Thy glebe brings corn, thy pasture plenteous grass,
For thee thy toiling oxen join in teeme,
And after with their death thy life redeem.
Thy sheep (a pleasant flock) their fleeces veil,
And from their dugges yield nectar to thy paile.
At home what duty neighbors yield to thee,
Creeping to others now thou must resign,
Attend their diet, ever waiting be,
When with less plenty in a shadie vine,
But greater pleasure thou were wont to dine:
Nature has powered enough in each man's lap,
Could each man learn to use his private hap.
But say all wealth and honor me betide,
And I were borne the only man to rise,
My Kings dear favorite, and countries guide,
Th'autentique object of all wondering eyes,
Experience holds the Tragique Poet wise:
That rather chose mong Corsicke rocks to dwell,
Then in the pomp of Casars court excel.
Thus reason sought to stale ambitions hold,
Wise Empyricke with twenty truths attended,
But his enchaunted force, all force controulde,
With privilege and charter long defended,
Against all invasions till that world were ended:
Whereon presuming he did thus reprove
All doubts, and from his seat all fears remove.
Unthankful man to heaven and heavens creator,
To men and Angels envious and unkind,
Burying Gods Image, quintessence of Nature,
Virtues perfection, excellence of mind,
In barbarous woods, and desert fields inshrinde:
When men like trees to sweetest voice never hark,
Where words of life can pierce their savage bark.
Long time the princely shepherd did remain,
Striking his harp in fruitful Palestine,
But as the sheep, so every shepherd swain,
Knew not the virtue of his touch divine,
Till once the Prince his fancy did incline
To hear him play; then home this child they bring,
With charming notes to ease the troubled King.
The Princes court is mansion of the wise,
Figure of heaven, fair fountain of delights,
Theater of honor, earthly Paradise,
Sudden aduauncer, Sphere of purest lights,
The lively Vatican of beauties brights:
Thither let Phoebus progeny resort,
Where shines their father but in Jove's great court?
Let never man endued with sundry graces,
So sell himself for tithes and trifling gain;
Nor that rich infinite spirit that embraces,
This universe in compass of a brain,
So prostitute her deity, nor restrain
In narrow limits of a base content,
Of learned thoughts the boundless continent.
But since our fairer means seem to inuit us,
By Jacobs ladder to ascend on high,
Whose every round with pleasure may delight us,
Why cease we all our studies to apply
To gain this tipe? And wherefore linger I?
With whose hart-strings Amphions Lute is strung,
And Orpheus Harp hangs warbling at my tongue.
Now was I drawn in chariot of Desire,
While Typhis-like Ambition led the way;
Arrived at Court, I needed not enquire
What Lord about the King bore greatest sway;
Their troops of followers, riches of array,
Numbers of suitors almost numberless,
Taught me to know, or somewhat more then guess.
To please their vain, and be my self admirde,
I cast my learning in a Courtiers mold;
My schollership and carriage both conspirde
T'appeach their wrong, that most injurious hold
Such men unfit, to have their names enrold
In place of note, or handle things of weight,
That spend their time in contemplations height.
Frame to your selves imaginary courts,
(O piercing spirits inflam'de with heavenly fire)
Kings Mathematicke, counterfeit resorts,
Portraites of justice, shadows of desire,
Such aerie castles as conceits inspire,
Such commonwealths as Plato did uphold,
Administering booke-iustice uncontrolled.
Such heavens, such planets, and such whirling spheres,
The Syracusan wisard did invent,
Wherein the curious workmanship appears
Of their first mouer, and did represent,
The wondrous fabric of the firmament:
If heavens and common wealths may be so shown,
The courts estate much easier may be known.
These fancies I had framed long before,
Deeming my self my fortunes architect;
Now care solicited me ten times more,
To bring those meditations to effect,
And so my wary counsel to direct,
As might content the pillar of my state,
That next in counsel to his soueraignesate.
A man made old to teach the worth of age,
Patriarke-like, and grave in all designs,
One that had finished a long pilgrimage,
Sparing in diet, abstinent from wines,
His sinews small as threeds, or slender lines:
Lord of the city, where with solemn rites,
The old Prince Arthur feasted with his Knights.
He saw my gifts were such as might deserve,
He knew his life was drawing to an end,
He thought no means so likely to preserve
His fame, with time and envy to contend,
As to advance some faithful serving friend,
That living might in time to come record,
The Immortal praise of his deceased Lord.
He brought me first in presence of the King,
Who then allotted me his Chaplains place;
My eloquence did such contentment bring
Unto his ears that never Prince did grace
Poor Chaplain more, nor lowly priest embrace
"Dread sovereign so. For Nature teaches ever,
"Who loves preferment, needs must love the giver.
Next who but I was sent Ambassador,
With Europes greatest Monarch to entreat,
Caesar of Almaine Germans Emperor,
In Belgia keeping his imperial seat,
To handle matters of importance great:
My hap was such the King could hardly guess,
Which pleased him more, my speed, or good success.
The Argonauticke vessel never past,
With swifter course along the Colchan maine,
Then my small bark with fair and speedy blast
Conuayd me forth, and reconuayd again;
Thrice had Arcturus driu'n his restless waine,
And heavens bright lamp, the day had thrice revived,
From last departure, till I first arrived.
The King not deeming I had yet been gone,
Was angry for my long surmiz'd delay;
I told his Majesty that all was done,
And more than all, and did his pardon pray
That I beyond commission went astray;
And could have wished for ever to be chid
With answer to content as then I did.
It Is not huge heaps of figurative devises,
Nor luxury of metaphors or phrases,
Nor finenesse of connection that intices
Court-learned ears, and all the world amazes,
But depth with pleasure craving all the graces
Of art and nature, curiously precize,
Serenely modest, excellently wise.
It is not learning; for the Courtiers know it,
Nor folly; but for Counselors most fit,
Nor grave demeanor; for we must bestow it
On Ladies toys; nor quintessence of wit,
For that is most vnstaide, nor does it fit
With Courtiers majesty to be reputed,
Too learned, too grave, too fine, or too conceited.
A skill transcendent over every art,
Yet subject or essential unto none,
Imperfect too, yet having every part,
And thus though strange, imperfect, and but one,
Yet all admire and reverence it alone:
Unknown and vndefin'de save in discerning,
By practice to be got, but not by learning.
Men pointed out by Fortune for good hap,
Have from their infancy this gift inspired,
Promotions fall, as plenteous in their lap,
As words out of their mouths, thus I acquired,
The deanerie of Lincoln vndesir'd:
And then the Almnership, and every hour,
Some drops distilling of a golden shower.
As in a burning glass or little sphere,
Dispearsed sunbeams often united are,
And in one point beams infinite appear,
Innumerable rays disiected far,
From th'oblique circle of that glorious star*
So like that instrument I now begun,
Tunite the favors of our earthly sun.
New friends unknown, great presents undeserved,
Old suitors came, held back with long delay,
And al like poppets when their time was served,
Gave place to other, and so likewise they,
Ending their parts, let other actors play:
No way in all the court so duly tread,
As was the path which to my lodging led.
Transplanted thus into a fertile spring,
And watered from above with heavenly dew,
Enlightened with the presence of my King,
My branches waxed large and fair of hew,
And all about fresh buddes of honor grew:
Garlands of Lordships, blossoms of degree,
White rods of office, keys of knightly fee.
Look how the God of Wisdom marbled stands,
Bestowing Laurel wreathes of dignity
In Delphos I Will, at whose impartial hands,
Hang antique scrolles of gentle Herauldrie,
And at his feet ensigns and trophies lie:
Such was my state whom every man did follow,
As living statue of the great Apollo.
But see, even when my joys did most abound,
My crowned pillar most untimely fell,
And I about his shaft like Iuie wound,
That did in pride, as he in height excel,
Was left behind to hear his heavy knell:
And sing a Requiem to his soul deceast,
For I, poor I, lost more then all the rest.
O hidden doom, of that eternal spirit,
That sentence gives, the righteous man shall die:
Injurious death that lets rude souls inherit
Long leases of their lives, and do envy
That Princes live, on whom all states rely.
And cruel fate that such confusion brings,
To common wealths by Ostracisme of Kings.
He died, and in memorial of his name,
Built that fair chapel, where he now takes rest;
A rich foundation of a curious frame,
The fairest monument left vnsupprest,
Passing all temples of the gorgeous East:
O strew his hearse with roses red and white,
For he both stemmes did in one bed unite.
True branch of both, thy father is not dead,
For in thy look I read his virtuous reign,
His crown is set on thy victorious head,
Dead to himself, he lives in thee again,
His wisdom seated in thy princely brain:
O were not Times old wings so far outworne,
But he new crownde, and thou as newly borne!
But both are gone, and we too soon bereft,
To better kingdoms both translated are;
This testimony to the world is left,
He was the Prince of peace, thou God of war,
He was a fixed, thou a wandering star:
Seven is a number fatal from the heavens,
But eight King Henry passing all the seu'ns.
He came of noble, thou of Kingly race,
He brought to win, thou borne to wear a crown;
He got great wealth, thou honor did embrace;
He kept his own, thou conquer'st many a town;
He houses built, thou batterdst cities down:
O worthies both! and insufficient me,
To mourn for him, or speak enough of thee.
Then for my self whom wisdom never taught,
To seek for gold in coffins of the dead,
My deep contriuing policy so wrought,
That in his youthly reign my dearest dread,
Me to his sacred counsel did aread:
Where all estates in open court did find,
The lively vigor resting in my mind.
When I did muse, my spirit did wholly bear,
His full perfection to enrich my thought;
What time I spoke, my life was wholly there,
And to my speech all grace and beauty brought:
What praise soever any member sought,
That God (whom we call soul) sprung from our heart.
Was all in all, and all in every part.
What matters past in private conference,
Or public counsel for the common good,
I still enform'd his sacred excellence,
Framing my sentence to his princely mood,
His word, my deed, his will, my warrant stood:
Nor need his grace one jot of pleasure spare,
His royal grant, in person to declare.
Enough said I your highness does in this,
To make us laws that in subjection dwell,
Let Magistrates correct what is amiss;
Such nobles as in wisdom most excel,
Advance to place where they may govern well:
And as you do your kingdoms glory prize,
Of all your land, select the learned wise.
For if the temperature of common weal,
Be guided by the course of heavenly pow'res,
Such as in deep affairs will justly deal,
Must have an eye to those aeternall bow'res,
And by their view direct this state of ours:
Else how can he a perfect statesman prove,
That knows not how celestial bodies move?
How can he mark religions steadfast pole,
How many long degrees we distant are?
How laws of justice compass in the whole
Like orb of fixed lights, or note from far,
A fained meteor from a fixed star:
How dark eclipsed truth is never seen,
When worlds corrupting treasure comes between.
When wise Magitians wandered far and wide,
To find the place of our Messiah birth,
A star by east, became their faithful guide,
Angels proclaming notes of joyful mirth,
Glory to God on high, and peace on earth:
While here I pawsde, the King with smiling cheer,
Bade me proceed, for he was bent to hear.
Dread sovereign, I intend not to detract
From noble families their ancient rights;
Ill fares the ship whose lofty tops be wrackt,
Whole Empires fall where such confusion lights,
Long life and honor to S. Georges Knights:
"Yet this I read, that realm shall fairest rise,
"Where wise men rule, or Rulers can be wise.
Put such in trust your grace may rest secure,
And sway the scepter with immortal praise,
Whether you please your royal self immure,
In city walls triumphing sundry ways,
Or else in progress spend the summer days:
What has the air, the sea, the land, and all,
That is not yours, or subject at your call?
Scholar (said he) thou know my kingdoms state,
And can with pleasure painful trauells brook,
I Will prize thy service at the highest rate,
Performing that which thou have undertook,
For Lordly rents, I Will change thy Easter book:
Good priest whose son so ere thou art by kind,
Wolsey of Ipswich never begat thy mind.
Soon after this the King with mighty host,
In person meant to enter warlike France,
To challenge what his auncetors had lost,
On Turney gates his standard to advance,
And in their courts, to make our courtiers dance*
Which unacquainted labor to supply,
He thought no subject was so fit as I.
He might as well appoint some artlesse swain,
In Pytheas place to build Mausolus toombe;
To rear the Egyptian Pyramid's again,
Restore the ruins of declining Rome,
Or put some shepherdess to Arachnes loome:
As me a student and a young divine,
To furnish out a camp, no charge of mine*
But now the sweetness of promotions taste,
Delightsome prospect to the tower of fame,
Such skill in my vnmartiall wits had plac'de,
As would not only just proportion frame,
Of men, and fit munition for the same:
But bring from rocks where flintie sinews stood,
Whole stony legions of Deucalions brood.
Imagine Turney vanquished by the King,
With Turwins walls and all the confin'de land:
Ill winds they are that good to no man bring,
Worse wars that suffer not the churches stand,
My wind blew fair, the church fell in my hand,
That was elect and consecrated soon,
Bishop of Turney when the wars were done.
A sweet preferment, for it was my first;
A strange advancement in another Realm;
A pleasant draft to quench ambitions thirst;
A joyful note to wake me from my dream;
A fruitful spring, to send so fair a stream:
What man but me could fortune thus advance,
In peace, in war, in England, and in France?
My solemn consecration being ended,
And holy miter placed on my head,
With falling mists the darksome night extended
Her sable wings, and gently ouerspread
Heavens gloomy veil, whence Phoebus lamp was fled:
Dead time of rest to every mortal wight,
No music to the silence of the night.
To cheerful minds that brings wanton sleep,
With many a Phantasme and deluding toy,
And pensive heart it does detain and keep,
From tedious company that would annoy,
Dull Saturnists that have abiur'd all joy:
To me whose day was all in pleasure spent,
This wondrous vision it did represent.
From that rich valley where the Angels laid him,
His unknown sepulcher in Moabs land,
Moses that Israel led and they obaid him,
In glorious view before my face did stand,
Bearing the folded tables in his hand:
Wherein the doom of life, and deaths despair,
By Gods own finger was engraven fair.
He passing forth, a joyful troop ensued,
Of worthy judges and triumphant Kings,
Victorious Iosuah that in arms subdued,
Profane usurpers of their hallowed things,
And smote their leaders, breaking al their wings:
With him as joining hearts with meek consent,
Princes of Israel and of Judah went.
Next whom with solemn note of trumpets sound,
The tabernacle of the Lord was brought,
About it holy Priests assembled round,
With sacred Ephods, girdles richly wrought,
Such garments as the Lord had Aaron taught;
With warbling harp, and crownet on his head,
The ghost of David lofty measures lead.
To these in order all the Prophets came,
Mysterious prophets, clothed in poor array;
Pronouncing often Iehouah's dreadful name,
Crying to Syon; Learn, O learn the way,
Your desolation hastneth every day:
These were refusde, for none regarded them
In all the daughters of Jerusalem.
The next in rank were holy Martyrs bleeding,
Whose every wound in perfect glory shines:
Then they which wrote our Saviors just proceeding,
His life and death in everlasting lines:
And last of all, the best of all divines,
To whom deep mysteries of things concealed,
At Pathmos I Will in vision were revealed.
Now from the Aethereall palace of her rest,
In perfect semblance they appeared to me:
But O my soul how are thy pow'res oppressed,
That sleeping saw, and waking can not see?
O God! if so thy gracious pleasure be,
Such beauty be revealed to mortal men,
Direct, O soon direct my wandering pen.
In chariot framed of celestial mould,
And simple pureness of the purest sky,
A more then heavenly Nymph I did behold,
Who glauncing on me with her gracious eye,
So gave me leave her beauty to epsy:
For sure no sense such sight can comprehend,
Except her beams their fair reflection lend.
Her beauty with Eternity began,
And only unto God was ever seen,
When Eden was possessed with sinful man,
She came to him, and gladly would have been,
The long succeeding worlds eternal Queen:
But they refused her (O heinous deed!)
And from that garden banished was their seed.
Since when, at sundry times and sundry ways,
Atheism and blinded ignorance conspire,
How to obscure those holy burning rays,
And quench that zeal of heart-inflaming fire,
As makes our souls to heavenly things aspire:
But al in vain, for mauger all their might,
She never lost one sparkle of her light.
Pearls may be foild, and gold be turned to dross,
The sun obscured, the moon be turned to blood,
The world may sorrow for Astraeas loss,
The heavens be darkened like a dusky wood,
Waste deserts lie where watery fountains stood:
But fair Theology (for so she hight,)
Shall never loose one sparkle of her light.
Such one she was as in his Hebrew song,
The wisest King for fairest creature proves*
Embracing her the Cedar trees among,
Comparing her to roses and to doves,
Preferring her before all other loves:
Such one she was, and every whit as fair,
Beside these two, was never such a pair.
Her handmaides in Amazon-like attire,
Went chaste and modest like Dianaes train,
One, by her gazing looks seemed to aspire
Beyond the moon, and in a high disdain,
To deem the world, and wordly treasures vain:
She hight Astrology, on whose bright lawne,
Spheres, Astrolabes, and skillful globes are drawn.
The next fair, smiling with a pleasing cheer,
Had pow're to ravish and enchant men's ears,
High Rhetoric whose shadowed veil shown clear,
With silver tongues, and over it she wears
A wimpled scarf bedewed with hearers tears:
Whose captive hearts she should detain long while,
With pleasance of her unaffected style.
The third a quicke-eyd dame, of piercing sight,
That reasons worth in equal balance way'd;
The truth she loved above all earthly wight,
Yet could not tell her love but what she said,
Was certain true, and she a perfect maid:
Her garment short tuckt up, to work prepared,
And she called Logic without welt or guard.
Next these, whose outward looks I knew aright,
And had some portion of their endless treasure,
Fair Algebra with figures richly dight;
Sweet Music foundresse of delightsome pleasure;
Earth-scanning Nymph, directresse of all measure:
These humbly did her sovereign highness greet,
And meekely laid their garlands at her feet.
From every one she plucked a special flower,
And laid each flower upon a several part;
Then from her own a stem of wondrous power,
Whose leaves were beams, whose stalk a fi'ry dart,
And that she laid upon my trembling heart:
Those were the buds of art, this plant of bliss,
This gave them life, they yielded grace to this.
Opening the closure of her speech divine,
My sweetly-rauisht sense she thus bespake,
Now Prelate art thou plac'de in Gods dear vine,
To heavenly thoughts thy studies whole betake:
And when thou shall from drowsy sleep awake,
Thank these my handmaides that have thought thee fit,
To whom the charge of souls I might commit.
To thee the charge of souls I here commit,
Of sheep and shepherds both take oversight;
If thou for gain the greater charge omit,
Or loose one title of the churches right,
Or less esteem Gods word then Kingly might;
Mingling religious book with honors mace,
Leaving Gods favor for the princes grace:
If thou by false pretense procure this wrong,
(What may not learned iniquity procure?)
Thy name shall die the vulgar sort among,
Proscript and abject from those fathers pure,
Whose memory for ever shall endure:
Oblivion and disgrace upon thy grave,
Shall write their triumph, and thy name deprave.
This said, her Martyrs drew her chariot on,
Through unknown passage of the blasting air,
And now to Abraham's bosom is she gone,
Commanding all her Nimphs and handmaids fair,
To these sweet waves, and pleasant banks repair:
And I, though full of care, and vex't in mind,
Took ship for England with a prosperous wind.
Welcome my Lord of Turney said the King,
Two Dukes with two as scornful looks past by,
A young French Bishop seemed so base a thing
To such great noble things that look so high,
As made me wonder at divinity:
That she the nearest to the King of Kings,
Should be debasde by any thing of things.
Say I were young, my lively spirits were fit,
To grow in wisdoms euer-blowing spring,
Or say ambitious, that is a mark of wit,
To bear our thoughts aloft on eagles wings,
And wit to youth especial grace does bring:
I hate such lingering wisdom as appears,
In hoary cognizance of ancient years.
Say all the world th'aboundance of their mind,
And speak of Wolsey all the wrong they can,
I say the world is envious and unkind,
The multitude e're since the world began,
Was ready to reprove the iustest man,
Who rightly climes the top of endless praise,
Regards not what the wise discourser says.
Object they Turney, I deuisde a way
To compass Lincoln or some other see,
Admire they this; I found a blisfull day,
In primacy of York enstall'd to be;
Such happy fortune still betided me,
That when they envied at my mean estate,
I got some greater to confound their hate.
Each sense may common objects comprehend,
Things excellent the sensitive confound,
The eye with light and colors may contend,
The ear endure the note of common sound,
Both fail when glorious beams loud strokes abound:
So envy that at meanest things bear spite,
Stands mute at view of unexpected height.
The peers that hated me were now content,
With me their former friendship to renew,
Who sought by me to purchase government,
And learn of me that thus in greatness grew.
O But the Italian Florentine said true:
The man furthereth other men to thrive,
Of private greatness does himself deprive.
Failing to hit the mark whereat I aim,
They take the least rupulse in deep disgrace,
And never ceast with fury to exclaim
Against my name, and odiously debase,
My birth, my parents, and ungentle race:
Vnnobly done, which though I not respect,
Yet unto them, themselves I might object.
Where are the gifts whose ensigns ye pretend,
O dull inheritors of others praise?
The virtues that your lordly arms commend,
And crowned your ancients with immortal bays?
Amiss fair Fortitude her coat displaies:
Where such as never durst maintain the field,
May bear a lion armed in their shield.
Thou fourfold goddess, that have stem'd thy crown,
With wisdom, valor, temperance, and right,
Place by thy sides those Heroes of renown,
That temperate justice with discretions might;
Let Herauldry provide in honors sight,
That such as are with fathers goods possessed,
Retain their virtues, or resign their crest.
Fine scholars borne of Pallas heavenly brain,
As she of Jove's, have purchasde this decree,
From meaner Princes in their several reigns,
Dukes, Vidams, Barons, such as brauest be,
To muse of things that nobles do not see:
When their reward, though they be well regarded,
May be to be well thought of, scarce rewarded.
Which made me, when I once had found the spring,
Draw from the Fountain where the proudest drew,
Leaving the counsel, seek unto the King,
And when my purpose was indeed to sue,
To sue to him, because I ever knew,
Suing to Courtiers with our best complaints,
Like superstitious praying unto Saints.
Wolseius triumphans.
CLlio, are all thy sisters scholler-like?
No court-like Muse for polliticke designs?
And only for Apollo do they strike
Their instruments to what he most inclines?
Is this the reason that he ever shines?
No wonder if the world behold him bright,
Such Virgins can give oil to any light.
Then shall no busy burdner of the Press,
Without a Muse stand riming at my ways,
The more a Nouice seeks, he finds the less,
And sure the less he finds, the less he straies,
No policy to silence now a days:
Let him that shall my famous life descry,
Write of my Triumphs, let the means go by.
The glory of my Primacie affords
Discourse enough (O Time) to spend thine hours,
Barren invention shall abound with words,
As Autumn does with fruits, the spring with flowers,
Summer with sunbeams, winter time with showers:
Poets in vain their stratagems devise,
Wits want makes men desirous to seem wise.
But as a Saphyre hanging down the breast,
A far more orient glittering does make,
Than does a Diamond of good request
Set in a bracelet, and more glory take,
Not for the virtue, but for the places sake:
So did a clowdy Saphyre dim my light,
Not with his worth, but with his places height.
Grave ancient Warham full of high desert,
The Eastern Metropolitan of Kent,
A perfect Leuite of a loyal heart,
Fit for the temple whereto he was sent,
In all religious orders excellent:
No fault, but that he would not soon resign
To me, and his large province change for mine.
Which fault, my Romish friends had soon espide,
Their care was fervent Catholic for me,
Who in their Synod did such means provide
For my advancement to more high degree,
As Canterbury should inferior be:
They chose me Cardinal, but mine own voice,
Had thought me worthy of an higher choice.
They chose me Cardinal, and sent a hat,
What choice? what hat? where was the triple crown?
A Monmouth man can do as much as that:
O had his holiness bin in a sown,
Or surfeited, or took some potion down!
S. Peter's church, S. Angels famous tower,
The seven hills city had bin in my power.
A second Vatican, a new Auignion,
Another Laterane I could invent,
For relics, pomp, and church division,
What had I cared in glory to have spent,
Mine own, the churches, and the Kings own rent?
Me thought, if Friends, and Fortune, had bin true,
I could have built all Italy anew.
Wise Chaplains that had walked a quiet pace,
Good honest painful Graduates in their kind,
Told me it was a step to higher place,
And such a step, as few could ever find,
A lofty step; and stepping terms refind,
Step they that doubtful fear to clime on hie,
What need he step has Wisdoms wings to fly?
Now missing Clemens crown, I thought to take
King Henry's Seal, high Chancellor of the land,
Which secular authority did make
Me able all their furies to withstand,
That in their wisdoms had severely scanned:
A clergy man his calling much impaires,
To meddle with the polliticke affairs.
Then Moses that had all Egyptians skill,
Whose deepest learning flourisht in his days,
And many priests of Judah sinned still,
That not by justice only purchased praise,
But practiced use of martial assaies:
Some pleas are hard, and many things befall,
Which privilege or conscience must recall.
Divine proceedings fail, not being backed
With lawful maintenance of eiuill sword;
Endeavors polliticke take small effect,
That wants assistance from the heavenly word;
Beside some help must wealth and state afford:
For judgment vttred by the mouth of want,
Is either partial, or admitted scant.
Thus though my crosses, pillars, and my mace,
Honored my person to the common view
Of such as measure men by outward grace;
Yet to my several charges being due,
I might not to succession be untrue:
Our state is not the Moons, that from her waine*
Grows crescent presently, and new again.
If once we fall, we fall Colossus-like,
We fall at once like pillars of the sun,
They that between our stride their sails did strike,
Making us sea-markes where their ship did run,
Even they that had by us their treasure won;
Rise as we may by moderate degrees,
If once we stoop, thei'le bring us on our knees.
I made my chapel pure devotions seat,
Meet for the service of the heavenly King,
The tongues of the most learned did entreat
Of his decrees, and skilful priests did sing,
And singing boys use their hearts trebling string:
Such ornaments are most beseeming us,
In Gods behalf, let noble Peers do thus.
My household was not like the tent of Love,
Full of fair damsels, like Venetian bowers,
Nor of such virgins, whom the spirit does move,
No place for sister-hood within my towers,
Yet every day as many meals as hours:
Servants and officers in every room,
And royal fare for strangers when they come.
Where is that open cawsey wont to lead
The hungry beggar to a sheafe of corn?
Who lets them gleane with Ruth, or gives them bread*
Who rather feeds not fools, or men forsworn,
Or else for briefnesse sake leaves al forlorn?
See now the parlours of our highest states,
Are like to painted doors or posterne gates.
Proportion was surucior of my charge,
Adding to lofty buildings, gardens fair,
Just with my gains my houses to enlarge,
Mine usual walks to pleasantness of air,
Of every thing making an equal pair:
Planting fair arbors in my forests wide,
And feasting chambers by the rivers side.
This loving stream that does salute the shore,
In true affection to a scholars eye,
Even from these banckes increases more and more,
Wave tossing over wave most enuiously,
Till flowing tide forbid her passing by:
And make them stay, while passengers may see,
What was begun, and what was done by me.
Fair Dambie is praisde for being wide,
Nilus commended for the seven fold head,
Euphrates, for the swiftness of the tide,
And for the garden whence his course is led;
The banckes of Rhine with vines are ouerspred:
Take Loyre and Po, yet all may not compare
With English Thamesis for buildings rare.
My dreams were nothing but of Memphis still,
Of Pyramids, of statues carved in gold,
Hercules pillars, and Olympus hill,
My waking fancies too were ever sold,
Such toys in gazing blindness to behold:
No strokes of Musickes sound could strike away,
High thoughts by night, nor deep conceits by day.
A proud man may his own musician be,
His heads devise makes pauines to his heart,
This heart with pleasure leapes, and daunces free
All but the measures, framing every part,
Like Organs worthy of so sweet an art:
His thoughts plays Marches to his vaulting mind.
And Memories Recorder sounds behind.
Pride makes her Rounds, for she has never end,
And Sonnets, for she never leaves her noise,
She makes her Dumpes, if any thing offend,
And to her Idole-selfe with warbling voice,
Sings Hymns and Anthems of especial choice:
And yet Prides quier is put to silence clean,
Wanting a base, a tenor, and a mean.
Far from the church be these immusicall
Untoward songs that wants so many parts,
And since that pure religion does install
Learned professors, prelates of deserts,
Let them aspire and rear instructed hearts,
Against the base bestowers of church livings,
That use their graunts in sellings, and not in giuings.
For such men are like curtains at their best, He means Symoniacke and
unlearned ministers

To make us sleep, or hinder us from light,
Troublers of Nature, children of the west,
Haters of sense, adopted sons of night,
In whom the wise both sorrow and delight:
Yet were there not such vegetalls the while,
What had the wiser sort whereat to smile?
O you that bear the courage of divines,
Hate such men's patronage, engage not Art,
For who beholds the spoiler of the vines,
And stands secure, or takes the spoilers part,
Shall in his conscience feel such deadly smart,
That when he seeks by scripture to be easde,
The more he reads, the more he is displeasde.
Renowned Picus of Mirandula
Hated the substance of a clergy man
That was unlettered, and made a law,
An ignorant which never had began
To seek, or after seeking never skan
Some part of somewhat, that might wisdom bring,
Should be accounted but a living thing.
The noble Tichobraghe for whose dear sake,
All Denmark is in admirations love,
In deep regard such difference does make,
Between those men whose spirit soar above,
And those base essenses which only move:
That in his Isles horizon he admittes,
No clowdy meteors of such foggy wits.
On foreign princes I will never stand,
Sweet Clio pardon, if I do digress,
The noble Earl, the learned Northumberland,
Favors you Muses, and he does address
His peerless cares, which you must needs express:
Write Clio, write, and that aeternally,
In spite of Muses he shall never die:
For in his life his praise, and after death
Thankful remembrance still remains alive,
So long as Fame's aeternall trump has breath,
And time draws time, and these days other drive,
Or hasty minutes in their swiftness strive:
While man can speak with man, and virtue praise,
So long continues his immortal praise
Princes are mere divines, for they maintain
The living Gospel of the lively truth,
Doubly in them Gods Image does remain,
In high commanding where her mercy shew'th
The future hopes of goodness that ensu'th,
And then in their creation: Thus two ways
Princes are bound the Prince of heaven to praise.
Now to be princely and to be divine,
I added Winchester to all the rest,
With sundry others which I held by fine,
And being once installed in the best,
Vouchsafte with Abbeys to be so possessed:
I held this certain sure, and never doubt,
Abbeys, and Bishoprics will not fall out.
I made them friends, and that they might continue,
I got church-liuings more then I will say,
Small livings added to a great revenue,
Riddes poor reports, and common talks away:
The Chorus of the people that can say,
The Parson cares not for our souls health,
Will hold their tongues at hearing of such wealth.
Thus full of riches and exceeding power,
I added living unto living still,
Scarce came a day, within whose every hour
There were not yielded offerings of free will,
To have, or leave, until I had my fill:
One star is newly added shining fair,
Unto the back of Cassopeias chair.
Between solemnity and lofty state,
The sequel of my life I will divide,
Whereby I purchaste honor joined with hate,
And envy still did bear a mighty side,
Who rises by his wisdom is enui'de:
Let them envy; but when their lordships fell,
I must have notice where their Wards must dwell.
I cared not for the gentry, for I had
Tithe-gentlemen, young nobles of the land;
The greatest of the Realm were highly glad,
When with great charge, and suit under my hand,
They left the first fruits of their nearest band:
Fortune is Lady of the nobly borne,
The learned noble have her gifts in scorn.
It may be some were glad when I was sent,
Twice in Embassage to the Emperors court;
And others sad, respecting that I went,
Furnished so royally with such resort,
As far exceedes belief of true report:
Speak they their pleasure, Yet with equal worth,
And greater good I came, then I went forth.
Imperious ghost of Charles come sit by mine:
He cannot come, but lies in Princes ward,
And he disdaines to sue to Proserpine,
Dear fellow ghost (but he will not regard,
Or if he do, from coming is debard:)
Truly Imperious, for thy entertain
To me, and all the followers of my train.
The town of Bruges, Princes fair resort,
Flanders rich ornament, noble Peers Exchange,
The chosen city for the Emperors Court,
About whose streets, my following troops did range,
Was in her curt^sie so highly strange:
That nothing there was suffered to be spent,
Either by me, or any one that went.
Returning home in far more glorious sort,
Then Mardocheus to the Median King,
The sum of my success I did report,
Pl^asing his ears with sound of every thing;
Eloquence taught my common talk to sing
Contenting matter, and delighting words,
No sweeter strains all Musicks art affordes.
Honor's without emploiments of estate,
Are like to sunbeams without heat or light,
A noble man, and not a magistrate,
Shines half eclipsed in his cleerest bright:
Join heavenly gifts to earthly, light to light;
Let these great excellencies make a truce,
Fortune shall need no wheele-write for her use.
But from a Monarch of that sovereign power,
Twice to be sent, so honorably graced,
To Europs highest branch and fairest flower,
In so short season with so happy blast,
Each doubtful care with wisdom ouercast,
Returning to be more, then going forth,
Was fatal to the Cardinal of the North.
Now at such times as Lawyers walk the streets,
Without long rowles of papers in their hands,
When friendly neighbor with his neighbor meets,
Without false challenge to each others lands,
The counselor without his client stands:
When that large Capitol lies void and waste,
Where Senators and Judges late were placed.
Then in a solemn progress would I ride,
To see the houses where my livings lay,
The Image of what was, did not abide,
Nay scarce the memory remains this day,
For any stranger that shall pass that way.
This course in old Records ignorance took,
Tear the red letters and burn all the book.
How patient is Antiquity the while,
And all the souls that lean on Abraham's breast,
Those sacred spirits, that with inspired style,
Wrote truly of the church, and having ceast,
Their pains on earth, do live in peace and rest?
"Our parents age worse then our grandsires be,
"We worst beget, our children worse then we.
Then in an humor I accursed strait,
Those unbaptized sacrilegious hands,
That only for Gods vestrie laid their wait,
Profanely seazing on the churches lands,
And casting fair for all while none with stands:
But lest my sorrows openly should break,
Thus with my self (me thought) I began to speak.
Ye churches founded by religious Kings,
Rejoice within your Echo sounding vaultes,
Though envious Time this desolation brings,
Battring your marble pillars with assaults,
And even in men there rest no mean defaults:
Triumph in this, there is a doom for time,
Revenge for men that by your losses climb.
And ye (the servants of the living King,)
Let not your stately palace walls decline,
No desolation may confusion bring
To those fair monuments, but let them shine,
Old famous Hospitality t'enshrine:
That if she now be there, it may appear,
If not, the stones may witness she was there.
That honor which is left, maintain it still,
That which is past, (due or not due) it is gone,
And be you like your selves, come what come will,
Those great procurers of the churches moan,
Shall one day be accusde by every stone
That now lies mute. Let them advance their style,
And boast their arms, bear you the cross the while
If crosses worn for sanctity are despisde,
Because the wearers, least deserve that crest,
Why should not crests of valor so be prized
At equal rate, but they enjoy the best,
Being of worthy meedes far dispossessed;
A new Clarentieux made for this intent,
One for desert another for descent?
What field deserves emblazon'd more to be,
Then which our Saviors blood bestain'd with red?
What Princes heir inherits like degree
To Gods dear son, whose blessed arms were spread,
Upon his arms the cross, whereon he bled?
All they that serve this Prince must wear that crest,
Like Princes followers fastened on their breast.
And happy is that servant, that has store,
Of those crosse-badges, and can use them well;
Invisible effects will more and more,
Provoke a secret virtue to excel,
Wrought inwardly, nor suffer there to dwell,
Vnherauld humorous stampes, that seem to burn,
When metal wantes, make color serve the turn.
Shall I discourse? that man that wants a cross,
Is a plain man untouched, and sure down right,
Content to suffer his saluations loss,
When with a shadow he may hide the light,
And hopes to do it. (O religions night!)
That hidest from our eyes, what most appears,
Crossing of Stars, of Planets, and of Sphaeres.
Say then there are no Poles; shortness of skill
Follows that proposit on: if there be,
Are they not opposite by Gods own will?
Nay can division make equality,
Unless the crossing make their even degree?
He that denies the crossing of each Pole,
Astronomy condemns him in the whole.
Then they were worn, when no man durst resist,
If now they do, the world is wiser grown;
Mistaking was the cause I was not blist:
If Diagrammes of Euclide had bin known,
Dioscorides fair twines in gardens sown;
The Mathematique skill of twining flowers,
Spheres, Globes, the earths authority were ours.
No more of this, lest if I say too much,
My lines poor writer, bear the greatest blame;
I may suspect, because the world is such,
Sometimes injuriously to lay the blame,
On him that speaks in another name:
Yet I Will declare my glorious state much more,
To vex them deeper then they grudged before.
Nor was that star, that joined to the sun,
Has been miraculous at noone days view,
When equal with his fiery course he run,
Or stood admiring how his greatness grew,
So wondered at, as when they gave their due
To presence of my state: If I had light,
All borrowed was from Henry's princely right.
How bright was he that could afford such beams,
And yet himself be glorious above measure?
How plentiful that had all flowing streams?
How kingly minded in his endless treasure?
From him I had my wealth, from me his pleasure:
Let others joy by other lights appear,
True Cynthaes father shines in my sphere.
If I bore pillars, it was a prophecy,
The church would want them to support their state,
In all my life there was a mystery
Accomplished in my fall, yet shall I rate
My self in compass, or appoint a date
To th'Empyrean highness of my birth,
Which I first made familiar to this earth?
Laden with reverence, proud with mine eye,
Which nothing but obedience would see,
Vnheau'nly musical I might not lie,
Organs were common, consorts were so free,
That pleasing others, they displeased me:
Entering into my self, I sung within,
An higher trebble then which they begin.
How lofty above other wings I flew,
And yet vnmelted by my Phoebus heat,
How fair a chariot in my sphere I drew,
And moving still, enjoyed a perfect scate,
How royal, how attended, nay how great,
Not I, but all forget but my descent,
No epithete fittes me but Excellent.
My study, heaven, my thoughts how to be wise,
My care to flourish, my desire to gain,
Glory my end, my comfort still to rise,
And to enjoy next place to Princes reign,
My settled purpose not to fall again:
My plot was policy, wit my defense,
Greatness my pride, holiness my pretense.
In due observance of the Lords behests,
So far as weak mortality perceived,
In such behavior, as behooued best,
Mortality, unless I were bereaved,
Or I in it, or it in me deceau'd:
I seemed to show, the world so seemed to see,
For to pretend is now esteemed to be.
Jerusalem, the pride of Palestine,
Renowned through the world for Syons height,
Within whose walls the purest Sun did shine,
That ever gave heavens euer-shining light,
Though far most glorious in all earthly sight,
Was just my Peer; and once of like renown,
I for a man, as that was for a town.
What has the world to which I may compare,
That thing which was my self, what I have been?
Nature her self is grown exceeding bare,
And Art wants words, and histories fair Queen
Will not report what mortal eyes have seen:
Lest Muses, wanting music take their wings,
As quite amazed, and leave their silver strings.
Yea they, whose opticke skill redoubles light,
And teaches men how they may see too far,
That Art which bids Natures poor eyes good night,
Gazed upon the shows of painted war,
Or on an arras-wouen blazing star:
Where Art with Nature curiously did strive,
In busy works of shadows prospectiue:
When as they need no more to calculate,
Or seek the house of Planets, and of signs,
They saw the figure of my high estate,
And knew how every object there inclines,
Though judging spirits be seldom true divines:
Within my private house they might epsy,
More of mine honor, then in all the sky.
Who followed me, but Fortune was at hand,
To follow him? or, if she went before,
To usher him? or, if I made him stand,
To stand with him? or, if I wished him more,
To beg herself, to amplify his store?
My birth enioyn'd, my planets to a date,
My self made Fortune to be fortunate.
Man's eye makes what is seen to seem so fair,
Man's ear makes what is heard to sound so sweet,
Man's speech is censured by the breathing air,
His touch by softness; every sense is meet
For his own object, but I needs must greet
Sence-wanting Censurers, that fail in this,
Not seeing things aright, they heard amiss.
Why should I satisfy the vulgar sort,
That beast of many, yet not wisest heads?
Whom I could wish some honest friend exhort,
To pick the Dazies in his parish meades:
For who my praise-excelling Triumph reads,
Although in glorious places he have been,
Must yet imagine more than he has seen.
For I my self that could conceive as well
As other judges of mine own estate,
Stood dumb at mine own height, nay could I tell
What to think of my self, or how to rate,
The long appointed providence of Fate?
For excellency ever bears this mind,
By no inferior skill to be defined.
Let Art in general seem to begin,
To specify, let every perfect sense
Conceive, and in conceit all greatness win,
Yet has my glory cause of best pretense,
When I am best defined by difference:
Describe me then, and there described are,
Might, wisdom, eminence, beyond compare.
To which my threefold joy, the thrice exceeding
The grace-vouchsafing presence of my King,
Added the spirit of more high proceeding,
Changing my tenor to a sweeter string,
For Phoebus never better light does bring,
Then when he takes from Jove's imperial seat,
If not his light, yet influence more great.
For once he maskt those his victorious eyes,
Wherein both majesty and mercy shined,
Eclipsed (as he thought) but no disguise,
Nor sight-deluding torchlight so could blind
My wandering eyes, but ever in my mind,
Somewhat suggested me, there should be One,
Deserved more then my place, a royal throne.
The very place wherein a Prince appears,
Discernes his presence, makes the chamber blessed,
Like planets are they known within their spheres,
Or as Halcyon with her turning breast,
Demonstrates wind from wind, and east from west:
This is a certain Nature of estate,
It cannot masked be, nor change his gate.
And as defaults will more conspicuous be,
How much the offender greater is esteemed,
So virtue in a princely body see,
Lamp like, and far more excellently deemed;
That in such unity it seldom seemed;
In mutual approach of highest bliss,
Whether more graced each by other is.
How are they blinded then that dare conspire,
The least offense against great sovereignty?
Or with Prometheus touch one spark of fire,
Kindled within the breast of Majesty?
How blind that cannot see serenitie?
O let them never more enjoy their sights;
Prometheus-like, let Vultures gnaw their lights.
Who stoppes the triumph of my chariots course?
Or charms the swiftness of my Fortunes blast?
Why lies my pride at anchor to discourse?
And weary Muse, why make you so small have?
What are you silent? shall I not be grac'de
By sea and land, whom sea and land have found,
With wind by land, with tide at sea renownde?
Their violence never drove me to the north,
Whence by the Proverb nothing comes but ill.
By great Promotion I proceeded forth
That worthy Pilot, that has wondrous skill,
To draw and withdraw, promise and fulfill:
At my return, to do the proverb due,
Either I found or made the proverb true.
Why should I do a seely proverb wrong
That meant not me, not I, his author knew?
O had he power to make his proverb strong,
Or good, or bad; then fortune might renew
My former favors; be that sentence true.
This answer is enough for my defense,
No harm, I came but half the way from thence.
And coming from a climate moist and cold,
I feared the south would be too hot for me,
Especially the court, when vncontroll'd,
Within the honest North I might be free
From scorching hatred: happy is that see
Whose Prelate sees no courtiers, none of these
That come a fleecing in their dioecese.
Which sanctity nathlesse pretends no harm,
But zealous hindrance of the churches pride,
Who lately would impropriate a Farm
Unto the church? Nay who does not deride
The poor fee simple on the churches side?
And laugh within themselves to see such tricks,
Babes in their cradles heirs to Bishoprics.
Before I stoopt, I hoou'red for my pray,
And stopped my western Knight, that once stockt me,
Within the Temple gate I made him stay,
In tenure of Knights-seruice, where his fee
Was like his practice, short of his degree:
And there he decked the tower with great excess,
Would God men could out-build their wickedness.
Then should the rich foundation princely laid,
Of this fair church half expiate my sins,
Or were as much of my great ransom paid,
As here is laid of this, but naught he winnes,
That cannot finish that which he begins:
In some calm rest my troubled soul would bide,
Might I, but where I built, be iustifi'de.
My buildings stand without an Echoes sound,
Yet they are lofty, and the waters nigh:
What bashful Echo walks the solemn round?
Or rather what inhabitants? or why?
Or else how long will they my worth deny?
If by the waters side my building lie,
Shall that fair river drown my memory?
The pedant minister and serving clarke,
The ten-pound, base, frize-ierking hireling,
The Farmers Chaplain with his quarter mark,
The twenty noble Curate, and the thing,
Called Elder, all these gallants needs will bring
All reverend titles into deadly hate,
Their godly calling, and my high estate.
It ill befits my triumph to acquaint,
The show thereof with such a rabblement;
Or turn my glory to a light complaint,
But that I would afford each complement,
As princes do to cause their meriment:
Diuiner fools then these sprung up of late,
Did never Porter bring within his gate.
It Is superstition to erect high towers,
But great religion to enjoy their height,
Folly to spend the utmost of our powers,
To kindle sacred learnings joyful light,
And save the Muses from eternal night:
But had none founded Colleges and Schools,
Whence had they wisdom to account us fools?
Alureds own wings, and Bayliols own zeal,
(Both Kings renowned for their gracious deed;
The three religious Winchesters did seal
Their praises, and their statutes with like speed,
Nor do the Lincolnes want deserved meede:
Why should not I of York by right expect,
Equal remembrance for my greater act?
Wolseius moriens.
VIth honorable burdens I have tir'de
My Fortunes wheel that it can turn no more,
The leases of my lordships are expir'de,
My lamp burnt out, poor Metaphors great store
To trope my miseries my heart grows sore:
Help me, for I have surfeited of late,
Some Paracelsian of a sublimate.
Sublimed indeed, but all the purest gone,
The treasure is in others coffers laid,
Now write Melpomene my tragic moan,
Call Neroes learned master, he will aid,
Thy failing quill with what himself once said:
Never did Fortune greater instance give,
In what frail state proud Magistrates do live.
Behold my grave, where scarce lies any stone
To cover me, nor roof to cover it,
And when thou see our ruins both in one,
One Epitaph will equally befit
The church and me, let never man of wit
Be used therein; paint on the churches wall,
Here lies an Abbey, there a Cardinal.
The North was never warm since I came thence,
Leicester was never rich since I lay there,
O blasting spirit of me, dead influence,
In countries, whose poor wasted Hemisphere
Did ever since a greater burden bear:
Tears that should fall from eyes of each degree,
Are Isicles, and will not melt for me.
The peoples hearts of late are strung so hard,
That they will break before one note shall sound,
Or so untunable, that still they iar'de;
Their brains so like the Moon, whose coat they found,
That tears for toys, and not true cause abound:
Call up my spirits themselves, all are asleep,
Distill my ashes, yet they cannot weep:
All as my Chrysom, so my winding sheet,
None ioy'de my birth, none mourned my death to see,
The short Parenthesis of life was sweet,
But short* what was before, unknown to me,
And what must follow, is the Lords decree:
The period of my glory is expressed,
Now of my death, and then my Muse take rest.
Not such as I took, when they from me hent
The Seal of England, by great Henry's will,
Wherein his picture with his favor went,
A double loss: They that have Courtiers skill,
They that have favor, let them sign their bill
While wax is warm, and Fortune seems to bless,
And Princes seal is ready to impresse.
For I vnseal'd was open to the view
Of all that read my fortune: some would say,
They thought as much before, but that is untrue,
Because they saw no likelihood of decay,
No bird that strived, nor beast that lost his way:
But men interpreted and made a gloss,
Imagining them Prophets of my loss.
My Crosses fall, and Chaplains broken head,
Were Oracles in silence, cause of fear,
Emblemes of trouble, impreses of dread,
Doubt and suspicion in my mind did rear
Heavy conceits, when nothing did appear:
Such are the desperate troubles of our soul,
Where greater things the better things control.
The day was now approaching nigh at hand,
Of my enstalment in Yorkes gracious See,
Th'aeternall Providence did then withstand,
M'intented enterprise; but things must be,
As heavens foreseeing wisdom shall decree:
The mace of Honor, borne like Virtues crest,
Was now laid on my shoulder for arrest.
I did not mean with Predecessors pride
To walk on cloth as custom did require,
More fit that cloth were hung on either side
In mourning wise, or make the poor attire,
More fit the dirige of a mournful quire:
In dull sad notes all sorrows to exceed
For him, in whom the Princes love is dead.
I am the toombe where that affection lies,
That was the closet where it living kept:
Yet wisemen say affection never dies;
No but it turns, and when it long has slept,
Looks heavy like the eye that long has wept:
O could it die, that were a restfull state;
But living, it conuerts to deadly hate.
My servants shall like bondmen serve the time,
My guard attend, without or welt or guard,
We now are subject to another clime,
Vain pride, and sumptuous pomp we must discar'd,
For from my loss they have their just reward:
Now is captivity the first degree
Of downfall by commission fallen on me.
But why do I here cease at my arrest,
By which I am provoked to proceed?
O Liberty how much is that man blessed,
Whose happy fortune do his fates areede,
That for Deserts reioyces to be freede?
Much more may others grieve, and much more I,
That for Desert have lost our Liberty.
By short and heavy iourneys I was brought
To Sheffield park, there taking sweeterepose,
Where true Nobility entirely sought
T'ennoble grief, and entertain my woes:
O how does heaven the course of cares dispose,
By enterchange of honor and of pleasure,
To augment our miseries exceeding measure?
His trains attendance showed my glories past,
(Bitter remembrance) and my present shame,
(Unhappy presence) and the times of waste,
Accusing all when I deserved the blame,
Accursing Change that keeps me not the same:
Let him that sees his private misery,
Avoid the prospect of prosperity.
It breeds pale Envy, and sad Discontent,
Procures offense before a proffered wrong,
Torments it self, till all conceits are spent,
And thoughts delivered by malicious tongue;
Then rapt with violent fury, grows so strong,
That it enuenomes all our humane parts,
Blind-iudging eyes, and sense-confounding hearts.
Far better had I met upon the way,
Legions of Lazars, ghosts of men unjust,
Afflicted spirits tormented night and day,
With Prides remembrance, and incestuous lust,
Appearing in their ornaments of dust:
Such passengers might well have met with me
Of like profession, and of like degree.
Ages to come will thankfully admire,
That princes worth which pitied prelates want,
Those benefits are noble and entire,
But in few grounds increases such a plant,
Since their old virtuous roots are grown so scant.
Professions doubt breeds good housekeepers care,
That though they would, yet few there are that dare.
Sickness the Herault of arms, hearts, and all,
Frustrating all arrests, arrests my health,
Stopping my vital powers, and did fall
So violent, and with so sudden stealth,
As that it ceaz'd on all my spirits wealth:
Some thought it was a wind, and sooth they say,
It blew my breath, my life, and all away.
By this time, and it was more then high time now,
Another Knight was sent me from the King,
To whom (saluting me) I began a vow,
My innocence, till his words did ring
A peale of joys, never did Siren sing,
Nor Sayler hear such music on the seas,
Sweetly to sound, and rauishingly please.
The King said he, (thereat I lowly bent)
Commends him (then I reared my heart again)
Commands me, (how I muz'd at his intent)
Assure you that his Grace does still remain,
His royal self your loving sovereign:
And wills you by his beams your thoughts to clear,
Shrouded so long in clouds of heavy cheer.
Where blind reports have buzzed in his ears,
Some heinous crimes wherein you should offend,
Since no sound proof, no certainty appears,
He reckes them of no truth, nor to no end,
Which made him in his princely judgment send
To hear your trial, and not judge before,
He could command no less, you crave no more.
I thank't him for his kindness, and repli'de,
Did now the liuehood of my youth remain,
Had not my strength late with my honor di'de,
No opposite occasion could restrain
My journey post, but yet ere Phoebus waine
Have drawn him twice unto his western rest,
I hope to be in better health addressed.
Two Agonies at once, each in his kind,
Unite themselves, and so divided me,
The bodies grief, and passions of the mind,
Agreeing in strength, and striving in degree,
Work on their subject, leaving one to be
Patient of sickness, suppliant of moan,
And I, poor I, must be that odious one.
My Mitre with two tops deceived my head,
Within one top of Antichrists own crown,
In this I blessed am, in being dead
Before I wore that weight that casts men down,
The souls and bodies both be overthrown:
And were my Rotchet true religions stain,
Repenting tears now wash it white again.
Coming to Leicester, hard at their gate,
The Abbot with his Covent and their lights
Met me, (O then again I saw the state,
Not mine, but theirs, not theirs, but churches rights)
This was the last of all the holy nights:
When no pure Planet would this sadness see,
The very toarches dropped black tears for me.
The Abbot meeting me stood half amazed,
Doubting what title should befit me best:
Seeing him silent, when I had embraced,
Thus opned I the closure of my breast;
Father I come to take my latest rest:
Vouchsafe for this vile flesh some holy shrine,
Provide a place to lay these bones of mine.
Would God (said he) would God this body were
Thy spirits worthy keeper and so strong
As they are high, then might you ouerbeare
The strange attempts of such as have too long
Offered your Lordship, as you think, some wrong:
But noble Cardinal, what shall we do?
Sickness is grown a Politician too.
Indeed perchance (I said) it may prevent
Such courses as my calling ill befits,
I rather choose that death should make extent,
Then I consume my fi^ry spirit of wits,
For he that stands may fall, and he that sits
May feel unsettled ease, then let me die,
So in my grave securely shall I lie.
Thus in I went into their holy Cell,
Where new objections wandered in my mind,
Why could I not be once content to dwell,
In like mean sort, and to like orders bind
My life? why was I not so well inclined?
A quiet roof seemed then too mean for me,
I sold my self to purchase high degree.
Monks, let your charitable tapers burn,
That I may see my self with outward light;
Fie, outward lamps will never serve my turn,
And of my self within I have no sight,
When it is day abroad, in me it is night:
Black smoke arises from my very name,
I want the oil that should maintain the flame.
Then gentle Kingstone thinking to appease
And mitigate the troubles of my mind,
Mistook the nature of my great disease;
Doubt not, said he, the Prince is well inclined,
And his good will your Lordship soon shall find:
He wishes your long life; Ah but said I,
The Prince of heaven determines I shall die.
And had the duty to my God bin such,
As it was faithful serving to the King,
Then had my conscience free from fear or touch,
Mounted aloft on Cherubins swift wing,
In holy consort borne a Part to sing:
That now with heavy weight is ouerspread,
And with my body wishes to be dead.
But now my Soul, how wandrest thou abroad
Through Labyrinths inextricable ways?
Oh find some ready passage to thy God!
And age, forget the course of younger days,
Forget the pomp and peoples flattering praise:
And Death (if thou regard a man's request)
Set free my spirit that feign would be at rest.
Why some are gone already, look about,
Did no man meet part of my soul before?
I had but three, one and an half are out;
Nay had I more then one? I had no more,
God save the substance of that little store:
I hope one goes to heaven, why then it is well,
Philosophy, and both the rest to hell.
I Will vegetate no longer, perish Sense,
Aspire sweet Reason, and by faith, ascend,
Fly to the perfect pure Intelligence,
Humble Repentance, teach me how to bend
My careful passage to that joyful end:
What is it a clock? as soon as eight has struck,
My soul this earthly body has forsook.
My Lord, (said one) the clock shall never strike,
No but the hour will come, and that is all one;
But Sir, these prophecies prove seldom like:
Yes at the hour of death, else few or none,
Where earthly clouds are half removed and gone,
The soul at separation mends her view,
With purer insight she discernes what is true.
Is not that Wainflet that is come for me,
Great Founder of the sinful woman's towers,
With Wickams ghost, fathers of like degree?
Come they of late from Gods celestial bowres?
I Will go with them, O if the precious showers
Of that unspotted Lamb with drops of blood,
Have washed you clean, let me enjoy like good.
When shall my toombe at Windsor be prepared,
That wants a tenant now expecting me?
It is a monument of good regard,
Befitting well a man of best degree,
O that I now lay buried under thee;
And by my side closde up in dustie vales,
All voices, Echoes, talks, reports, and tales.
I want my Balm to be perfumed withal,
My coffin is too close a lodge for me,
Fie, fie, address me to my funeral,
My mother Earth mine only wife shall be,
And yet no incest, sithence only she
Bears al her sons and daughters in one womb,
She Europes, Amerikes, Affrickes, Asiaes toombe.
Those worldlings that wont Nature to accuse,
For giving Ravens longer lives then men,
Let them the joy of their opinion use,
And rauing live content in earthly den,
Let age lend them the spectacles to kenne:
This body is a jail, our soul enlarged,
And when we die, our debtes are al discharged.
So if I rest indebted to my Lord,
Then let him take my body, soul, and all,
Feign would I see him of mine own accord,
Or hear that warrant that should quickly call
Me to appear at sizes general:
Mean while within this Porters lodge to stay,
But till I shall desire to break away.
Twixt this and then I will devise a word,
That ten times ten sound worse than Guilty may;
My Conscience shall witnesses afford,
As many as are minutes in a day,
I charge it not dissemble any way.
If for my traill they demand my will,
My Country has and does condemn me still.
Whither? to Lions den? Daniel came thence;
I am not worthy to succeed his place:
O'r to the Wolves? there lies my best defense,
For I was ravenous in the time of Grace,
To spoil the forest, and the plants deface:
The chosen sheep will to the Shepherd say,
I was the sheep that ever went astray.
Yet I that durst offend, dare hope for grace
Beyond all reason, contrary to sense,
Salvation heavy sinners may embrace,
If God remit the guilt of deep offense;
Let all the world hang in their own suspense,
The world is but a point, whereon men dwell,
And I am at a point what they can tell.
If any bills of new indictment come,
At the Kings bench in heaven I must appear,
Long since arrested, now expect my doom;
Sue where you list, but I must answer there,
Die and accuse me in that hemisphere;
No'r flesh, nor blood my Declaration tells,
Mine own accuser in my bosom dwelles.
In whose great Temple richly beautified,
Pau'd al with Stars dispersed on Saphyre flower,
The Clarke is a pure Angel sanctified,
The Judge our true Messiah full of power,
The Apostles his Assistants every hour,
The Jury Saints, the Uerdict Innocent,
The sentence, Come ye blessed to my tent.
The spear that pearc'd his side, the writing Pen,
Christ's blood the Incke, red incke for princes name,
The vailes great breach, the miracle for men,
The sight is show of them that long dead came
From their old graves, restored to living frame,
And that last signet passing all the rest,
Our souls discharged by Consummatum est.
Here endless joy is their perpetual cheer,
Their exercise sweet songs of many parts,
Angels the quire, whose Symphonie to hear,
Is able to provoke conceiving hearts,
To misconceiue of al enticing Arts:
The Dittie praise, the subject is the Lord,
That tunes their gladsome spirit to this accord.
Stay then till some good Meteor appear,
Or let the Sun exhale me vapor-wise,
Stir Charles-wayne, and see the coast be clear,
Let no congealed clouds or mistes arise
Along the moving circle of the skies;
Or rather shut up all in darksome night,
That none may see my silent secret flight.
FINIS.
REader: the Decorum is kept even in these Errata: there is no reason that a
Book should be without faults, when the person of whom the book entreats
had so many in his life. But the Author could have wished, that Wolsey had
corrected his errors while he lived, on that condition, that himself had
committed none in the description of his life. If the reader find any more then
are here set down, let him remember that it is a matter inevitable, unless
Nature had either placed our eyes behind us, or the wallet of faults before us.

A 4 side 2 line 14 dele now. C 2 line 6 for When read Where. Ibid, line 7 for
Where read Nor. E 3 side 1 line 6 The man that. Ibid. line 9 for rupulse read
repulse. F the last page line 21 read immortal days. K 2 side 2 line 6
trial.

I. S.


