XI. CHOICE SERMONS, PREACHED UPON Selected Occasions, in Cambridge. VIZ.

I. The Preachers Dignity, and Duty: In five Sermons, upon 2. Corinthians. 5. 20.
II. CHRIST Crucified, the Tree of Life: In six Sermons, on 1. Corinthians. 2. 2.
BY JOHN STOUGHTON, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Fellow of Immanuel College
in Cambridge, late Preacher of Aldermanburie, LONDON.

According to the Original Copy, which was left perfected by the Author
before his death.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for John Bellamie, Henry Overton, John Rothwell, and
Ralph Smith. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY, EARL OF HOLLAND, Baron of Kensington,
Captain of His Majesty's Guard, one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber,
Chancellor of the Universitie of Cambridge, Knight of the Most Noble Order of
the Garter, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
The Widow of the deceased Author, in testimony of her humble and
thankful acknowledgement of his noble favor and respect, showed to her
dearest Husband in his life time, presents these ensuing Sermons, which are
now, according to the trust reposed in him, published by A. B.

To the Reader.
BE pleased to take notice, that here is presented to public view, the true
legitimate birth of the Author, whose name it bears. He left several Sermons
under his own hand, preached at special times, and in Auditories of greatest
worth and estimation, the chief of which are now made public, in these
ensuing Sermons: other of his Sermons were only taken from his mouth, in the
publishing of which, the best care is and shall be taken, to publish them by,
and compare them with the exactest copies that can be gotten. In both you have
the Authors mind, as near as can be, expressed, in his own words, without
adding or detracting. In the latter, you shall find the heads of the Sermons
(which were all that were last perfected by the Author) in a methodicall
Analysis prefixed before them: they were his own, both for form and words;
only what he wrote in Latin, is translated into English, for the benefit of
all, and the Latin you shall have inserted in the margin, in his own words,
answerable to the several particulars treated on in the Sermons: you may see a
proof of it in the Sermon upon 1 Samuel 2. 30. if it had been sooner thought on,
you should have found the like in all, you may expect it in the rest, except in
some few, which are already in the Press, or prepared for it. This shall be
the token in every Sermon, by which the true birth shall be distinguished from
such counterfeits, as might otherwise be fathered upon him. Be entreated to
pardon the slips of the pen in writing, and of the Press in printing, and then
I hope you shall not find any material imperfections: so I commend these
labors, together with thy self, to the blessing of God.

A. B.

FIVE SERMONS, ON II COR. V. XX. Preached at Cambridge, BY JOHN STOUGHTON,
Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Fellow of Immanuel College in Cambridge, late
of Aldermanbury, London.

Perfected by the Author in his life time.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. We beseech you brethren, to know them which labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord.

Quanto sublimitas notior, tanto humilitas pretiosior.

Bern. in Epist. Dom. 2. Sermon. LONDON, Printed by R. B. for John Bellamie, and
Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at their Shop, at the three golden Lions in
Cornehill, near the Royal Exchange. 1640.

2 CORINTHIANS. 5. 20.
1. The Connection and Coherence of the words. 1. The occasion of them. 1.
Imputations cast upon the Apostles. 1. Person, by reason of his meannesse. 2.
Calling, by reason of his afflictions.
2. Removed and taken away: 4. Chap. 7. verse. where he does plead for, 1. The
excellency of his Function. 2. The necessity of his work: though afflictions
do attend him: for, 1. Hope of reward iuticeth him, verse. 13. of the 4.
Chapter, and 10 of the 5. Chapter. 2. Fear of Punishment incites him, verse.
10. 11. 3. Love of Christ constraines him.


2. Text it self.
2. The parts of the Text, 1. Institution of an Office. 2. Execution of it.
3. Explication of the words. 1. Subject, we: 3. degrees of latitude, as it
respects, 1. Himself. 2. All his fellow Apostles. 3. All his fellow Laborers.
1. As it respects himself, he speaks in the plural number, where is, 1. The
Language of humility. 2. A Mystery of wisdom.
2. As it respects all Apostles: who do, 1. Agree in substance of commission,
with Ministers.
2. Differ in circumstance of execution, with Ministers.
They differ in two things 1. Their Mission was more Authentical. 2. Their
Motion more observable.

2. Ambassadors. 1. Comparison holds between Ministers and Ambassadors, in
three things. 1. They are both messengers. 2. Both from Princes. 3. Both about
matters of mutual behoof.
2. The disagreement is in three things, 1. Ambassadors are sent, because
Princes themselves cannot be present. 2. Ambassadors are to Princes only, or
free States. 3. Ambassadors are set forth with some beseeming port and Pomp.
3. As it respects all his Fellow Laborers.
3. For Christ: who may be conceived, 1. As the Author. 2. The end of this
Embassage. 3. Object, of these Ambassadors.

4. Doctrine: Ministers are Gods Ambassadors. 1. Explication. 1. The necessity,
that God should send his Ambassadors to us. 1. On man's part, miserable
extremity. 2. On Gods part, most feeling and free compassion.
2. The conveniencie, that men and mean men should be sent, not Angels, in
three Reasons.
1. From the nature of the thing. 1. Men have more ordinary and visible
converse with men. 2. By this means man is drawn to God in such a manner, as
is suitable to his nature. 3. By this means the gifts of grace are conveyed,
as by a conduit-pipe, by the same nature.
2. It is most profitable for man. 1. It is a fruit of Christ's exaltation, and
a real pledge of Gods affection. 2. It is a most probable and likely way to
bring men to God* God deals. 1. More familiarly with us. 2. More credibly:
for, 1. Men are known unto us: 2. They cannot deceive others, but they must
also deceive their own soul. 3. They confirm their own words with their
works. 4. They sometimes set a seal of suffering to their doctrine.
3. More effectually.
3. It is the strongest bond of love between Christians.
3. Gods gains most glory this way. 1. He magnifies his own Power in this. 2.
Makes trial of the obedience of his children.

2. Proof: by demonstrations taken from the nature of the doctrine. 1. The
antiquity of their doctrine. 2. Excellency of their Embassage. 1. Subject of
their Doctrine. 2. Project of their Doctrine.
1. Subject they teach. 1. Plainly of the incomprehensible distinction of the
Trinity, etc. 2. Truly of man's blessed integrity, and cursed Apostacy. 3.
Clearly of a strange marriage, the Divine nature with the humane, etc. 4.
Sweetly of humiliation by the Law, of vocation by the Gospel, etc.
2. The project of their Doctrine: the salvation of man, which is, 1. The most
noble and necessary work. 2. Most beseeming the greatness, goodness, and wisdom
of God. 3. Most distant from the reach of reason.

3. Efficacy of their Ministry: showed, 1. In general. 2. In particular, 1.
Exten sively. 2. Intensively, it works.
1. In the heart. 2. A strange work in the heart, both those in regard* 1. Of
the act it self. 2. Of the manner of working. 1. Without any help, ex part
subjecti. 2. Without any help, ex part medii: or thus,
1. They work upon the heart: which is, 1. The most free. 2. The most hard of
any thing to work upon.
2. They work upon the heart in a special and strange manner: consider, 1. Act
it self: it is, 1. A Resurrection. 2. A Generation. 3. A New creature.
2. Effect, 3. Terms between which this mutation runs.
3. The heart conferres nothing to this work, not so much as a natural
receptivitie. 4. All this is done with weak means. 1. Not with inticeing
words of eloquence. 2. But with humility, simplicity, and plainness of speech.
Extensively, the efficacy of it, 1. Extends to all Nations. 2. In despite of
all opposition.

3. Application. 1. In respect of those that enter into the Ministry. 1. To
those that are in authority: they must keep out such as are defective. 1. In
sound understanding. 2. Insyncere affection. 3. In unblameable conversation.
2. To those that have children to bring up, and do dedicate them to Gods
service, let them not be the gift of, 1. Some infirmity: or, 2. Deformity.
3. To those that are entering into the ministry: they must bethink
themselves of all. 1. Helps. 2. Ornaments that may 1. Grace. 2. Expedite their
function.
1. A rich invention. 2. A solid judgment. 3. A faithful memory. 4. The
skill of Arts and Tongues.
4. To those that are too forward in this kind:
2. In respect of those that are already in the Ministry. 1. For instruction.
1. For their life, it must be, 1. Holy. 2. Exemplary: else they,
1. Dishonor 1. The Country, from whence they come. 2. The Person, from whom
they come.
2. Dishearten the people in their way.
2. For their Doctrine: the title of Ambassadors commends many things unto
them. 1. Fidelity: they must not go beyond their Commission. 2. Humility. 3.
Diligence: enforced from, 1. The nature of their Service. 2. The authority of
their Master. 3. The necessity of their Errand. 4. The Reward of their service.
5. The Punishment of their neglect.
4. Courage and resolution, against 1. Fear. 2. Flattery.
1. Fear of reproaches, nicknames. 2. Fear of the frowns of men. 3. Fear
of the greatest sufferings: fear, how of these for 1. If we perish, we
flourish. 2. Cowardice is cruelty.

2. To those that are eminent in the Church, they must consider, 1. That no
dignity can make them so truly honorable, as the preaching of the Gospel. 2.
The frequencie of this duty is no disparagement to their greatness.
3. To the people. 1. Offer no discourtesie to those Ambassadors, for, 1. God
gives charge they should be inviolable. 2 It will pull all Gods judgments upon
us.
2. Receive them as the Angels of God: give, 1. Attention, 2. Credit, 3.
Obedience to their words.
1. When we go to Gods house, say, I go to hear what Gods Ambassadors will say
unto me. 2. When we return with benefit, say, Blessed be thou, and Blessed be
thy counsel, and Blessed be the Lord, that sent thee to meet me this day.






2. Corinthians. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.
I Purposed to have entered into these words abruptly; but the first words which
stand as it were in the porch, being particles of special inference from the
former, and therefore of necessary reference to them, tell me that I must
borrow light at the next door, that I may walk inoffensively. To give a touch
then of the coherence. You may take notice of it, either as they depend upon
the next verses immediately going before, or as they stand in the whole
building, and are as it were woven into the whole frame of the Apostles
discourse. The connection with the precedent verses is very easy and
perspicuous: you may areed the meaning, if you will but read the words, And all
things are of God, etc. these are the words out of which you may easily draw,
and (with a little turning of the wheel of your understanding) as it were spin
the words that I have read, thus: We have a commission to preach the word of
reconciliation, that is the good will of God, for reconciling man to himself
by the blood of Jesus Christ: We have such a commission from God: Ergo, we are
Ambassadors for Christ. But there is something more difficulty to observe how
these make to the general end and scope of the Apostle: give me leave to go
back a little, and take the advantage of a run, that I may the better open the
meaning of these words. The faithful Apostle (as it is the condition of all
that will be faithful) met with many rubs and much opposition at Corinth,
especially from the College of proud Pharisees and learned Rabbis among them:
among other things, his afflictions were laid in his dish, and that scandal of
the meandness of his person, was interpreted as a real prejudice against the
truth of his profession. You will say, a brutish collection, and against a
common rule of humanity; and yet, to say truth, it is the common opinion of
carnal men; they judge of Religion by these outward impertinencies, rather
than appurtenances, they cannot fancy the truth, because of the ragged garment
that she wears. As on the contrary, the tyrant boasted that the Gods approved
of his sacrilege, because he sailed home with a fair gale of wind: Foelix
scelus virtus vocatur, Mischief happy in the success is called virtue: and
with the Papists, the ostentation of the prosperity of their estate, is the
best demonstration of the sincerity of their religion: belike they have clipped
the wings of prosperity (as the Athenians did the wings of victory) that she
cannot fly away from their Church: so in this, Jobs friends reason thus,
surely thou art an hypocrite, or else thou had never come to this: And the
Barbarians in the Acts conclude thus in their country barbarous Mood and
Figure, when they saw a viper upon Paul's hand, Acts 28. 4.
surely that man is a malefactor, justice pursues him, and that vermin, as an
officer of justice, has arrested him. So do they of Corinth, according to
their barbarous divinity, seeing Paul's misery, as they conceived it, call his
ministry into question: But the Apostle wipes away both these imputations, the
one cast upon his person, the other on his calling, with one answer, and stops
two gaps with one bush, look 4. Chap. 7. Verse. But we have this treasure in
earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us.
As if he should have said, our profession is honorable, though our person be
contemptible; our Ministry is a treasure, though we Ministers be but earthen
vessels; and these very earthen vessels, though they have but a base matter,
yet they have a blessed end: for they proclaim to all the world, that the
excellency of the power is of God, and not of us. Is it thus, might some man
say, and is there nothing then that comes to your share? have you nothing but
your labor for your pains? is there nothing to be gotten by the Gospel but
blows and persecution? Why then you may take all the gains, and put them in
your eye (as we use to speak) and see never a whit the worse, and then weep
them out again. But I wonder what makes you so faithful in such a fruitless
thing? why are you so hot for that which yields such cold recompense? The
Apostle, besides the excellency of his function, alleges three reasons why
afflictions did not daunt him, and dash him out of countenance, but he held on
his course and diligence in publishing the Gospel: I will but point them out
and pass them over.

1. From the hope of a blessed reward in heaven, from the 13. Verse of the 4.
Chapter to the 10. of this 5.

2. From the fear of just punishment, and a curse, if he should have done the
work of the Lord negligently, in the 10. and 11. Verse of this Chapter, For we
must all appear, etc. and though here were weight enough to set the most rusty
wheels a going: yet because these two may work in base minds, and are in
themselves but sinister ends, which many that seem to go straight, may look a
squint upon: fear in the foreward, and reward and hope in the rereward
marshall all his forces, and love in the maine battle, or rather, tota in toto
and tota in qualibet part, animates every one to valor and victory;
punishment is servile, and hope of reward mercenary. He adds a third motive,
which is the peculiar character of a Christian mind, and that is love, in the
14 verse. of this Chap. For the love of Christ constrains us, this is that
which winds up his affections to that intention of zeal and fervencie. And I
pray mark the words. Reward has an attractive, and punishment an impulsive,
but love has a compulsive faculty. Reward draws him, punishment drives him,
but love hales him forward, to the discharge of his duty: Hope like a tender
Mother entices him with a reward, fear like a severe Master incites him with
punishment, but love like a Sovereign Lord commands him. Hope hales before
him, and fear blows behind him, and both on each side row him, but love
within him like the very soul of obedience teaches him a natural motion.
Behold again a strange agreement, force and freedom, violent and voluntary,
necessity and liberty met together, and married; and which is more, the most
pure liberty with the most powerful necessity, For the love of Christ
constrains us, the sweetest natured affection. Love is grown a tyrant and
will needs force and ravish the virgin, freedom of will; which hitherto has
been inviolate. Love constrains not by forcible but by loving necessity, as
Plato speaks. (...).
You see three goodly threads, which twisted all together have strength enough
to draw the most sleepy sluggard out of his bed of sloth, but you do not see
how they are fastened to Paul, you see three mighty engines, which are able to
moove him that were immovable, but you do not see in what point they touch our
Apostle, and yet that is the principal point: for if these generalities were
sufficient, why does not every Vzzah lay hands upon the Ark of God without any
check of justice? why does not every man that is not a stock or a Stoic,
that has any hope or fear or love, become a Preacher, a publisher of the
Gospel? Yes I will tell you, Paul was an Apostle, he had a calling which
authorized him, to do what he did, and therefore all these wrought upon him,
and encouraged him to do it diligently. This is the handle on which they all
lay hold; Now we being Ambassadors for Christ, hope invites us, and fear
commands us, and love constraines us to strive for our victory, to see for our
safety, to condescend to your infirmity in the faithful execution of our
ministry, and therefore in all earnest, obedient, and humble manner, we pray
you be ye reconciled to God. I have made bold to crop these few tops of flowers
out of this Divine Garden which lies before my text, where I must dwell
something longer, and I mean to scruze the juice of them into my following
discourse. And therefore if you find that it shall taste of this coherence, you
see the ingreedients, you need not suspect the operation. The sum of the
words is the sum of the Word of God, they are a little Bible, an Enchiridion
of the whole volume, all the letters are compendiously abbreviated in these few
characters, all the particular words cast up into this total sum, all the
silver sayings reduced into this golden sentence, that it may be more portable.
We pray you be ye reconciled to God, for here is the knowledge of God; we pray
you be ye reconciled to God, here is the knowledge of man; we pray you be ye
reconciled to God, here is the knowledge of him that is both God and man; we
pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, here is the knowledge of
them that are sent from God to man, to bring man to God.

We pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. I shall not be curious
in laying out the parts, a popular argument will be content with a popular
distribution, I will but let the words fall into your ears and they will
break themselves into two parts. Now therefore we are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you be ye reconciled to God. You
see the words of their own accord fall into two parts. 1. Ye have the
Ambassadors, 2. The Embassage: The Ambassadors in the first words, We are
Ambassadors for Christ, The Embassage in the rest; and then the last words of
the first part [ for Christ] are as it were the corner stone, in which the two
buildings are coupled; the middle ring, in which the two extremes are joined;
the communis terminus, in which the two parts are continued; the joints upon
which they turn themselves, and clasp one with another: and perhaps I may
express the same thing in better terms, if I call the first the charge, the
second the discharge; the first, the institution of an Office; the second, the
execution of it: In the first, we have one Proposition consisting of a simple
antecedent, and a triple consequent; the antecedent We, we are Ambassadors for
Christ: the primary consequent is Ambassadors; We are Ambassadors, which is
attended with a double illustration, and so altogether make a treble
attribution, as I told you: First from the Object about which they are
employed, for Christ; We are Ambassadors for Christ: The second from the
Author, by whom they are employed, from God; We are Ambassadors for Christ from
God: indeed this is employed in the text, but must be supplied out of the
context, as you may see easily, and shall see shortly. This is the first part,
and the second is like unto it, as our Savior said of the Commandments: for
there we have one proposition likewise, which has a sensible proportion with
the former, but yet accompanied with some remarkable alterations: for, 1. It
consists of a triple antecedent, and a simple consequent clean contrary to it.
2. That which was the consequent before has shifted his place, and is now
become the antecedent, the whole being enriched with a new consequent, which
was not in the former. 3. The three parts of the consequent have had a remove,
that which was last, is commended and preferred to be first; and which was
first, is degraded and rejected to be last; only the middle, as the center, is
unmooved. And now thus it is; We are Ambassadors for Christ from God, there is
the antecedent, peeced out with the three parts of the former consequent: pray
you be ye reconciled to God, there is the consequent, but the order of the parts
are inverted: for they should run as I propounded them, but they are propounded
so, that they run clean backward in a (...).
retrograde motion, as the Artists speak: We as Ambassadors for Christ from
God, coming from God, as though God did beseech you by us, coming for Christ,
in Christ's stead, or in Christ's name: coming as Ambassadors or Orators, do
play the Orators, we pray you be ye reconciled to God. The last point of the
first, is the first of the last; and the last of the last, is the first of the
first, and so they close together much like the figure which the Rhetoricians
called (...).
a circular figure, and more like the year, of which the Poet, Atque in se sua
per vestigia vertitur annus.

So that ye have in these words two propositions, like two Semicircles, and we
is the Center upon which they both move; like two Hemisphears, and we is the
Horizon, which divides the superior from the inferior; both which together
make one solid Globe, and we is the Diameter, that cuts it into equal
portions, a Semicircle of being, and a Semicircle of operation; an Hemisphear
of office, and an Hemisphear of action: The first, We are Ambassadors for God,
The second, We as Ambassadors pray you to be reconciled to God. The contriving
of these rooms was so perplexed, that I am afraid my speech has not given
window enough to let in light enough to clear the passages: I am sure I am
glad that I have wound my self out of this intricate Labyrinth, though I were
to break the clue that guided me, and the thread of my discourse presently.

But now we have cut out the stuff, we must go about to make up the garment.
To begin with the first. As the Stars in the Firmament have a double virtue, of
illumination and influence, whereby they communicate themselves to the
inferior bodies: So has every text in holy writ, an illumination of truth
upon the understanding, and an influence of grace and goodness upon the will;
and therefore I will endeavor to show your apprehensions the light of truth in
the explication of the words, so that they may shed their influence of grace
upon your affections in their application. The first word that offers it self
to our confideration, is the subject we: which though it be so concrete with
that which follows in the original that it has lost it self, for there all
that sentence is wrapped up in one word (...); as the lesser Stars when they
have approached in too near a degree of propinquity to the Sun, as it were
conscious of their own presumption, they dare not be seen, or else they
forfeit their light to the Sun their sovereign, and are eclipsed. Yet a good
Logician, with his Prometheus fire, would sever these heterogeneals, and
resolve them into their pure and primitive natures, and then would appear a
pair of arguments, besides the yoke that holds them together, as our
translation renders it, We are Ambassadors. Well then, that first word (that we
may take the just measure of the meaning of it) must be considered in three
degrees of latitude. 1. It respects himself. 2. All his fellow Apostles. 3.
All his Fellow Laborers in the Lords harvest. The body of it moves within
himself, as in his proper and particular Sphere, the beams are cast abroad
upon all the Apostles in a direct and perpendicular line, the beauty and
luster diffuseth it self yet further in an unpartiall liberality to every
Minister of the Word; I, and they, and all, we are Ambassadors for Christ. 1.
Himself, I, who was an abortive birth, a stranger, a wolf, a persecutor, a
traitor, an enemy to the grace of God, in my best principles of nature; I am
become, by the rich mercy of God, a darling son, a Subject, a Shepherd, a
Preacher, a Favorite, an Ambassador of the grace of God in Jesus Christ: I am
an Ambassador. Thus the Apostle chewes as it were upon his office, as the
wounded Heart upon the famous Dictamum, and all the poisoned Arrows of reproach
and obloquy, drop off. Thus he shakes the Viper off his hand, which those
barbarous enemies thought to have been deadly* but the reason why he speaks
in the plural number, is because of humility partly, and partly of wisdom.
It is the language of humility, when a man is urged to a necessary (...).
selfe-praise, and forced by the importunity of others, to vindicate himself,
yet to qualify his speech as much as may be. So does the Apostle here
excellently, it seems good to him to distribute this honor to many, that he
may not seem to attribute too much to himself, and this plural number is a
phrase of singular humility, and thus the style of Princes runs (we will and
our pleasure) joining their Counsel or the whole State with themselves: For I
rather take that frequent anomalie for an intimation of modesty, then of
majesty, though I am not ignorant how others apprehend it. Again here is a
mystery of wisdom in this word. For as a Dear that is eagerly pursued will
immerse it self into the whole heard, that so she may suspend the violence of
the chase, by the ambiguity of the choice in such variety of game: So Paul
being singled out by calumny, does mingle himself with the whole fellowship of
Apostles. Or as one in danger of arresting will take sanctuary in some
privileged place: So Paul takes sanctuary at the College of Apostles. 2. This
word besides the particular appropriation which it has to Paul himself, must
needs be interpreted, according to the true propriety of the number, and
meaning; and so it extends it self. 1. To all the Apostles. 2. To all
Ministers of the Word, both of them are Ambassadors, for they agree in the
substance of their commission, though there be some difference in the
circumstance of the execution: the Apostolic office, indeed, carried a more
lively resemblance of an Embassage, then the ordinary Ministry, in two
regards. 1. They were authorized by Christ himself, and so received their
instructions immediately from his mouth, who is the King of the Church; and
accordingly were furnished with all sufficiencies, by the inspiration of his
Spirit; they bestowed not much time and travail to speak foreign languages,
(a thing necessary for Ambassadors) but as Esaie's tongue was touched by a
Seraphim with a cole from the Altar, so they had cloven and fiery tongues,
bestowed on them by the Spirit: beside that, they had the gift of miracles, as
it were the broad seal of Heaven, annexed to their letters of credit. But with
our Ministers it is not so, but they are brought up at the feet of Gamaliel,
and trained up in the Schools of the Prophets, and purchase their abilities
(as he in the Acts did his freedom) with a great sum of labor, and time,
and cost: and then the Church the Spouse of Christ, since her Lords departure,
as a Matron, wears the keys of authority at her girdle, opens to them a door
of utterance and admits them to the service of the Altar. As they had a more
authentical mission, so they had a motion more observable, which adds as it
were life and spirit to the image, and picture of Ambassadors. They were
dispatched into all coasts and corners of the world; but ours are fastened to
some one place, like pillars of residence; but notwithstanding these petty
differences, seeing they have the same sphere of activity, in which they moove,
to reconcile men to God, and the same Sun of authority, by which they moove,
the power of the Church, being the power of Christ derived to her, (as we call
them the Kings officers, who are created not immediately by his Majesty, but
in virtue of his power and in subordination to his Royal prerogative) And
lastly, seeing the similitude may be preserved entire in both, though this
variety be confessed: there being a difference in the type Ambassadors, much
like that in the antitype of Ministers; so that either may answer the pattern:
And our ordinary Ministers suit with agents or leiger Ambassadors, as the
Apostles came nearer to extraordinary. In all these respects they also being
included, the whole extent of this word We has three degrees: 1. Himself, 2.
All his fellow Apostles, 3. All his fellow laborers in the Lords harvest. I
have made some haste, but the time I fear has over run me much, and
therefore for that which is behind of the explication, I will lay down but the
rude lineaments, and proportion, and leave the perfect colors and complexion
to another time. The second word ( Ambassadors) is a speech borrowed from
Princes Courts, and applied to Christ his Church, by a decent analogy.
Ambassadors are messengers from one Prince or State to another, about such
affairs as concern both. You may observe three moments of being, in this rude
description; and accordingly draw out three parallel lines, in which, the
terms of comparison do run along one by another in a sweet proportion. 1.
They are both Messengers. 2. They are both from Princes. 3. They are both about
matters of mutual behoof.

But, because you know a similitude is a tender thing, and must be gently
handled, you must not squeize it too much, and stretch it too far, lest you
break the harmony and analogy, the Music and Logic of the parts; I shall
pray you to carry along with you three maine discords in which they jarre,
least promising your selves an harmony, (...), in every note and point; you be
offended too much with every harshnesse and inequality. 1. Ambassadors are
therefore sent from Princes, because them selves cannot be present every where:
but the Lord of these Ambassadors, as he is in no predicament of time, because
he inhabiteth eternity; so he is in no vbi, but ubiquity. 2. Ambassadors are
directed to Princes only, or free Estates, and that from some Peer, who can
neither claim subjection of them, nor superiority over them to whom he sends.
But these are sent to subjects, to vassalls, to rebels; from him, to whom all
owe an oath of allegiance; to whose supremacy, the highest must subscribe; to
whose soveraigntie, all the sons of the mighty are obnoxious in a political,
natural, essential order of dependence. 3. Ambassadors are set forth with
some beseeming port and pomp, that they may sustain the person of majesty,
and support the majesty of the person, whom they represent. But with these it
is nothing so, the Chariots of their glory, are the shame of their Lords house,
who, to speak with reverence, is like some rich Gentleman in the Country, who
in a bravery, scorns to be brave. The third word of the Text remains, [ for
Christ] which may bear a threefold construction: wherein Christ may be
conceived, either, as the author, or the end, the Alpha and Omega of this
Embassage, or thirdly, the object of these Ambassadors, the center, and
circumference of their employment. But I promised but a delineation of these
things: only give me leave to close up all, with one observation out of the
words: I noted before that this sentence [ We are Ambassadors] is closer
trussed up in the Original, into one word (...), a word of a precious
emphasis, which is much abated, and very dilute, almost lost in the
translation; for that word of action, signifying the office, may tell us so
much in our ears, that those officers must be men of action, they must be of a
nimble and active constitution. The men of the earth may be of a more dull and
sad temper, they may fold their arms, they may stretch themselves upon their
beds of Ivory, and turn themselves upon them, as the door turns upon the
hinges: But these Messengers of Heaven, must be like Heaven in perpetual
motion: They may well fall to a motus trepidationis, if they but once forget
their daily progress. They that preach Christ the Son of righteousness,
must be like the Sun, who comes forth of his chamber, like a bridegroom,
and rejoices to run his race, as a mighty man; and yet when they have done
all, there will be many sons of darkness, that will live in a night of
security, and sleep and snort in sin: there will be many cold professors,
that are frozen to their lusts, and will not be thawed by that Divine Lamp, and
melted into the tears of true repentance. And therefore this translation, We
are Ambassadors, nimis lentum est: We ergo Ambassadors, hoc quoque est nimis
lentum. These Ministers must fly, like the Cherubims that give attendance in
the presence of God, they must have six wings for expedition, in the
execution of his will: they have wings upon their feet, a strange thing, wings
upon their feet; no they cannot foot it fast enough, but they must speed their
race with flight, remis velisque, the book they carry, is such as the Prophet
saw, a flying book; and Christ himself in their ministry, sits between
the Cherubims, and rides upon the wings of the wind, and so communicates
himself to all Nations.

2. Corinthians. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.
YOU may remember, that I proceeded thus far the last time, to lay down the
coherence of these words, with the former, and to lay open the particulars in
them contained. The first point of Doctrine, that we started then, was, That
Ministers of the Word, are Gods Ambassadors. I touched lightly both the
circumstantiall differences, which might be objected; and the substantial
agreement, which must be observed, as it was intended, in this metaphorical
speech; and there we coupled up. And though I determined then, to have gone
overthem more fully, yet because I foresee many things to be delivered, I will
rather pass them over; contenting my self, with that which has been spoken,
and descend to the confirmation of the truth propounded. But there is one thing
crosses the way, and comes between me and my purpose: For, perhaps there are
some here, who considering the name and nature of this exercise, will demand,
or rather, command and challenge the resolution of a question, before I go any
farther. For what necessity can be imagined, that God should send his
Ambassadors to us; or, if that be supposed, what convenience may be conceived,
that men, and mean men should be employed in so honorable a service? To the
first part of the question, I shall shape an answer briefly. Look as some
royal King, when his natural subjects, have unnaturally rebelled, and taken
up arms against him; (like the churlish Israelites, We have no portion in
David, no inheritance in the son of Ishai, every man to his tents O Israel.)
that he may curb their insolency, with the bridle of Sovereign authority; is
ready to send forth a decree of wrath, by the hand of the messengers of death:
But the young Prince, out of his special grace and princely compassion,
stepping between them and the blow, and interceeding for them, is entreated to
reverse the sentence, and dispatch a Proclamation of pardon, to all such of
them as within the prefixed period shall return to their obedience: So we
having committed high treason, against the most High, in most ungracious
manner, and lifted up the hand against our Maker (like the proud tyrant that
belched forththis, Who is God, that we should obey him? or who is the Lord,
that we should serve him?) whose hands had but even then fashioned us; and the
decree of death being gone forth against us, Thou shall dye the death; Christ
Jesus the eternal Son of God, the Prince of peace, has interposed himself
for us, and latched the blow (that would have sunk us to Hell) upon his own
body, which he gave for us on the Cross; that so reconciliation being made in
his blood, the Father might be well pleased in him, to speak peace unto us,
and proclaim a free pardon to all that should believe, by the silver Trumpet
of the Gospel: Return, return, for why will ye die o house of Israel? This
is the necessity: wherein you may observe on man's part, no meritorious
excellencies, but miserable extremity: On Gods part, no forcible compulsion,
but a most feeling and free compassion, that caused him to visit us, with
these comfortable messengers. And this I might exemplify in all, if I would
run through all kind of Ambassages. As, some are to moove, and make marriages:
So is this, to espouse the Soul to a noble Bridegroom, even Jesus Christ.
Some are for commerce and traffic; and so is this: that we might have a secure
and sweet intercourse with the Lord, as once we had, before the league was
broken in Paradise, in integrity: that the Lord might transport us to that
aureum vellus, the robe of Christ's righteousness, who was the Lambstain from
the beginning of the world; that Pearl of price, that rich Margarite, the
Kingdom of Heaven; and might receive again of us, by way of exchange, (a
poor exchange, but very precious in his sight) our humble and thankful
obedience. But which way soever you please to pattern the materials of the
similitude, you shall find no other motive but what I said before, Gods
incomparable mercy, beholding with a tender and compassionate eye, man's
irrecoverable misery. This may suffice for a taste of a farther answer, to the
first point in the question, concerning the necessity why God sends
Ambassadors; for I should but anticipate my following discourse, if I should
labor to give the full satisfaction. The second point comes now to be
considered. For if there must needs be Ambassadors, why are not some of those
glorious Cherubims, and Seraphims, that shine with knowledge, and burn with
zeal, that cry, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath; that like courtiers of
the King of Heaven, attend upon his Royal person, and behold the face of their
heavenly Father, continually ready to execute his will and pleasure; why are
not some of these preferred to this honor? I am sure such a liturgy, might
well beseem the highest Hierarchy; such a message, the tongue of Angels; such
supernatural truths, such Angelical and Seraphicall Doctors. And who more fit
to dispense the Word of God, the heavenly Mannah, the food of Angels, then the
sons of God, then Angels? Who can tell me the mystery of this strange
proceeding, that they should be neglected, and man exalted to this dignity? May
not every one presume to refuse this office without presumption, and disobey
such a command, without disobedience; or will not such presumption, be counted
humility; and such disobedience, modesty? As Moses when he should have gone in
Gods errand, What am I, that I should go to Pharaoh, or deliver the children
of Israel out of Egypt? Exodus 3. 11. 12.
though the Lord removed the scruple, when he answered, I am with thee; as if
he should have said, count not only the multitude of enemies, and the
likelyhoods of opposition, as Antigonus his Admiral did, when he told him,
that the enemies number far exceeded his; but how many do ye set me against,
said the King? but look about you and see who is with you, Behold I am with
thee, Cap. ^ 10.
yet Moses was not satisfied, but replied the second time, O my Lord I am not
eloquent, nor ever was, but a man of a heavy mouth and a slow tongue, the Lord
satisfies him again, but he is not satisfied; for after he had bid him
consider, who gives the tongue to man? or, who makes the dumb and deaf, as it
not I the Lord? As if he should have said, it is the grace of God, by which we
are that which we are, and I am able to do all things by the grace of God,
which enableth me: And we may say of grace in this kind, as the Poet does, O
mutis quoque piscibus
Donatur a Cygni, si libeat, sonum.
Totum muneris hoc tui est,
Quod spiro, and placeo, si placeo tuum est.


Yet Moses could not rest but he leaves objecting, Verse. 13.
and falls entreating; O my Lord, I pray thee send by the hand of him, whom thou
should send. And who is so highly privileged above Moses, that might not
shrink as Moses did, when he should consider with himself the weightinesse of
the work, and the weakness of his own person, 2 Cor. 2. 16.
and say as Paul did, who is sufficient for these things? But it is time to
frame an answer: Though neither our shallow capacity can sound the depth of
Gods counsels, nor he be bound to render a reason of his proceedings, yet he
gives us both liberty to enquire with sobriety, and light to find out so much
that we may go away with reasonable satisfaction. And therefore I pray observe
with me three principal Reasons, why the Lord who wants neither wisdom, or
power, to contrive it otherwise, either by immediate irradiation, upon the
understanding, and influence into the will, or by the ministry of the blessed
Angels, yet thought good rather to make use of the help of man, for the
bringing of man to himself, and working that mighty work of conversion, which
our Divines have thought, and taught not without some probability of reason,
to be greater than the great work of the first creation. The first, I take to
be from the nature of the thing, wherewith this order stands in greater
congruity diverse ways: For first of all, supposing things in statu quo, that
God will have men descend by natural propagation, and divide themselves into
political societies; of which, and out of which, he will call some to grace,
which shall come by degrees, not powered in all at once, but dropped in, by
little and little, here a line, and there a line. It sures not with the nature
of Angels, to have such ordinary, and visible commerce with men, as is
necessary to accomplish this: for men in this case, must be always feeding, as
children use, and must have continual hand and tending: well indeed they may
be dry nurses, to watch, and preserve, and protect the children of God; but to
be fathers to beget them by the immortal seed of the Word, to be wet nurses,
to succle them with the sincere pure milk of the Word, they cannot be. So
that, unless we would imagine the whole face of nature changed, and all
molded into a new frame, this piece would not hold proportion with the rest.
Nay, it were a thing irregular, and a kind of violence to the Angelical
nature, to converse with men in this kind, whereas we all know, nullum
violentum est perpetuum, there be few Analogies, but there be none Anomalies
that are perpetual: Indeed the Lord uses them for the good of man many times,
but their part is not to be always on the Stage. 2. By this means, man is
drawn to God in such a manner, as is most convenient for his nature, not only
in regard of his composition (for by preaching of the Word, his sensible part
is wrought upon, and affected) but also in regard of his freedom, for as in
the free motions of nature, there is (that I may use a distinction something
nice for the terms, but necessary for the thing) I say, a cooperation, without
any coaction: so in the first motion of grace, though the Lord work with a
certain infallibility, and as I may say, a sweet necessity, yet he does not
offer violence to any principle of nature, which has some evidence, ever from
this, that God* works it by man; so that if you look to both the causes, the
principal, and isntrumental, you may say it is the work of God, therefore
there is no possibility of resistance; it is the work of man, therefore there
is no show nor shadows of violence: and these two must go together, for as
the King in Plutarch said of a groat, (...).
it is no kingly gift; and of a talent, (...).
it is no base bribe: So may we say in this case, to work with danger of
failing, agrees not with the power of God, whose will is not will, if not
omnipotent, except it can work what it will. Again, to work by way of
forcing, agrees not with the nature of man, whose will is not will, except it
will what it works. I should enterpret my self more fully, for fear of
unkind constructions, but that I must make haste. 3. There is a decency, that
seeing the Son of God became the son of man, that the sons of men might
become the sons of God; and we having all received of his fullness grace for
grace, his gifts of grace should be conveyed as by a conduit pipe by the same
nature: and therefore the Apostle, painting forth unto us that goodly body of
the Church, of which, Christ is the head, makes Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors,
all men, etc. the organicall parts of that body, which receive sense, and
motion, and direction from the head: and for this purpose, he is (as the head)
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, that is, in greater
measure, and above, that from him it may distill by the higher to the lowest
members. Now the Angels are not univocall members with us, under the same head,
though for the efficacy of Christ's merit, whether it may any way redound to
those blessed Spirits, I will neither peremptorily deny, nor dispute for the
present: and therefore it is more meet, the Word should be committed to men
than Angels, or any other creatures. The second principal reason may be this,
because it is most profitable for man, that men should be Gods Ambassadors, and
that in three respects. 1. Because this honor is both a fruit of Christ's
exaltation, Who ascended on high and led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men; and those gifts, are the ministerial gifts, as you may see in the
place: and besides it is a real pledge of Gods (...).
affection to man, not only to the persons so dignified, but also in them to
all mankind, even as great offices in the Court bestowed on any, are
ordinarily arguments of great grace with the King. 2. Because it is a most
probable and likely way to bring men to God, for many reasons, which I will but
propound, and so proceed. 1. In that God deals familiarly with us, which is a
wondrous art to win affection. You know the Fable of the Theban Dame, that was
misperswaded to entreat lupiter to company with her in all his majesty, to
which when he condescended, she was so far from taking that pleasure she
promised her self from her goodly Bridegroom, that she lost her life: So
could not our feeble spirits brook the presence of the Divine glory, if he
should vouchsafe to come unto us in all his Royalty. I will not tell you any
Poetical Fable, but the truth of God. The Israelites tried this, for when the
Lord appeared to them in Mount Sinai with thunder and lightning, they presently
found their own weakness, and made suit to Moses, Let not the Lord speak
unto us, Exodus 20 18, 19
lest we die, but speak thou unto us, and we will hear thee. And therefore
Job wishes that God would lay aside his terror, and reason with him
familiarly, to which when the Lord graciously condescended, what was the issue?
instead of his former disputation, he grew to this conclusion, Job. 42. 6.
Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
I abhor my self in dust and ashes. And God promises this as a blessing, I
will raise you up a Prophet from among your brethren, he shall teach you. And
therefore the Lord stooping to our capacity, gives us so as we may receive,
and speaks to us men by the mouth of men, as the most proportionable
instrument to work upon us. Not much unlike Astyanax, in the Poet, who when
his father being armed came to embrace him, (...).
the child forthwith hid his face in his nurses bosom, cried, and being afraid
at the sight of his father, when he saw his hairy Plume upon his Headpeece
bending toward him. Like as the Sun when he lists to be seen, delays his
beams in some thicker cloud, that the edge of his brightness being abated,
our dim eyes may not be too much offended. Again, thus the troubled soul, may
have free access to the Minister, which comfort could hardly be conveyed
another way: especially, considering whom the Lord makes choice of, to bestow
the riches of his grace upon, not the great ones of the world so much, but the
mean ones. Now as you have seen in a Fair, the Country people will not
venture into the rich Shops, among the fine Citizens, but had rather bestow
their money on some country Chapman: so it may be in this case: and therefore
the Lord appoints men, and mean men, that even the meanest Christians may more
freely repair unto them. 2. Secondly, the ministry of Men, is more credible
then Angels, or any other could be; for though their testimony be of more
weight in it self, by reason of their acurate knowledge, and entire fidelity;
yet I know not how a man may have more advantages to deal with us: for to let
pass the irrefragable authority of the word of God, upon which all divine
truths must stand, which would be needless, if it pleased God to take any
other course than this; and to omit that it is hard to give such infallible
characters, whereby divine illuminations, might be distinguished from
diabolical illusions, that all ambignity might be taken away; I say, 1. First,
men converse with us, are known, they are our brethren, flesh of our flesh,
and bone of our bone, and therefore what suspicion can arise, that they, who
are otherwise approved, should go about to deceive us, in a thing that is as
much worth as our soul is. 2. They cannot deceive others, but they must
deceive their own soul, being they are in eadem navi, in the same condition.
3. They confirm their own words, and add a commentary of practice to the
text of preaching, with their works; and by tasting themselves of what they
prescribe to us, securing us of all fear of poison. 4. Lastly, they may, and
do sometimes set a seal of suffering to their saying: but I pass to the
third. Thirdly, the ministry of men is most effectual, as for those respects
touched before, and because they symbolize in qualities; whereas Philosophy
teaches, that there is easiest transmutation, where there is a Symbolicall
quality between the agent and the patient: and because they sympathize in
nature, so that there may be a secret attractive power, as we see in the
Loadstone to the Iron, or rather a mutual conspiring to embrace one another:
So even by the very art of persuading: I know not what the tongue-eloquence of
Angels is, and the Apostle seems to mention them with intimation of excellency,
neither will I maintain against all comers that a man may be a better Orator
than an Angel: but I know the Lord is, and he has put his Word into the mouth
of man, he that made the heart and tryes the reins, he knows how to frame
words that will affect the heart, and so they do insinuate themselves into the
darkest corners of it with wondrous power and efficacy. And this I know and
dare avouch, that the highest mystery in the Divine Rhetoric is to feel what
a man speaks, and then speak what a man feels. (...).
* Praxiteles exquisitely drew love, taking the pattern from that passion
which he felt in his own heart. And therefore this advantage a man has, that
he having a portion in the work of Christ's redemption, has himself tasted,
how sweet the blood of Christ is, how sovereign to a sinful soul, by
experimental, as well as contemplative Divinity. The heart best understands
the language of the heart. But as this ordinance is profitable to men, because
it is honorable to the Minister, and beneficial to the people, so there is a
common utility redounds to both. For thirdly, it is one of the strongest bonds
of love between Christians, who are hereby made givers and receivers in the
most precious things, it is a knot to tie man and God together, God speaking to
man by the Minister, and man speaking to God, it is the mid way as it were, in
which they meet, and though there be more subtle bonds of faith, and Gods
Spirit, whereby we are immediately united to Christ, and made members of his
mystical body: yet for our visible communion with him in his political body,
the Ministers are as it were the ligaments. There remains yet one of the three
principal reasons, Why the Lord makes men his Ambassadors, and it must not be
omitted, because it is the most principal among the three: and this it is. 3.
He gains most glory this way, for, the weaker the instrument is for outward
pomp, or appearance, the greater had need to be the power, and so the praise of
the artificer; Eccl. 10. 10.
If the Iron be blunt, you must put the more strength to it, says Solomon in
Ecclesiastes: Now you know how much the Lord esteems of his honor: I am the
Lord, (says he by the Prophet) And my glory I will not give to another. And as
Xenocrates said once to the children of one that had been liberal to him, I
have required your father, (said he) for all men commend him for his kindness
to me. And as Themistocles, when he entered into the Olympic games, and all the
Grecians cast their eyes upon him, and pointed at him, and whispered one to
another, This is Themistocles that delivered Greece from Xerxes, and the
barbarous Persians, This is Themistocles, This day (said Themistocles) I
confess I am abundantly recompensed, for all the pains that ever I took for
Greece: So the Lord looks for no other reward but this: And therefore the
Psalmist repeates it very often, and very pathetically, O that men would
therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wondrous works that
he does for the children of men, Psalm 107. He gives all the commodity of the
world to the sons of men, receiving only this Royalty to himself; he calls
for no other tribute, but that we attribute all to him. Now when he works by
simple means, all the glory comes entirely to him, there is none to share with
him, none to cry halfes with him, men's minds cannot rest in the inferior
causes, they must needs look higher and say, This is the Lords doing, and it
is mavelous in our eyes: whereas if the means had many fair probabilities
in them, God must needs be robbed of a great part of his honor: both because
men are ready to think highly of themselves, and magnify their own actions,
and also because others are ready to ascribe much to the immediate agent, who
is entitled to the honor by the suffrage of the senses too, Is not this great
Babell that I have built for my own magnificence (said Nebuchadnezzer)
strouting in his Palace: and the proud Physician wrote thus to King Philip,
(...).
Menecrates a god, to Philip a King: what title then might the spiritual
Physician challenge, that revives souls? either arrogating all to themselves,
or else dividing (as the Ass in the Fable did to the Lion) an equal portion
to God and themselves; and as the Jesuits now do, Laus Deo and virgini
Marieae, and then they would fall soon into the Cardinals method, Ego and Rex
meus. Besides you see how fond men are of the instruments of their good, how
ready they are to deifie them: most of the Heathen gods have been dubbed so,
because they have been beneficial to men. Communicative bonitie (which we call
bounty) has such a lively resemblance of the Divinity, that weak eyes can
hardly know them asunder: it was once Dionysius his sophistry, Dii boni sunt,
eorum ergo bonitate utendum; but it is almost all men's natural Logic, Boni
sunt, ergo dii sunt, according to that in the Poet, -- Deus nobis haec otia
fecit,
Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus. --


And therefore the Lord to prevent all such injurious usurpation, and vindicate
his own title, effects great things sometimes without means, sometimes with
very small means, that in all matter of praise, the image and superscription
may be his only. And therefore as when Caesar and Bibulus were Consuls
together, and Bibulus did nothing, being overawed by Caesar, they were wont to
write in jesting manner, Iulio and Caesare Consulibus: So if it please God at
any time to assume man to be his colleague, in any great action, we must not
say God and man did such a thing, but God and his grace, did such a thing. And
it may be said well enough of him, as it was of Caesar in in another cause,
Socium habet neminem, he may have a companion, but he must not have a
competitor. Perhaps indeed, the foolish Epicure, that cousened himself with a
silly Paralogisme, and concluded, that God did not create the world, because he
had nothing to create it withal: Quae ferramenta, quae machinae, qui vectes,
qui ministri tanti operis fuerunt? perhaps, I say, he, when he heard of
Ambassadors from a God, and a new creation, and saw nothing but men, and weak
men, Gods Ministers, would make a scoff again, at qui Ministri? and would
either deny the thing, because he did not like the means, or would hardly be
persuaded, that such Atoms could do such great wonders. But God sees not as
man sees: he in his wisdom uses this course, for the cause alleged. It is
time to conclude, but yet give me leave to confirm this with two places of
Scripture, and two examples: The first is the 2 Corinthians 4. 7. But we have this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God
and not of us: I will not urge it because I have used it before, since I entered
into this argument. The second is, the 1 Corinthians. 1. from 17. to the end of the
Chapter, a known Text, where as Apostle discourses this at large, The sum is
this: It pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save them that
believe. And again, Brethren, you see your calling, how not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble that are called: And wherefore
is this? God has chosen the foolish things of this world, to confound the
wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things
that are mighty, and base things of the world, and things that are despised,
has God chosen; yea, and things that are not, to bring to naught, things that
are: and what of this? That no flesh should glory in his presence: and the
conclusion of all is according as it is written, He that glories, let him
glory in the Lord. The words need no Commentary, and therefore I pass to the
examples. The first you shall find in the 7. of Judges, There the Lord
overthrowes the Midianites by Gideon, who at first had gathered thirty two
thousand men, but these were too many for the Lord to work with, therefore he
will have them as it were boiled by two decoctions, till they sunk first to
ten thousand, but there were yet too many, then to three hundred, and then they
march against the enemy, who were more then one hundred and thirty thousand,
and covered the land like Grasshoppers: but I pray, how were these three hundred
appointed? we do not read so much as of a sword they had, but they carried a
Trumpet in their right hand, and empty Pitchers, with a Lamp in their
Pitchers in their left hand: and what did they? we cannot find a stroke they
struck, but only they blew their Trumpets, and brake their Pitchers, and
cried, The sword of the Lord, and of Gide on, and their enemies fell down
dead, or fled before them: and the end of all is couched in the beginning of
the Chapter, Lest Israel should vaunt himself against nee, and say, mine own
hand has saved me. The second, is the 6. of Joshua, where the Israelites
beseiged Jericho, and won it, a strange seige, and a strange victory: the
Priests carried the Ark of God about the City, and blew with Rams-hornes,
they compassed it about six days, and seven times the seventh day, and this
was all: there was no other (...).
seige laid, but the Ark of God; no other Arietes to batter the walls, but the
Ramshornes; no Ordnance, but the ordinance of God that commanded this; they did
not lift up an hand against it, only they lifted up their voices; they did not
shoot once, but only shout, and the walls of Jericho, as it were willing to do
some holy service, on Gods holy Sabbath, did obeisance to the Ark of God, (as
Dagon did) they fell down flat, as it were, and worshipped the God of Israel.
I made choice of these the rather, among infinite examples, because I may
parallel both with the thing in hand, for the Preaching of the Word is but like
the sounding of Rams-hornes (in the judgment of carnal men) toward the
shaking of the walls of Jericho, toward the casting down the strong holds of
sin. And the former would make a sweet Emblem of it. A Soldier with a
Trumpet in the right hand, and an earthen Pitcher with a Lamp in the left hand,
lively representing the Minister, who does both in his ministry sound the
Trumpet of the Gospel, and in his martyrdom, break his body, like some
earthen pitcher, that the glory of God might break forth, through the humane
frailty, like a Lamp, and shine more bright and clear. But I must pass over
these, I will touch but one thing, and so conclude: for there is yet another
respect in which God gets glory by this order, and that is, because by this
means, he takes try all of the obedience of his children, whether they will
entertain such homely messengers for his sake, who sends them, and yield
obedience to him, whose will they publish. But too much of this argument, which
I am afraid some may think needless, or fruitless: and the truth is, I
should not have gone so far in this path, if I had not observed some worthies
of Israel all the way before me.

2. Corinthians. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.
IT is reported of a Saracen Ambassador to Charles the Great, that sitting in
the Emperors Hall at dinner with him, and observing two tables full of guests;
the lower, of poor people (invited according to his accustomed manner) in
ragged weeds and simple apparel; he asked what they were: the Emperor
answered; These are the Servants of our God, whom we Christians worship, and I
entertain them for his sake: the upper, full of gallants, Courtiers in gold
chains, and gay attire: he asked also, what they were: the Emperor answered,
these are my servants that attend upon my person: O, said the Saracen, if you
prefer your servants, before the servants of your God, that they be brave and
costly, and these be base and beggarly, I will never embrace your religion. I
may not think there is any son of scoffing Ismael here, any bastard Saracen
among these true sonns of Abraham, sons of Promise, sons of the Prophets,
that will pick a hole in the coat of Gods true servants, his Ambassadors, that
so they may pick a quarrel with Gods true religion: I may not think so. And
yet I think I may take occasion here, to take away all occasion of doubting,
that may perhaps arise in some weak judgments. For as Aristotle could not
better apprehend, or express the magnitude of God, then by the magnificence of
the King of Persia: so there may be some babes in Christ, not thoroughly weaned
from the vanities of this world, that would require some outward eminencies in
the Ministers of the Word, to prove that they are Gods Ambassadors; which if
they be wanting, though they dare not contradict the truth, because they
profess to believe so much, yet they cannot conceive the mystery, because they
do not believe so much as they profess. And therefore having cleared this the
last time, why God made choice of mean men for this honorable office, rather
then of the Glorious Cherubims, and Seraphims, rather then of the sons of the
mighty: give me leave now to produce some few evidences, by which it may
appear, that these men are indeed Gods Ambassadors. The ground of this is
plain (as I touched also before) for this great world, is a little Kingdom,
wherein* God is the sovereign Lord, the King of Kings, and all men for their
possiessions, are his tenants; for their functions, his Lievtenants; and in
this great world, the little flock of Christ is a great family, in which, God
is the great Master of the family. There can nothing be done in this family, in
this Kingdom, without the authority of this Master, of this King, and
therefore the Ministers of the Word, must needs be dispensers of his special
favor, in the great family of his Church, from him, as from the great Master
of this family. And again, Ambassadors of his Royal pleasure, in his Kingdom
of the world, from him, as from their supreme Lord the King of Kings. But why
do I produce the ground? the Text is plain: We are Ambassadors for Christ,
and if you cast your eyes back to the foregoing verse, you shall see from whom,
namely from God. And the same Apostle, in the last of the Ephesians uses the
same word to the same purpose, Ephesians. 20. (...).
For whom I am an Ambassador in chains: where a man would think, hearing of an
Ambassador, that he spoke of a golden chain, and in some kind of vanity
boasted of it. And indeed, the servants of God are noble and free, though
fettered in chains of Iron, as the slaves of sin are base prisoners, though
in chains of Gold. And in this sense I think I may allude to the story and
custom of wearing chains, and say the Devil deals with them, as the Aetoli
scoffingly said of Titus Flaminius the Roman General, who pretended liberty
to the Graecians, but yet held some principal Cities by Garrisons, that he
made their clog smoother indeed than it was under Philip King of Macedon's
tyranny, but as heavy as it was. And again, (...).
Their feet are free from the stocks, but their neck is under the yoke: but
this by the way. The same thing is affirmed every where through the Scripture
in equivalent terms: Prophets are called Men of God in the Old Testament; and
Timothy in the New is styled a Man of God; and all Apostles Servants of Jesus
Christ, the Servants of God, and Angels of the Churches, for this reason. But
why do I enforce the Text? the truth is plain, and who is there here that does
not acknowledge it? Who is such a fresh Proselyte in the Lords family, that
does not know his cognizance, his livery? As the Disciples said ignorantly to
Christ himself, Art thou only a stranger in Israel, and know not these
things? So it may be truly said to that Christian, if there be such an one, Who
is such a novice in Gods school, that if he has but learned the Alphabet of
the language of Canaan, cannot tell that they speak the language of Canaan?
Thou art a Galilean, thy very speech bewrayes thee, said the maid to Peter: So
may every Christian see the Minister by his speech, (as Socrates did) and know
where they are, and from whom they come: or if any do not understand them when
they tell them whose Ambassadors they are, it is because they have not an
interpreter (as the Eunuch said to Philip) they have not the Spirit of God,
which should be their interpreter. But why do I confirm the truth of this,
the point is plain: That the Ministers of Gods Word are servants of Jesus
Christ, Men of God, Gods Ambassadors. Yet suffer me now (according to promise)
for the further clearing of this, to add a few probable demonstrations, (if I
may so speak without a Soloecisme) and because the Doctrine is the best, and
truest (...).
touchstone of the Doctor: I shall draw them all from the nature and quality
of the Doctrine they teach. And here I might enlarge my self: for all those
arguments that are alleged by Divines, to prove that the Scriptures are of
Divine authority, might easily be persuaded to speak the same for the
Ministers, and prove that they have a Divine Author: but I shall single out two
or three most pithy and pertinent for my purpose.

And first I might place Antiquity an Argument much used, much urged by the
ancient Fathers, against the ancient Philosophers: a good argument, if I had
not little time enough for better: for though I have not such an overweening
opinion of every Moth-eaten Manuscript, as your young and busy Critics seem
to have: though I do not superstitiously admire, and adore every relic, and
ragg of every Father, (perhaps of their own getting) as the Papists do: though
I know there be sins of the forefathers mentioned in Scripture, there be an old
Serpent, an old man, not commended: I wist there is vetustas erroris, as a
Father speaks: there are veteratores as well as veteres, and not far
distant: to conclude, the Gibeonites musty bread and moldie shoes, are but a
slovenly argument of a long and teadious journey: yet I confess, in a good
sense, the Prophet Jeremy bids the Israelites inquire for the old way, which
was the good way, as if antiquum and bonum, were convertible one with another,
and both of them with unum and verum: In a good sense I approve the Axiom of
Tertullian, Quod antiquissimum, etiam verissimum: I admit that of the Poet,
Veritas temporis filia, though some allow Platoes elogy of the ancient, (...).
Antiquity is near a Deity: to conclude, I think, that true antiquity in
any Doctrine, argues the author of it to be time, that is the ancient of days:
I am sure it is so here, for though I find it not recorded in Polydore Virgil,
De Inventoribus rerum, yet I can warrant it out of better Authors, that
Paradise was the first Parish, that had a Sermon in it, and Adam was the first
auditor, that heard a Sermon in Paradise, and the fall of man, was the first
Text of the Sermon, that Adam heard, and God was the first Preacher of a Sermon
upon that Text, and these were the brief notes, written by Moses in
characters, of Gods Sermon, The Seed of the woman; shall break the Serpents
head. So that God is not only as the Athenian Commander said he was, (being
asked what he was) neither Bow-man (said he) nor Pike-man, nor Hors-man, nor
Footman, but one that knows, istis omnibus imperare: But God as he gave some
to be Priests, some to be Levites, some to be Prophets in the old Law, and some
to be Apostles, some to be Evangelists, and some to be Pastors, and some to be
Preachers in the new Law, and is the Lord of all these, qui solus novit illis
omnibus imperare: So he was himself, as I showed, the first Preacher, and all
the rest ever since, perform their office by an authority derived from him:
they are the (...) Gods Ministers.
Lords Vicars. This is the true antiquity of the Doctrine, that Gods
Ambassadors teach, of the function they have: not as they, who were wont to
wear Moons in their shoes, to clear theirs that they were (...).
older than the Moon; they were rather (...).
Lunatic, as the Gospel speaks: though the Church of God may, even in this
sense, be said to have the Moon under her feet, as the Woman (in the
Revelation) a Type of the Church, is said to have the Moon under her feet. But
that which Cyprian alleges and allows, Non quod ante nos, ille, vel ille
dixerit; sed quod ante omnes Christus: and therefore we may justly say to all
other Doctors, as the Egyptians in Plato to the Graecians, (...).
You Graecians are always children; and to another Doctor, thou art but of
yesterday, but the Word of God endures for ever, as God the Word is yesterday
and to day and for ever the same, from eternity to eternity.

excellency of their Embassage. For if the people in the Acts, for a little
flashie eloquence in Herod's Oration, could say, The voice of God, and not of
man. If Plato could discern some (...). beams or influences.
beams of Divinity in all Arts, for some obscure tidings of God, that they
told him, Grata de Deo fama in artibus sparsa est. If Pompey were received by
the Princes, non tanquam ex vrbe missus, sed tanquam e caelo delapsus, as the
Orator speaks, because they found a beneficial, though thin influence of his
Justice and temperance upon them. If Catoes nobility, though he were but Novus
homo, must be derived from heaven, and that by the best Heralds, the minds of
men admiring his virtues, tertius e coelo cecidit Cato: Then I pray tell me in
what account should the Ministers be, to whom all these may be as truly
applied, as they were friendly supposed in the other. It is not with them, as
it was with the Persian Lord, in Apelles Shop, whom the apprentises admired for
his bravery, so long as he stood silent, but when he began to speak of things
he had no skill in, derided him for his simplicity: but clean contrary, like
Ulysses, in Homer, who stood like some silly Country fellow, leaning upon his
staff, says the Poet, (...). But when he spoke he spoke with a courage.
but when he spoke, he spoke admirably. Let me entreat you to take notice but
of the subject, and the project of their doctrine, and you shall see it: for he
that teaches plainly of the incomparable perfection of the Deity, the
incomprehensible distinction of the Trinity, the depth of predestination, the
power of creation, the skill of gubernation, that there is a nature infinitely
surpassing all nature; that it is one, yet three; three, and yet one; that all
things were molded in nothing, made of nothing, and yet kept from nothing, is
not this man from God? Surely none but they that have learned of his Spouse,
plowed with this Heifer, can areed these riddles. Again, he that teaches truly
of man's blessed integrity, his cursed apostacy, the Devil, the Serpent, the
Garden, the Apple, the Woman, the funerail which Adam made for himself, the
fall, how man was once full of sanctity in his soul, beauty in his body,
majesty in both, the son of God, a vessel of honor, the tenant of Paradise,
the heir of Heaven, the lord of the creatures, whom the very sacred Angels
served, and the very salvage Tigers feared: but is become by his own fault, a
slave of the creatures, an heir of Hell, a vessel of dishonor, a child of
the Devil in soul and body, and both the very sink of sin, and shame, and
misery, Heu! quantum Niobe Niobe distabat ab illa! Is not this the man from
God? Surely if the Heathen did not understand their own meaning, I cannot
tell, but their words are very good, and I dare avouch with them, out of better
Oracles than Apollo's, de Coelo descendit, (...).
Know thy self.

I proceed, he that teaches clearly of a strange marriage, the Divine nature
with the Humane, As Euripides.
and yet a stranger; a marriage of justice and mercy, (...).
a sweet marriage of a Virgin that was (...).
Mother of a God, and an Infant that was (...).
God and Man, of a God that was man, beginning, growing, hungring, thirsting',
weary, weeping, bleeding, and, that which was the wonder of wonders, dying; of
a man that was God, rising from the grave powerfully, ascending into Heaven
triumphantly, sitting at the right hand of God royally, trampling under his
feet sin, Hell, and death, and Satan victoriously, and returning to judge
the quick and the dead gloriously: is not this man from God? To conclude, he
that teaches sweetly of humiliation by the law, of vocation by the Gospel,
justification by Christ, reconciliation with God, sanctification from sin,
resurrection from the dead, the terrible day of judgment, the glory of the
Saints, the torments of the wicked, and the like, I will not ask you any more,
but I tell you plainly, that man is from God. For, behold in these truths not a
beam of Divinity (such as Plato spied in all arts) but a body, or rather, not
a shadow, for his beam was no more, (the word may be ambiguous) but a perfect
body of Divinity. Neither is it possible that any man should invent, or
conceive these sublime mysteries by natural reason, since we see evidently,
that no man can so much as accept or receive them being taught, without a
supernatural faith. And therefore as Telemachus said, when he saw a great
light which guided his father and him in a dark room, (...).
surely there is some god in it: So let every one confess when he hears these
things from the mouth of Gods Ambassadors, Non vox hominem sonat, Never any man
spoke as he spoke, as they said of Christ. I might add something of that
divine precept of morality, far beyond the strain of Philosophy: for though
the Academicks, Stoics, Peripateticks, and Epicures travailed much in these
Observations, and went far, yet how short do they come? For here we have
Rules more natural than the Epicures, which made pleasure their Empress, and
themselves her Parasites: more humane then the Peripateticks, which made Reason
their Mistress, and themselves her Scholars; more Heroical then the Stoics,
which made Virtue their Goddess, and themselves her Votaries; more divine then
the Academicks, which made God there Idol (I understand their Idea, which they
did not understand) and themselves his idolaters, and so excelling every one of
these great professors in their several projects. The end remains, which I
will dispatch in a word.

(...).
husbandry, as the earth is man's: And therefore it is absurd, as Plutarch has
well observed (...).
to take the best things out of the compass of Gods foreknowledg. To shut up
this, it is absurd to think that Solon, Lycurgus, Numa published their laws,
as the Heathen did, from the gods, and that Ministers do not preach the
Gospel from God, since they brought many things against the rule of reason,
and nothing above the reach of nature; but these teach nothing against the rule
of nature, but many things above the reach of reason. It is absurd that every
petty beuefactor of mankind should be deified, and these founders (I may term
them) vilified; that they should be esteemed gods, even to the vilest vermin,
among the Egyptians, and these should not be esteemed so much as Gods
Ambassadors. The blind Heathen could not choose but see some splendour of
Divinity in these things. The Critic Longinus observed out of the description
of the creation of the World, in the 1. of Genesis, that Moses was no ordinary
man: and besides that Imperatoria brevitas (which Tacitus speaks of) he saw so
much majesty in the relation: In the beginning God created the Heaven and the
Earth, and God said, let there be Light, and there was Light, let there be
Earth, and there was Earth, that he confesses (...).
that narration had a seemly character and cognizance of the Divine power set
upon it. The Platonic Ammonius also, so admired the story of the Divine
generation of Christ, in the first of S. John's Gospel, In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, that he judged those
words worthy to be written in golden Letters, and prefixed on the gates of all
Temples. The men of Lystri likewise in the Acts, hearing the Apostles Paul and
Barnabas, were so convinced in their consciences, that their Doctrine was
divine, that they were something transported in their judgments, to think
their persons were divine, and therefore would needs have worshipped them as
gods, with Priests, and Bulls, and Garlands, and Sacrifice. And if I would give
you a short draught of some truths, as they have degenerated into fables, among
the Heathen, I might make them seem with oce labor more perspicuous, and more
precious: for as their unlikenesse to themselves (crossing and thwarting one
another) confute themselves: so their likeness to the truth, (intimating and
as it were acting it) must needs confirm the truth. The tales of the golden
Apples, and the (...), of the Hesperidum horti, and Adonis Garden, of the fiery
Dragons that kept them, answering either to the flaming sword of the Cherubim,
or the Serpent, to the true Paradise, the Garden of Eden, to the Apples of the
Tree of Knowledge of good and evel, are sufficient for a taste. But it were a
shame for me once to name these fabulous legends, since I did but name the
Heavenly truth, which they have adulterated. To conclude, I think none but
David's fool, that has said in his heart there is no God, can find in his
heart to say the messengers of these things are not Gods Ambassadors.

For, as for the rule of happiness it self, which I touched in the last step
of my former gradation, I wonder not, if men of the earth did errare toto
coelo, they were ignorant of the three forenamed grounds, and it could not be
therefore otherwise, they could not take the height of Gods excellency, in his
nature, and works, and therefore could not sound the depth of man's misery in
his fall: they were ignorant of the measure of his fall, and therefore could
not measure, nor comprehend, the height, and depth, of Gods mercy in Christ:
they had not heard of Gods mercy in Christ, and therefore could never teach, or
think of the profunditie of humiliation, the latitude of sanctification, the
altitude of glory, but vanishing in their imaginations, instead of these,
groped in the dark to find man's Summuns bonum in himself, and dreamed a
pretty dream of a shadow of happiness ( (...).
man is a dream of a shadow, as Pindar speaks) which they meant to purchase
with a shadow of wisdom, and virtue, and riches, and honor, and pleasure: and
in this respect, we must do with their books, as they say the Jews did with
the book of Hester. The Jews read the book of Hester indeed, because they
account it Canonical Scripture, but before they read it, they let it fall to
the ground, because they do not find the name of God once mentioned in it, as
their Rabbis have observed: So for the moral treatises of Philosophers, we
must read them, because they speak of virtue, and happiness; but we should let
them fall to the ground before we read them, because they do not give glory to
the glorious name of God.

I come to the third, which I mean to draw from the efficacy of their
Ministry; for which purpose I might produce many express places of Scripture,
and many plain experiments: for this respect the Lord Jesus is represented in
a Vision to Saint John, Revel. 1. 16.
in the Revelation, Act. 24. 32.
With a sharp two edged sword proceeding out of his mouth: and when he talked
with his Disciples going to Emaus, Did not our hearts burn within us, said
they, while he talked with us? In this respect the Psalmist says of him,
Psalm 45. Thou art fairer then the children of men, Grace is powered into thy
lips; Suada in labris sessitat, Apes in ore mellificant; it is true of him, for
Grace is powered on his lips, a sweet attractive Grace, which is an eloquent
beauty, as they say that beauty is a dumb eloquence, and therefore Thou art
fairer then the children of men; and it follows, Thy arrows are sharp in the
heart of the Kings enemies: his lips and men's hearts are chained together, as
you have heard the Emblem of the French Hercules. Ierem. 20. 9.
In this respect, the Prophet Jeremy says, His Word was like a burning fire,
shut up in his bones, Esaias 6. 6, 7.
and he could not stay, the Prophet Esaias had his tongue touched with a cole
from from the Altar. The Apostles had the gift of fiery tongues, and what was
the succeesse? at one Sermon of Peter three thousand were set on fire, and
inflamed with the love of God, and come rather bleeding, then breathing forth
these words to the Apostles, Act 2. 37.
Men and brethren what shall we do? What should I tell you the voice of God is
mighty, the voice of God breaks the Cedars, the Cedars of Lebanon, which is
not only true of thunder (as interpre^ers expound it) but of the Word of God.
For if Caligula trembled at that, I am sure Felix did at this, Act. 24. when
Paul reasoned of righteousness and temperance, and judgment to come, Felix
trembled, a strange thing, that the accused party triumphed, and the Judge
trembled* if being touched with his affecting words, and trembling he had
turned to Christ, as the Needle touched with the Loadstone, turns to the
North, and had shaped his course accordingly, Felix had been happy as one
says: But this is the more remarkable, because, in the same place, Tertullus a
curious Orator had made a quaint oration with no such success, as if the Lord
would compare as it were with humane faintly eloquence, and teach us that all
is but painted eloquence, in comparison of the divine power of his Word: Indeed
they report, that when Tully pleaded for Ligurius, (I think) Caesar trembled,
and the bills of accusations fell out of his hands, as it were wrested out by
Tullies eloquence: but you shall see the difference anon. Yea, and Paul
himself felt the force of this thunder, for in the very heat of his
persecution as he marched furiously (like Iehu) to Damascus, Act. 9. 3. 5.
he was arrested by a messenger from Heaven, a great light shone round about
him, and he heard a voice from Heaven, the light like lightning flashed in his
face, and dazeled his eyes, and laid him flat on his back: But will you hear
a terrible thunderclap, Saul Saul why persecutest thou me? this was the thunder
that boared his ears (as Scaliger reports of a country fellow that had his
ears boared with thunder) and this was the lightning, which, as the
Naturalists say, melts the Sword and hurts not the Sheath, that breaks the
bones and bruises not the flesh: this was the lightning that broke Paul's heart
and melted his very soul within him, and made him that was yet (...).
breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord
Jesus, breath out more gentle and humble words, Who art thou Lord? what shall I
do Lord? and the like. I cannot stand to press these, and yet I cannot pass
over one place, because it is most effectual, look Heb. 4. 12. For the Word
of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then a two edged sword, piercing
even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow,
and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Who has any gold
weights and a balance of the Sanctuary, that we may expend and weigh these
golden words exactly? I pray mark, it is a living Word, yea more, a working
Word, yet more, a cutting Word, yea, and more yet, a piercing Word, it is not
as other written words are mutus magister, but viva vox, (...).
a living word, it is not living, as some do (of whom it may be truly said, Hic
situs est, as Seneca said of Vatia) but it is an (...)
effectual working word: it is not working, as some do, till they be cold
again, or as we say, as good never the whit as never the better, but it is a
cutting word: it is cutting, not lightly to raze the skin, and scratch a
little, but it bites sore, it is a piercing word: it is like a sword, a bloody
instrument, but that it is sharper, for the Apostle says (...).
sharper: the word is a word of comparison, but the thing is above compare, for
it is (...). 2 Cor 2. 16.
sharper then a sword, it is like a two edged sword (as I told you of Christ in
the Revelation) it will cut which way soever it lights, either a savor of life
to salvation, or a savor of death unto condemnation, as the Apostle speaks:
but it is (...)
sharper then any two edged sword, It was once said of the sword of Goliath by
David, There is none to it, but I dare say it is true of the sword of God and
of Gideon, the sword of God and his Ambassadors, for it pierces to the dividing
of the soul and spirit: who is so acute almost that can distinguish these two
by an intellectual precision? (I am sure Interpreters sweat about it) and yet
this royal sword, like Alexanders, is so sharp that it cuts this knot with an
actual division, between the joints and the marrow, not the hardest bones can
abate or turn the edge of this invincible weapon; not the most hidden marrow
can escape the dint of it, but as the Sun in the 19. Psalm, nothing is hid
from the heat of it. To conclude, it is (...)
a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart: the strangest Critic
that ever was, thought it not free from it: and whereas other Critics pride
themselves in restoring some obliturated monuments, stopping some gaps in old
Manuscripts, taking up some stitches let fall in a Poet, this goes farther, and
reads the very thoughts, verbamentis, the letters written in the soul, that
abrasa tabula, as the Philosopher calls it: I have put all the weights, grains,
and scruples that I have into the Scales, and yet this place of Scripture as it
is pure, ( the word of God is like gold which is tried in the fire seventimes)
so, for weight it weighs them all down, which was the reason that I insisted
the longer on it, for me thinks, this very place does not only affirm that the
Word is effectual, but confirm it exceedingly, being it self so effectual.
I conclude this general, he that knows the efficacy of this Word, cannot choose
but acknowledge the divinity of this power, and be affected, as the Prophet
Habakuk was, with the presence of God in his glorious works, When I heard
(says he) my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, Habak. 3. 16.
rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might
rest in the day of trouble. There remains much behind yet, for I should show
you this in particular both extensively and intensively as it works, 1. In the
heart, 2. A strange work in the heart, both these in regard of the act it
self, and then in regard of the manner of working, 1. Without any help, ex
part subjecti, the heart conferres nothing, not so much as natural
receptivitie. 2. Without any help, ex part medii, no insinuations of wisdom,
no tricks of Rhetoric, but with down right blows: and I could wish all
unsaid that has been spoken, that I might spend my self wholly in these
things, but I must touch them briefly. The heart of man is the most free and
hard of any thing to work upon, and to make an impression and stamp upon this
hard heart, this heart that is so stony, Adamantine, harder then the mother
Milstones, as the Scripture teaches. To compel this freewill, that Domina sui
actus, the Queen in the soul, the Empress, it cannot be without a divine
power, without a hand that is omnipotent; but the Ministers do this by the
Word, they mollify, and wound, and break this heart, they incline, and bow,
and draw this free will whither the spirit lists: And Clemens Alexandrinus is
not afraid to say, that if the Fables of Orpheus and Amphion were true, that
they drew birds, beasts, and stones with their ravishing melody, yet the
harmony of the Word is greater, which translates men from Helicon to Sion,
which softens the (...).
hard heart of man obdurate against the truth, that raises up children to
Abraham of stones, that is, (as he interprets) of unbelievers, which he cales
stocks and (...).
stones, that put their trust in stones and stocks, which metamorphoses men
that are (...).
beast-like wild, birds for their lightness and vanity, serpents for their
craft and subtilty, Lions for their wrath and cruelty, Swine for
voluptuousness and luxury, etc. and charms them so, that of wild beasts they
become tame men: that makes living stones (as he did others) come of their own
accord to the building of the walls of Jerusalem, (as he of Thebes) to the
building of a living Temple, to the everliving God: this must needs be a (...).
true persuasive charm, as he speaks. Herodotus relates of Cambyses, that
being admonished of his drunkenness by Prexaspes a noble Counselor, in a
rage he commanded his son to be placed before him as a mark, and his Bow and
Arrows to be brought, and He shot and killed the boy, and then caused him to be
opened, and finding the Arrow in the midst of his heart, he made this
argument, that he was no drunken man, and turning him to the father asked him
(with a cruel smile) what he thought of it: O my Lord (said Prexaspes, betwixt
grief for his son, and fear for himself:) I think the gods cannot shoot
better: I may parallel this out of Scripture, and apply it to my purpose, for
the Apostles in the Acts, being charged with drunkenness, Peter steps up to
make an apology, he takes his bow and arrows (as the Prophet Esaias speaks) he
has made my mouth like a sharp sword, in the shadow of his hand has he hid
me, and made me a polished shaft in his Quiver:) he shootes and smites three
thousand with one arrow, and when they opened themselves, it was found they were
pricked in their hearts: and you shall now be judges, whether I may not well
say as he did with a little alteration, O Lord I think none but God, none but
thou can shoot so well. I conclude this, the Ministers of the Word are stars in
the right hand of God, (as it is in the Revelation) and therefore they dart
their influence into the secret corners of the soul: their words fall high
from heaven, and therefore sink deep into the hearts of men. As the woman of
Tekoah was subtle, because the hand of Ioab was with her: so they are
powerful because the hand of God is with them, they are the pen that write in
men's hearts, but it is the hand of God. In a word, they bear such authority
because they are men under authority, men of God, Gods Ambassadors. I should
prosecute the rest, but I will rather leave the point abruptly then be tedious.

2. Corinthians. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.
IT is a maxim in Divinity received by general consent of all, Cathedram
habet in coelo qui corda docet: and therefore I see no reason, why that which
has been said should not be a sufficient argument to prove, that those that
sit in Moses chair are sent from Heaven, except it be to those that from
walking in the way of the ungodly, and standing in the way of sinners, are come
to sit in the chair of the scornful. Yet I will add a second degree, to put
it out of question: for they do not only work upon the heart in general, but
in a special and strange manner, as might be shown many ways, I will but
touch the principal. It is our Saviors promise to his Disciples, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, Ioh. 14. 12.
the works that I do, shall he do also, and greater works then these shall
he do: greater works then these, O blessed Savior, (might the Disciples say)
how can that be? Thy name is Wonderful, the great Counselor, and thou do
wonders alone; and is not this one of thy great wonders, how we should conceive
the wonder of this speech, greater works then these, O blessed Savior! The
Schools of men have an Axiom among them indeed, (...).
Many Scholars are better than their Masters, but we have learned another
lesson in thy School, The Disciple is not above the Master, and it is enough,
the Disciple be as the Master is, it is enough: O humble Savior, among proud
sinners, it is too much! greater works then thou O Lord! did not thou cure
all diseases, cast out Devils, did not thou rebuke the Fever, and it durst
not stay, chide the winds, not as he in the Poet, expostulate with them, but
chids them with authority, (...).
rebuk't the winds, and they were silent, calmed the Sea, and walked upon the
swelling waves, as it were upon some Marble pavement? and can there be greater
works then these? But who was that O Lord, was it not thou, that did raise
the dead, that Rulers daughter at the house, the Widows son at the Hearse,
the two sisters brother (I mean Lazarus) in the grave, when he that stunk was
revived with thy sweet voice, and he that was bound hand and foot with linen
clothes (which was (...).
a miracle in a miracle, as a Father speaks) came forth and walked: and can we
do greater works then these? Now we have begun to speak unto our Lord, suffer
us to speak once more, though we be but dust and ashes. Did not thou feed
five thousand men with five loaves, five loaves, which by a strange Arithmetic
were so multiplied by Division, and so augmented by Substraction, that five
loaves sufficed five thousand guests, and yet twelve baskets full were gathered
up, for thy twelve Apostles. Did not thou cure the poor woman of her
incurable issue of blood with a touch of the hemme of thy garment only: it was
her contactus, but thy virtue O blessed Lord that did it, and shall we do
greater works than these? Yes, they do greater miracles, says Augustine,
Majus enim est quod sanet vmbra, quam quod sanet fimbria, comparing the last I
mentioned, with that which is recorded of Peter in the Acts, that those which
had diseases were healed by his shadow as he passed by: and they did greater
works that were no miracles, then all the miracles that Christ wrought, and
they were the conversion of many souls to God by their ministry: and good
reason it should be thought so, for if a shadow, a privation, a nullity may
produce such a real effect, then what shall we think of the light of the
Gospel, the most beautiful, the warmth, the most active, the truth of the
Gospel, the most powerful quality in the world, if we believe the Wiseman?
and two of which are so transcendently excellent, that it has been said, that
if God himself would take a visible shape, he would make a body of light which
should be acted and animated by truth as by a soul: Thou have made light thy
garment, and thou love truth in the inward parts. Yea, and that same Father
affirms, that the justification of a sinner, is a greater work then the
creation of a World. Aut si aequalis sit utrumque potentiae, certe hoc est
majoris misericordiae, as he concludes it. The School follow him in this, and
dispute whether it be not simply the greatest work that ever was; and
determine that it is ex part effectus, averring that the least work of grace
is greater then the greatest in nature: they doubt also whether it be
miraculous, and leave it doubtful. Our modern Divines give a reason of it,
because in creation there is only a negative indisposition of nothing, to
being: but in regeneration, there is besides a positive opposition of sin, to
grace. I will not now discuss whether this be precisely true, or no: but a
great work it is without question, as may appear by the act which is called in
Scripture a rising from the dead, Blessed are they that have their part in the
first resurrection, Rev. 20. 6.
says the Spirit, in the Revelation: (...).
a generation, except a man be borne again he can never see the kingdom of
God, says Christ to Nicodemus: (...). Ioh 3. 3.
a new creation, says Paul to the Corinthians: it appears likewise by the
(...). Gal. 6. 15.
effect, the which is called the new heart, Create in me O Lord a new heart: A
new man, That the new man may be renewed daily: A new creature, Neither
circumcision, nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new creature: It
appears lastly by the terms, between which there is as much difference, as
between light and darkness, death and life, Heaven and Hell, the Devil and
God, immane quantum! for these are the terms between which this mutation
runs, as the Scripture teaches us. Who can bring to pass this true (...)
transmigration, ( Pythagoras dreamed of another) but he that is the Father of
Spirits, and the Word that does it, must needs be the breath of his mouth: This
divine (...).
Conversion (as Plato calls it, speaking admirably of it, though he knew it
not) but he to whom the Prophet goes in this case, turn us O Lord, and we
shall be turned: this wondrous (...)
change, as Clemens calls it, as I noted, but he that formed the mountains, and
of whom the Psalmist, Manus tuae plasmaverunt me, he that formed man after his
own image: Dii coeptis, nam vos mutastis and illas, aspiratemeis: figmentum
cordis, says Moses, The imagination of man's heart is only evil and that
continually: but as for the heavenly work of grace, of holiness, of a new man,
is as the Heaven is said to be, and as the Protoplast was, figmentum manuum
tuarum, the workmanship of thy hands O Lord. In a word, none can restore or
vindicate a man from the servitude of sin, into the liberty of Gods
children, and of a miserable bond-slave make one a (...).
royal man, (as Clemens calls his Gnostick) but the great King, of whom it is
said, if his Spirit make us free, then are we free indeed: the knot in which we
were tied is dignus vindice nodus, and our desperate case does require a (...).
strong help, according to the use and phrase of Tragedies. I could be
infinite in this theme, if I would tell you all the wonders that they work in
the heart of man, the terrors of the Law, which make a man think that he is in
Hell, more truly and more profitably, then the Jesuits do their Clients in
their chamber of meditation: by the consolations of the Gospel, which gives a
man wings to fly into Heaven, and take sanctuary there from all afflictions,
from whence he looks down upon this lower world with heroical contempt and
scorn, wondering at the vanity of men, that are so greedy of vanities, whereas
the whole World appears to him (as the territory of Athens to Alcibiades in
Lucian) but a spot of earth; he scorns the best Orators to persuade him (as
Nazianzene says of Cyprian that he did in his Letters exhortatory to
Martyrdom) to think that swords have not met all in them to do him hurt, that
fire is cold, that wild beasts are gentle, that famine is dainties, that the
hottest flames that ever Martyrs were burned in for Chrict's sake were but like
Eliahs fiery Chariot, wherein he rode in triumph into Heaven; and which is
more, that these are are not Paradoxes in Christianity.

I can remember but one that gave such testimony of the power of any humane
writing: and that was Cleombrotus, I think of Platoes book, of the
immortality of the Soul, which when he had read, he was so afflicted, that he
killed himself, to learn that without book in the Elysian fields that he had
read there, and enjoy that good that he imagined out of it. But how many
thousand Martyrs, have set a feale of blood to Gods book, and took it upon
their death, that it was the most powerful of all other.

But to bound my self: I purposed only to treat of the first work, which I
have already done: Yet I will add one thing more, and but one thing. The
untamed horses of distempered passions (as Plato calls them) which many times so
hurry and wheel about the crazie chariot of reason, that they set the wheels
of judgment (upon which it should run steadily) clean besides the socket,
even these are charmed and tempered by this heavenly music, as the evil
spirit in Saul was by the Harp and hand of David. Excellently Lactantius, Da
mihi iracundum, da libidinosum, da avarum, etc. and I will so inchant him with
a few syllables, (he says no more, but paucis syllabis) out of Gods word, that
I will make him meek, chaste, liberal, and concludes this confident assertion
with this Epiphonema, Tanta divine sapientiae vis est, ut in hominis pestus
infusa, matrem delictorum stultitiam uno semel impetu expellat. It is more then
time to shut up this point: briefly therefore, it is absurd to say of natural
generation, Sol and homo generant hominem, and yet to think of spiritual
regeneration, that the son of man can do it without the son of
righteousness. And if the principles be true that the masters of that art have
delivered in conveyance of water, Aqua tantum ascendit, quantum descendit: then
this water of life, which makes a man ascend to God, must needs have descended
from God first, and the Conduitpipes, the Ministers of God, must needs be
Organicall, not Authentical agents, in the cures they work with it, they must
be the instruments of God, Gods Ambassadors. The third degree follows, which
is, the heart of man conferres nothing to this work, to this great work, not
so much as a natural receptivitie: if there were apprehension in nature, the
difficulty would not be such as to prove a Divinity, but to make Adamants
receive impressions like wax, to teach a stone to fly like a bird, to swim
against the stream, to crowd against the multitude, to sail against the
winds, to make a man against the corruption of his nature, against the nature
of his corruption, a man of the World, to savor and relish the things of God:
I know not what strength in nature can make it good, what authority can warrant
it: Rom 8. 7.
The best wisdom of the flesh is (says the Apostle) (...).
enmity with God: most significantly (...).
the most refined wisdom is not only an enemy, but even enmity to God:

Non vitiosus homo es Zoile, sed vitium, said the Martial.
Poet, with some affinity to this phrase. I will illustrate this but with a
word or two out of Nazianzen, and so leave it, because I perceive the time
passes, and the thing has been touched in part already. Such is the
corruption of man, that propound any divine good to it (says he) it is
entertained, (...).
as fire by water, or wet wood with hissing: So grace is almost hissed off the
stage with scoffs and taunts: I cannot tell, but me thinks I could bid the
secure and carnal men, if there were any such among us, beware least it prove
that they have learned that hissing faculty from the hissing serpent: but to
go on, propound any evil, (...).
like fire to straw, as he shows elegantly, like the foolish Satyr that made
haste to kiss the fire, like that unctuous matter; which the naturalists say
that it sucks and snatches the fire to it, with which it is consumed. Nay, this
is the great difficulty of a Pastoral cure, says the same Father, that
whereas in other medicinal, the diseased party is termed a patient, and may be
so, because he is willing to subscribe to that which his Physician shall
prescribe him: In this theological, it is clean contrary, a man's self is his
greatest sickness, (...).
like a frantic person that falls foul with his best friends, (...).
we are valiant against our selves, and we defend what we affect: like corrupt
Lawyers, to plead an ill cause; and they which (...).
are more generous without all coloring or cloaking the matter, run
bare-headed as we say, run on shameless to all wickedness: who shall help
poor man in this miserable condition, nam quid miserius est misero non
miserante seipsum; says Austin in his Confessions: even thou O God who art
Pater miserationum, which workest mightily with thine own word in the mouth of
thy Ministers, thy Ambassadors. The fourth and last degree will make this
proof square and sure, a good proof; like Aristotle's good man, (...).
quadrangular, and therefore we must not omit it. This work of the Ministers
upon the heart, which is so effectual, and yet so much against the hair,
against the bent of the heart, besides all these, it is done with silly
instruments. The Philosophers and Rhetoricians make a Goddess of their
eloquence, and by the power of her divinity, think to bewitch and inchant
their auditors as they please, and to scrue themselves into the most retired
parts, to take the heart (...).
the chief City or Metropolis of man's affections: they admire her, they study
her, they pray her (...).
charm this man: yea, and to say the truth, who is such an infant that has
not heard of the power of eloquence? And yet it is not this that does this
great work, it is another (...).
persuasive goddess, that breeds this settled (...).
confidence, this grounded (...).
persuasion of a Christian, it is humility, and simplicity, and plainness of
speech that does it, as the Apostle declares to the Corinthians: such is the
Scripture language, such the Ministers. And as Plutarch observed out of the
naturalists, that the seed of those that are lascivious and incontinent is not
fruitful, and applies it to the great talkers: so I make no question, but
wanton and lascivious Rhetoric, makes the immortal seed of Gods Word more
unfruitful; like a sword wrapped in wool, that cannot cut; like an Oak
embraced with the flattering Ivy, that will not thrive and prosper. I do not
condemn Rhetoric: the genuine tropes and figures in a solid speech are like
arrows in the hand of a mighty man, as the Psalmist says in another case,
blessed is the man that has his quiver full of them. And as the Philosopher
said of Oil, observing the use to be good, but the abuse to be great, Male sit
illis cinaedis (said he) qui rem optimam pessime infamarunt: so may I say, the
use is good but the abuse is great of eloquence: and therefore away with these
effeminate, and unmanly Orators, that have cast a shrewd aspersion upon a noble
profession: As for the modest and sober use, that is true of Divinity which
Seneca said of Philosophy, that is true of eloquence which he said of wit,
Philosophia non renunciat ingenio; Theologianon renunciat eloquentiae, for
there is an eloquence in the Scripture, which is more then eloquence: the
Rhetoricians may call theirs an (...).
Allurement of the soul, but this is a (...).
transmigration as I told you: theirs may perfundere animum, but this does
perfringere: they may delight, but this does ravish with a divine Enthysiasme:
theirs is properly oratory, but this is, to speak more properly, Imperatory,
which is then most full of Affection, when it is most free from affectation:
theirs is more Scholasticall, but this is more majesticall, as best becomes the
mouth of Princes, as the noble Lord of Plesis has well noted of the style of
the Scripture.

But the best of their nervi and t^ri, the best sinews and strength, is but as
Longinus observes of some childish Orators, (...).
their school wit through curiosity ends in folly, or frigidity and chillness,
in comparison of this.

To end this, I can bear well that they brag of their Arculae, Myrothesia, and
Lecythi, like some deformed women of their boxes, out of which they draw a
painted and greasy beauty. But I cannot brook that they should speak of
thunder and lightning in their Orators, ignorant and silly men, as though these
fiery Meteors were bred, or did appear in this lower Region, so far from
Heaven. No, no, as they said once of Christian Soldiers, that they were
Fulminatrix Legio, so I may say of the celestial Hierarchy of the Angels of
the Churches, the Lords Ministers, that is Fulminatrix Regio: and if I be not
deceived, he should not be much amiss, that should call the Pulpit the shop of
thunder: all other Pericles have but brutum fulmem, in comparison of that, as
you may conceive out of that which has been spoken: and that which is the
wonder in this, all this is without any pomp or show, not (...).
with great pomp, but (...).
with great weakness and infirmity rather, which argues the evidence of the
Spirit and the power of God the more strongly. I conclude therefore. As one
said of Demetrius Pompeii libertus, who spoke much, but had nothing to do,
when Pompey himself who did all, but said but little, I regard not (said he)
(...).
what thou say, but what he does silently: so may we say, it skils not so
much what the Minister said outwardly, as what the Spirit works inwardly:
since the efficacy of their words depend not so much upon themselves, because
they are good orators, as upon the Spirit of God, because they are Gods
Orators, Gods Ambassadors. I have finished now the explication of the intensive
efficacy. I must add a word of their extensive, for so I was constrained to
call them for distinction sake. I mean it thus: If you take a view of the
whole world you shall scarce find a region, of which the Ministers of the
Gospel may not say as he in the Poet, Quae Regio in terris nostri non plena
laboris?

The Sects of Philosophers were distinguished by the names of (...).
Italick, and (...).
Ionick, as Laertius tells us, but Religion is characterized and known by the
name of (...).
Catholic. Now we know there is nothing commonly received, but either by the
law of nature in moral, or by the law of nations in political affairs: Now
the faith of Christ preached by the Ministers being dispersed over all, and not
imprinted in all, by either of those it cannot be but probable, that it
proceeds from the grace of God, who is the God of nature. Again, as the great
Mathematician said once to the King, (...).
let me have a place to stand on, and I will move the earth, implying that the
moving of this earth could not be supposed without a firm standing on some
other earth granted: so the moving of the whole earth by the Ministers, to the
embracing of the faith, must needs evince a fixing of them in Heaven, from
whence they are sent, and the rather because of that great opposition, which
they find every where, which will compel us to grant the former supposition.
You have seen the Emblem of an earth beseiged round with many winds, the
Devil on the one side blowing, and the Pope the Devils instrument on the
opposite side blowing, and the Cardinals the Popes agents on each side between
them blowing, and the Turk at another corner blowing, and all to shake this
earth: and yet notwithstanding all these, the word is written in it immobilis,
the word is written in indeleble characters, and it is unmoovable: and it may
well be said of all these blowers, as the Orator said of the Athenians,
comparing them to men running up an Hill, (...).
they blow hard, but run slow. The Earth is the Ministers of the Gospel, and
that Word which they preach, all those and many other lay their heads together,
to blow it away, but all in vain, for the finger of God has written immobilis
upon them, and his decree is like the Medes and Persians, that cannot be
changed, but what he has written he has written: Nulla litura in Decretis
sapientum, it is true of God: and good reason, the Spirit, as the wind, blows
where it lists, as Christ says, and it is folly at least, if not madness,
as Pythagoras speaks, (...).
to blow against the winds.

The Word is like the (...).
Lamp that is unquenchable, in the story which laughs at the winds ( ridebis
ventos, says he) that swell, and puff, and blow against it, but it cannot
blow it out: and they that carry it are like the Persian Soldiers, which they
call (...).
immortal, of whom the world may say, as they did once of the Grecians in that
Epigramme, whom they thought invulnerable; (...).
we shoot at them, but they fall not down, we wound them, and not kill them.

In a word: as Gamaliel said of the Apostles preaching, if it be of God it will
prevail, we may invert it and say most truly, if it prevail thus against all
opposition, surely, it is of God, they are men of his right hand, men of God,
Gods Ambassadors.

There is no gainsaying (...).
Demosthenes words: it is true of the power of the Spirit, in the word of the
Ministers: as it was said of Steven, his enemies could not so much as (...).
stand against the wisdom of the Spirit of God that was in him, but fell
down, as Dagon did before the Arc.

The tale of the Dragon and his train (the false Prophet is the tail, says
Isaiah, and the Pope is the false Prophet, as may appear out of the
Revelation) the tail of the Dragon, the Pope, may draw the third part of the
stars out of heaven, but the gates of Hell cannot prevail against any part of a
star in the right hand of Christ: O thence it is that they are so invincible.

2. Corinthians. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.
YOu have seen a Lark upon a fine Sunn-shine day mounting and singing, not to
the Sun (as Cardan tells of strange flowers, that make strange hymns to the
Moon) but (as Clemens Alexandrinus speaks) of the quire of Grasshoppers, one of
which leapt upon the Musicians Harp, and supplied the want of a string that
chanced to crack in the midst of his song ( (...).
to the most wise God the inventer of music,) a song of thanksgiving to him
that taught her the art of singing, and so she climbes aloft with her pretty
note, peiring and peiring, as though she would peire into the secrets of
Heaven: but on the sudden, when you have long expected what news she would
bring from thence, you have seen her fall silently to the earth again: me
thinks those Ministers may be said to be like those Larkes, fly like Larkes,
and fall like Larks, which rise much in the contemplative of their discourse,
nothing in the practical; which in the explication of truths wind up their
auditors understanding to so high a pitch, that they seem to carry them into
Heaven, and make them read distinctly in the volumnes of eternity, but in the
application so slacken their hand, that they let their affections fall again,
and have them where they found them at the first, on earth. And therefore I will
crave leave to spend this exercise wholly in such instructions as may be
profitably deducted out of that which has been formerly delivered. You have
heard the proportion between the Ministers of God and the messengers of
Princes, how they are Ambassadors; the compulsion and necessity of the sending
of these, why there needed Ambassadors; the election of these, why such mean
men were made Ambassadors; the confirmation of the point, that these mean men
are notwithstanding Gods Ambassadors, and this the last time: where the last
proof was from the efficacy of their Ministry, as it was upon the heart, in
which respect that may be said of all, which was said of Luther, that he spoke
as if he had been within a man: in that it was a great work upon the heart, a
resurrection, a regeneration, a new creation, in that it was against the
propension of the subject, the heart of man opposing it, in that it was without
any great preparation of art and eloquence: in which respects though there had
never been any miracle, to seal their preaching, yet it may be said of the
doctrine it self, as the Thomists say of their Master Aquinas, Etsi nullis in
vita sua nec morte miraculis claruisset, etc. to warrant his canonization for a
Saint, yet his doctrine would be sufficient, quot enim articulos, tot miracula,
so many articles as he wrote, so many miracles God wrought by him, quilibet
enim est unum miraculum, say they: and may not I say, so many articles of
Religion, so far above natural reason, as they have persuaded men to
believe, so many miracles have they wrought? Lastly, in that it has prevailed
over the whole world, in spite of all enemies and opposition, in which respect
I may not unfitly parallel the triumph of the Word of God, concerning Christ,
with the triumph of Christ himself described in the 19. of the Revelation, who
is called the Word of God, not without some reference to this I think, Rev. 19
11. 12, 13.
And I saw Heaven opened, and behold a white Horse, and he that sat upon him
was called faithful and true, and in righteousness he does judge and make
war: his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns, and
he had a name written that no man knew but himself, and he was clothed in a
vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called the Word of God, and out of his
mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations, and he
shall rule them with a rod of iron, etc. I might improove this text, but that I
make haste to the observations that follow, which I must pass over in a word,
because I have many things to speak; and am loath to trouble memory.

The first of which, concerns those that enter into the ministry. Use I.
It is reported of three Roman Ambassadors appointed for Bythinia, one of
which had his head full of scarres, the second did vecordia laborare, and the
third had the gout in his feet, of whom Cato said scoffingly, that Romana
legatio neque caput, neque cor, neque pedes haberet: and it were great pity
that Gods Ministers, which are his Ambassadors, should be such, as might be
obnoxious to any just obloquy of the World* for any gross defects: it would
well become the Church of God, the Spouse of Christ, which wears the keys of
authority at her girdle: (as I noted heretofore) to turn the key against all
those that would presume to enter, into this great office and charge, and had
not good cards to show for it; that should be found defective either in sound
understanding, or sincere affection, or unblameable conversation, either in
head, or heart, or feet. Princes count it a point of honor to send those that
are fit, and in this case it is a shrewd presumption, that those that are not
fit, were never sent by God, who is so jealous of his honor; they may be
uncased for counterfeits, that have not these gifts to show, as it were letters
of credit from their Master. There is indeed a latitude, and it were folly to
disable every one, that cannot fill Procrustes bed: but it is wisdom again to
measure every one, and (...).
stretch them out by Paul's Canons, as Nazianzen speaks, that they should be of
(...).
good behavior, apt to teach, at the least, it is not necessary every one
shonld be a golden mouthed Chrysostom, but who ever heard of dumb Orators,
dumb Ambassadors: much is required of them, they must instruct, exhort,
reprove, correct, etc they must be wise, and learned, and meek, and zealous,
or to use Nazianzens word, they must be (...).
in a word heavenly, they should reflect some splendour back upon their honors,
which cast so great a luster upon their persons, that it may be said of them,
as he says of a learned and worthy Cardinal, Qua demum purpurato facto ipsa
mihipurpura vere fact a ornatior: we should not hear then any complaints of
such as the Father speaks, (...).
I may translate it, yesterday players on the Stage, and to day laborers in
the Lords Vineyard. But there were sous of Ely which were sons of Belial,
slovenly Priests, that made the people of Israel abhor the offering of the
Lord, and I would to God there were none such now adays. It was the sin of
Jeroboam who made Israel to sin, that he made Priests of the (...).
vilest of the people indeed the basest of the people if they were but men,
were too good to make Priests for Ieroboams gods, which were but Calves. But
what has Gods truth and religion deserved, that she should fall into such
hucsters hands? If this were tolerable, and God would bear with it in the time
of our former ignorance, when the Proverb was verified (...).
the worst Cretian is as good as the best Grecian, and inter caecos luscus Rex
est, yet in this great (...).
augmentation of light and learning, it must needs be lamentable. The Ass did
not only teach the Fox wit, as it is in the Fable, but the Prophet also, as we
read of Balaam: and Christ himself made use of an Ass; but it was then when
the Disciples might say truly, The Lord has need of him: but now we may say as
the servants of Achish said of David, when he slavered his beard, and scrabled
on the walls, has our Lord need of mad men? who if they chance to bestow any of
their children on the Church, as he said of Basil, who was therefore preserved
from the violence of an Arian Emperor, because he was a means to recover his
son of a dangerous Ague, that he was (...).
the gift of an Ague: so they are the gift of some lamenesse, or some
blindness, some infirmity, or deformity, some want of gifts; if he be good
for nothing, he will make a Preacher, say they. Base wretch! Does the Lord
require that the beast which is offered to him should be without blemish, and
can he take it well, the Priest that offers it should be full of blemishes?
Does he call for a reasonable Sacrifice, and will he be content with an
unreasonable Sacrificer? Shall they be thought fit to rule in Gods
commonwealth, which some wise Philosophers have not thought fit to live in
their commonwealth? Yes, go to the Prince and offer him such a present, will he
accept him at thy hands? Mal. 1. 8.
say to him I have a son which I had purposed to have made a Lawyer, or a
Merchant, or a Tradesman, or a Husbandman, but because he is lame, or blind,
dull, or simple, I beseech your Majesty to take him into your service, to make
him your Ambassador: I leave it to you to imagine what the King would answer
such a rude suitor. But you know what Xerxes did, when he was solicited by an
old man, (a father) that he would release but one son of seven from the
service of the wars, that he might remain with him, a stay, and staff of
his age, caused all to be slain before him, thinking him unworthy to have any
son that would not give them all freely to his Sovereign. And we read that
Mephibosheth, lame Mephibosheth was a Courtier, but we do not read that he
was an Ambassador; or rather he was entertained at David's Table as a friend,
not as a Courtier. Why do I speak to these men of the earth, who (...).
do account Religion so much worth, as they find her rated in their books of
account; whose best Christianity is but good husbandry, their tongue goes of
the Service at the Altar, but their eye squints at the fat of the sacrifice?
Let me rather turn to those that are more like to hear me, and so conclude
this point. Hearken then O ye sons of the Prophets: seems it a small thing
to you to be Ambassadors for a King, for the King of Heaven? Suffer me to give
a little counsel. The Church of God is an honorable stage, God, and Men, and
Angels, are judicious spectators: these Seminaries of learning are attiring
houses wherein we do address our selves to action, you must bethink your
selves of all the helps and ornaments that may either grace or expedite your
function. And Lord what a world there is of this mundus Theologicus! as I may
so speak: A rich invention, a solid judgment, a faithful memory: all these
like your Merchants Ships, returning from some happy voyage, full fraught and
laden with precious wares, the skill of Arts, of tongues, the ancient Hebrew,
the copious Greek, the elegant Latin, (Tongues are necessary for Ambassadors,
and these tongues are very necessary for Gods Ambassadors) all which must be
assisted (as the Orb in his motion, with his Intelligence, or rather informed
as the body with the soul in all his operations) with pithy Logic, persuasive
Rhetoric, profound Philosophy, that I might not name others, every one of
which apart, would make a noble profession in another, and yet altogether make
but a small part of the noble profession of Theology, and rather not a part,
but a porch of this royal building: for I have not yet told you of the
Scripture, in which not a word, not a Jot, not a title, but has his weight,
and must not be suffered to perish, the depth of the Scripture, least it be
said by some scoffing Samaritan, the Well is deep and thou have never a Bucket.
Lastly, the infiniteness of Divinity (there is no infinity in Philosophy, but
here there is) positive, controversall, Ecclesiastical, experimental, for the
Chair, for the Schools, for the Pulpit, for the conscience, Omnia quae multo
ante memor provisa repones,
Si te digna manet divini gloriaruris.


All which are necessary for him that would be a worthy Divine in the Country,
that I may conclude the catalogue of instruments in this heavenly Georgicks, as
Virgil does that of his Georgicks. He that should be as Nazianzen says of
Basil, (...).
he breathed as much fire as eloquence, that none were like him; and such for
Logic, that it were easier to wind ones self out of a Labyrinth without
Ariadnes thread, then to untie the Herculean knots of his Syllogismes, and had
all the rest answerable, would find use for all: Illi des nominis hujus
honorem, (as the Poet says in another case) he is a Divine indeed, let him be
so styled. But as for him that is altogether ignorant in any of these, let him
say, I am no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, but I was among the herds
men of Tekoah. To conclude this, they that are too forward in this kind, may
run apace, as Ahimaaz did, they may run faster to the Sepulcher of Christ,
as John did, but Peter that was slower went further, for John came first to the
Sepulcher, but Peter went first into the Sepulcher and saw all things. In a
word, let them be sure to take their instructions with them, that desire to go
Ambassadors.

I come now to the second observation, 2. Use.
which concerns those that are in the Ministry, and that diverse ways, both
for instruction, and first for their life. If Vzzah must die but for touching
the Ark of God, and that to stay it when it was like to fall: if the men of
Bethshemesh but for looking into it: if the very beasts that do but come near
the holy Mount be threatened: then what manner of persons ought they to be, who
shall be admitted to talk with God familiarly, to stand before him (as the
Angels do) and behold his face continually: to bear the Arc upon their
shoulders, to bear his name before the Gentiles, in a word, to be his
Ambassadors. Holiness becomes thy house O Lord, and were it not a ridiculous
thing to imagine, that the Vessels must be holy, the Vestures must be holy, all
must be holy, but only he upon whose very garments must be written Holiness to
the Lord, he might be unholy: that the bells of the horses should have an
inscription of holiness upon them, in Zechariah, and the Saints-Bells, the
Bells of Aaron, should be unhallowed? No, they must be shining and burning
lights, or else their influence will dart some malignant quality* they must
chew the cud and divide the hoof, or else they are unclean; they must (...).
divide the Word aright, and (...).
walk uprightly in their life, join life to learning; or either of them
single, like the solitary Helena to the Mariners, will be unhappy: they must be
such, as he says of zealous Christians, which unwisely opposed their Pastor,
which had a (...).
conversation persuading to godliness; they must be such of which that may be
verified, (...).
his degree credited his life, and his life graced his degree: then shall all
the world know them to be Gods servants, Gods Ambassadors: they shall be like
Innes, which have their Signs on both sides: like those which you have seen
of the Kings Guard, which have the Arms of the Crown on their breasts and on
their backs, they carry about them a double demonstration of their office, a
priori, and a posteriori: If they meet with you in their doctrine, you know
them for Gods servants: If you follow them in their steps, in their example;
you know them for Gods servants, either way they bear the stamp and
cognizance of Heaven upon them. Excellently Nazianzen of Athanasius, (...).
he was rich for the theorick, and rich for the practick in his life, and he
linckt both as in a golden chain, manifesting it, by using his conversation as
a guide of his speculation, and his speculation as a seal of his conversation:
where the reading I think may be better inverted. If this be wanting, they
dishonor the country from whence they come, the Prince from whom they come,
and this dead Amasa, this dead Doctrine not quickened with a good life, lying in
the way, stops the people of the Lord, that they cannot go on cheerfully in
their spiritual warfare. They would be wished therefore, to preach no
otherwise then Origin did, you know the story: Origin after his foul fall,
when put to his choice, whether he would defile himself with an Ethiopian
woman, or sacrifice to the Heathen gods, he had done the latter, coming to the
Church at Jerusalem, and being requested to preach there, he opened the book,
and fell upon that in the Psalm, What have thou to do to take my words into
thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed? which when he had read, he closed
the book again, and sat down and wept, and all the congregation wept with
him, and this was all his sermon. And thus in my opinion would these men be
counseled to repent of their preaching, and so as it were preach of their
repentance. The second instruction follows, for their doctrine: For this title
of Ambassadors, commends many things unto them, as, 1. Fidelity. Ambassadors
have a commission, beyond which they must not go, and I think it is disputed
and determined by Lawyers, that a Legate may not transgress it, though he
might, in probability advantage his master more otherwise: I am sure, it must
be so with Gods Ambassadors, the Word is their commission, from which if they
swerve, the Lord will commence an Action, (...).
concerning their Embassage, against them: And if it were possible, that
traditions, and humane inventions, could gain more glory then this, yet, they
that presumed to use them, might justly look to be handled as the Triumvirs
did the servant of a noble Senator of Rome, that betrayed his Master, whom they
had proscribed: they rewarded him for his service to them, because he delivered
him who was proscribed, they proving him guilty; and then they rewarded him for
his treachery to his master, whom he should have preserved, they cast him down
headlong from the Capitol, and brake his neck. 2. Humility. They go for
another, they must not woe for themselves: Non nobis Domine, non nobis, not unto
us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be given all the praise and glory,
must be their song. They may take up the Emblem that a noble Lady of France,
being suspected of a crime, and not well knowing how to wash it away otherwise,
used a watering Pot dropping, with this Motto, Nil mihi praeterea, praeterea
mihi nil: The Ministers I say may well use this watering pot, for Paul may
plant, and Apollo water, but it is God that gives the increase. In a word,
(because I am forced to post over these things) as Peter and John having healed
a lame man, that lay at the beautiful gate of the Temple, said to the people
that beheld it, and began to have them in some admiration, Why gaze you upon
us, as if we had done this by our own power, etc? And as the King Canutus in
our English History, took off the Crown from his own head, and set it upon
the Crucifixe at Westminster: So Gods Ambassadors, must not receive honor for
themselves, but must be like the Mercuriall Statues to point men the right way
to Christ. 3. Diligence, Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently, especially they that are* is Ambassadors, they must not say, as
Justin Martyr speaks, in a case not much different, (...). We know not how to
minister.
we know not how to work: but as the heroical Prince professes, so their
Arms must be, the feathers, and their word, I serve: and who is so dull a
Gramarian, that cannot put these together, and make this easy construction,
That the nature of their service requires much diligence, and expedition: Their
master and their errand, the authority of the one, the necessity of the other,
the reward, the punishment, the horror of the one, the hope of the other, will
compel them to discharge their office, with all possible industry. Who would
not run like a star in perpetual motion upon earth, that he might shine like
a star in heaven hereafter, in perpetual rest and glory but to leave this, as
not so proper, Luther said wittily of a servant, Minus nocet ignavus fur, quam
segnis minister, which is most true here: the little Foxes that the Canticles
speaks of that steals the Grapes, do not so much hurt, as the idle Ministers,
lazy laborers in the Lords Vineyard. 4. Courage and resolution against all
fear or flattery, Fear not their faces, (says the Lord to Jeremy) lest I
destroy thee. Popilius a Roman Ambassador to Antiochus the great, having
delivered his message, and the King deferring his answer, and demurring on it,
drew a circle round about him with his wand, and conjured him, to determine,
and resolve, whether he would have peace or war, before he went a foot out of
the circle: which wondrous resolution and confidence, caused him presently to
define, peace. And do not we see how bold every petty Constable will bear
himself upon the higher power, I charge you in the Kings name, etc. and why
should only Gods Ambassadors like children, be afraid of shadows and
bugbeares? The world has many reproachful nicknames for Gods Ambassadors,
Priest, Parson, Vicar, etc. what should we do? as he in the Poet,

-- Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo -- ipse domi.
Vain men! as though the crown of honor, which God himself has put upon
the head of all these, whom he has made his Ambassadors, were made of such
fading flowers, as would be blasted with every stinking breath, of every
profane scoffer; away with such ignoble, and base pusillanimity: to be scared
with these, we are too too nice and dainty, Christi nimis delicati martyrs,
as one speaks, if we think the worse of our selves, or of our profession for
this, or if not the better. It is a small thing, yet many times more praise
worthy, to digest these without any rising of stomach, quam centum plagas
Spartana nobilitate concoxisse: like curs they bark, because they are afraid
of you, they would not have you come near them. They speak evil of you,
because you do well, or as he said plainly, being asked why they did so, quia
malefacere nequeunt. In the wilderness, these wild beasts go loose, and prey
upon Gods children: but in this prosperity of Sion, the Law chains them, and
chains them so, that they cannot hurt, and therefore they grin the more afar
off. Let them know, every contumelious word against a Christian, who is the
son of God, is at least scandalum magnatum, against his Ambassadors, petty
treason, and when they belch forth this among their Tobacco-smoke to collow
them, they utter voces per jugulum redituras, as the Phrase is. What if Ahab
frown and fret, and charge the Prophet of sharpness, and unkindnesse: Thou
never propheciest good unto me, like the King in Homer, (...). Jnquit Agamemnon
ad vatem Calchanta. Iliad. (...).
Thou never propheciest good unto me? What if that be true, loquor certa crux?
as Francis the first of France, when he looked for an Embassage from Charles
the fifth the Emperor, which he liked not, set up a Gallows at the Court gate,
and promising to hang him on it, that should bring the message We must say as
Michaiah did, as the Lord lives, what the Lord says unto me, that will I
speak unto thee. We must conclude with Nazianzene, (...).
we fear only that which is of the fulness of God. We must resolve with
noble Luther, If all the tiles in Worms were Devils, yet I would not be afraid
to go and speak in behalf of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Or as Hector in
Homer, (...).
I will combat with him, although his hands were as fire, and his strength as
Iron. Tell me, who was that, being about to speak for the nation of the Jews
in great danger, armed her self with this, If I perish I perish, was it not
Hester? was it not a woman? and yet it was a more then a manlike speech, and
yet it smells strong of some womanly weakness, If I perish, I perish: no,
Hester was deceived, that had been truer, Periisses nisi periisses: And this
may be a riddle which a Christian only can areed, and a Christian will areed it
easily, if I perish, I flourish. Admirably Themistocles, when being about to
speak to Eurybiades, the chief Commander of the Greeks forces against
Xerxes, he held up his staff, as if he had been about to strike him, (...).
strike (said he) but yet hear: so let every Minister say, scoff if you will,
but hear; rail if you will, but I pray hear: strike if you will, but I
beseech you, hear that Word of God which I bring unto you. But incomparably
Pompey, who being chosen Curator annonae, in a great dearth at Rome, and having
made great provision for the relief of his Citizens, and ready now to put to
Sea for the conveyance of it, when the Pylot of his Ship told him that the wind
was boistrous, the Sea tempestuous, and the passage like to be very dangerous,
it skilleth not (said Pompey) hoist up sail, (...).
it is necessary for us to sail, it is not necessary for us to live. So should
every man of God resolve (whose lips, and Libraries, are the very Granaries of
Gods people) it is not necessary that I should live, but it is necessary, and
woe is unto me, if I do not preach the Gospel, of which I am an Ambassador. To
shut up this, as the Philosopher has observed, (...).
every Coward is a Murderer. And as Mauritius the Emperor, said of Phocas, who
conspired against him, having enquired of his disposition, and hearing, that he
was fearful, Si timidus est, homicida est, said he: So I say in this case,
the cowardice of the Ministers, is cruelty: if he fear the faces of men, he
is a murderer of the souls of men. A word of flattery. It is a rule in
Plutarch that a Queen gives a Courtier, those that speak to Princes, must
speak silken words, their tender ears will not abide the scratch of biting
truths: but as a worthy Divine has wittily observed, I think (says he) that
must be understood of silken men: but as for Elias, or John Baptist, a
Minister, a smooth tongue will as ill become their rough garments, as Jacobs
smooth voice, became his rough hands; between which, there was a real and
palpable contradiction: as it did become the Ass in the Fable, to fawn and
leap upon his master, which he did, because he saw the Dog that did it, was
much made of for it. Of all things in the world, a Parasite and a Pulpit, are
most incompetible. It is most base for Gods Ambassadors, which represent his
person, to pick feathers off from great Men's coats, (an ancient character of a
Parasite) to stuff pillowes withal to sow underneath their elbowes: how much
do they cast themselves beneath themselves, and trample upon the royalty of
their office, that can find in their hearts to stoop to this servility? A
Lacedaemonian slave standing to be sold in the market, and asked of a chapman,
what Art he knew? (...).
I am a free man, said he: and shall Gods Ambassadors be the greatest slaves,
whose very speech being but attired and attended (as they ought to be) with
that majesty and authority, which Divine truths carry in their very
countenance, should command as much reverence, as the Pontifical garments, in
which Iuddus the high Priest met with Alexander the Great, who was so affected
with that auguste state, and bravery of them, that he fell down at his feet,
and worshipped him, as Josephus records. I have done with the instructions: a
word or two of encouragement.

I will not be so bold my self, but I would commend any thing, to some that
were worthy to put our great Rabbis in mind, wherein their honor lies: it is
not Silks, nor Velvets, nor Scarlet, nor a goodly train (what do I speak of
these) it is not Throns, nor Dominations, nor Powers, nor any dignities, that
can make a man so truly honorable, as the preaching of the Gospel to poor
souls, to be Gods Ambassadors, surely they are mistaken, they need not fear,
the frequency in this duty, should prove a disparagement or imminution to
greatness. Excellently says our Savior, All power is given unto me both in
Heaven and Earth: I will now prefer all my servants, and make you Lords and
Rulers, but wot ye how? it follows, Go preach to all Nations, but this, by
the way. I conclude this with a word to some, with whom I may be bold. Let no
man here that is in a way to the Ministry, believe the false spies that raise
an ill report upon that good land, that flows with milk and honey. I will say
no more now, but is it think you a base thing and sordid, to be Ambassadors to
the King of Heaven? I will repeat it once more, because I can scarce hear
without some indignation, that that should be a maxim in the worlds Heraldrie,
for earthly Kings, once Ambassador, ever honorable: And it is a base thing to
be Ambassadors for the King of Heaven. And now I come to the third deduction,
concerning the people, which I must run over. I shall not need to tell you,
that you must not offer any discourtesie to these Ambassadors: Ambassadors are
inviolable by the law of Nations: and the Lord has set a better mark then Cain
had, and given them a better pasport, touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm: And if any should rise up against them, I would tell them
boldly, what one whispered in the Captains ear, when he was something too busy
with Paul, Take heed what thou do, this man is a Roman: Take heed what thou
do, this man is an Ambassador. The Romans sacked the famous Corinth and
razedit to the ground, for a little discourtesie they offered to their
Ambassadors: And what shall the Lord of the Vineyard do to those husbandmen,
that beat and stoned and killd his servants, that he sends unto them? It is a
symptom of a disordered and desperate estate. When these Ambassadors are
violated, we pull all Gods judgments upon our heads, with the chains of our
sins: but this is the link of the chain that immediately draws them. It is
a remarkable place, in the last of the Chronicles, Moreover all the chief of
the Priests and the people transgressed very much after all the abominations of
the Heathen, and polluted the house of the Lord, that he hallowed at Jerusalem:
here be many links, but observe that follows, And the Lord God of their
Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up betimes and sending, because
he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place. But they mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets (this is
the last link, and ye see judgment fastened, chained, and linked to it) until
the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy.
Therefore he brought upon them the Chaldees, etc. I pass from this. When Ehud
told the King of Moab, I have a Message to thee from God, O King, he rose from
his thron and bowed himself. I think it was Francis that said, if he should
meet a Preacher and an Angel together, he would first salute the Preacher, and
the Angel after. I am sure Paul says of the Galathians, that they received
him as an Angel of God, yea as Jesus Christ, and that they would have plucked
out their eyes for him, how beautiful are the feet of those upon the
mountains that bring the glad tidings of Peace, says the Church in the
Prophet: the Spouse of Christ is so humble, or modest, or both, that she dares
look no higher then the feet, and yet she spies beautiful, written in the
very dust of their feet (as you have seen a contrary word other where) and
that in such legible characters, that she reads it afar off, before they come
near her, upon the mountains, as though it had been written with a Sun beam
upon some Eastern hill in a goodly morning: and those letters printed such
affection in her, that being not able to express it by art, she throws down
her pensill, (as you have heard of the Painter) and expresses it with a
passion, or rather, she shadows that she could not set forth in a patheticall
exclamation: How beautiful are the feet of those upon the mountains, that
bring glad tidings of peace! and what she did in speeches, Mary in the Gospel
spoke in deed, she fell down at the feet of Christ, she broke her box of
precious ointment and powered it upon them, she let fall a shower of more
precious tears, (penitent tears are something like to pearls, but that they
are more precious) with which she washed them: she wiped them with a most
precious towell, the hairs of her head: me thinks these golden hairs were
like to threads of gold, with which Mary tied her self (as it were) in a true
lovers knot to her best beloved Savior. Would you know plainly what
entertainment you must give these Ambassadors. I will tell you in a word. Give
attention, credit, obedience to their words: if they thunder and lighten out of
Mount Sinai, if the Lion roar, let the proudest beast in the forest quake and
tremble: if Mount Sion let fall her silver drops, if the silver trumpet of the
Gospel sound peace and comfort, let the poorest worm forget that he creeps
upon the earth, and think he has a title to Heaven. I know you long till I
make an end, and so do I too. To conclude therefore: I wish you could forget
all that has been spoken, and blot it out of your memory, to fasten this one
thing which I am now to say. Let this be our remembrance when we go to the
Lords house, I go now to hear what Gods Ambassadors shall say unto me: they
that dress themselves to go with any colder or baser conceits, may well be
checked, as Caligula was wont to say tyrannically, what Antidotum contra
Caesarem: and that is a real crime in them only, which was a ridiculous
accusation of Trebonius, Quod telum toto pectore non exceperit. Again let this
be our meditation, when we return from thence, with benefit, Blessed be thou,
and blessed be thy counsel, and blessed be the Lord that sent thee out to meet
me this day: Surely this is a man of God, a man of Heaven: tell me, O you that
are cunning linguists, did he not speak with the tongue of Angels? was not I in
heaven while I heard him? is it but an imaginary fancy? or did I hear the
more then Pythagorean harmony of the spears? His words like Sovereign balm
dropped into my wounded soul, like the sweet influence of the Pleiades upon this
lower world: me thought, I felt my heart (while he spoke) shoot up into my
ears, as it were to meet and kiss the blessed lips, which distilled such
gracious dew, such golden showers, and drink them as the parched, and thirsty
earth the dew of Heaven: and yet, in the sweet remembrance thereof, My soul
magnifieth the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices in God my Savior. Blessed be the
Lord that has sent his Angels, (as he did to Peter) to draw me out of the
dungeon of sin and misery, that has sent his Ambassadors, as David did to
Hanun, to comfort me. Signa Deum agnosco per sua, Christus adest: only Christ
the (...).
munificent God (as Nazianzen calls him) could go to the cost of these precious
and cordial words, he has put them into the mouths of his Ambassadors.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father, and the
comfortable fellowship of the blessed Spirit, be with all those blessed souls,
that by the grace of God, and power of his Spirit, love the Lord Jesus.

Deo soli gloria.
SIX SERMONS, ON I COR. II. II.

Preached at Cambridge, BY JOHN STOUGHTON, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes
Fellow of Immanuel College in Cambridge, late of Aldermanbury, LONDON.

Perfected by the Author in his life time.

COLOS. 3. 11. But Christ is all, and in all. LONDON, Printed by R. B. for John
Bellamie, Henry Overton, John Rothwell, and Ralph Smith. 1640.

A methodicall Analysis of the chief heads treated on in these Sermons, upon
the 1 CORINTHIANS. 2. 2.
1. Context. 1 Occasion of the Epistle, ministered by. 1. Information of those
of the house of Cloe. 2 Inquiry of those of the Church of Corinth
2. Argument of the Epistle, 1. Complaint of corruptions, to Chap. 7. 2.
Resolution of questions.
Complaint of corruptions. 1. Persons guilty. 1. Magistrates. 2. Preachers. 3.
Whole Presbytery.

2. Several maladies. 1. Permitted. 1. Schism, 1. Broken out with arrogance.
2. Not bound up with charity.
2. Incest, 1. Committed by vilanie. 2. Not controlled by authority.
3. Law suits, 1. Prosecuted at heathen Courts. 2. Not taken up by Christian
care.


3. Cure, 1. Of Schism, from 10. verse. of 1. Chap, to 5. 1. Intimated. 1.
Premises his Letter sent by Timothy. 4. 17. 2. Promises to come himself, 19.
2. Expressed. 1. Sum of the Letter, an exhortation to unity. 1. Proposition
supposed, 10. 2. Assumption whetted with interrogations, v. 13 3. Conclusion.
1. Proposed. 1. Sweet entreaty. 2. Sound authority. verse. 10.

2. Iterated, 14. verse. of 4. Chapter.
2. An objection. 1. Insinuated, verse. 12. 2. Removed, where.
1. Causes of their disorder. 1. Bewitching tongues of teachers. 2. Itching
ears of hearers.
2. Cure: where is expressed, 1. Duty of people: they must not esteem too
highly of their Ministers: for, 1. They are but the Lords Servants. 2. The
Corinthians servants in the Lord.
2. Duty of Ministers in Paul's example: in which 1. Efficient 1. God,
peremptorily commanding. 2. Paul, voluntarily obeying.
2. End. 1. God intends his glory, Chap. 1. 2. Paul attends the Peoples good,
Chap. 2.
1. God commands Paul so to do, v. 17. of 1. Chap. to the end. 2. Paul
determines to do so. 3. He did so.


2. Text, with the context contains. 1. A general precept, 1. What they must
preach, in the Text. 1. For matter, Christ Jesus only. 2. For manner, with all
humility.
2. Why they must preach, in the text and context. 1. God commands it. 2. It is
the Ministers duty, from the ends he seeks. 1. Gods glory, not his own
applause. 2. The peoples salvation, not his approbation.
3. How they must preach. 1. Not in humane wisdom. 2. Plainly and humbly.
2. An illustrious example of Paul.
3. Text alone: where, 1. The Ministers duty, which is more natural to the
scope. 1. Expressed in Paul's example. 2. Enforced: as it contains. 1. A
precept concerning the argument of preaching: 2. An argument to provoke us to
that precept.
1. Paul did thus, therefore none exempted. 2. He did this, not out of
rashness, but deliberated what to do. 3. He determined not so much as to know.
4. Not any thing. 5. No not amongst the Corinthians, save Christ crucified.
Observe, That if Paul upon these terms would not, then no Minister upon any
terms must preach any thing, but Jesus Christ and him crucified.
2. The duty of every man, which is more general in the order of nature. Doct.
That the knowledge of Jesus Christ crucified, is sufficient to Salvation.
2 Explication, two things to be considered* 1 Appretiation 2. Appropriation,
1. Gift. 2. Conveyance

1. Gift, Christ is a sufficient Savior. 1. What is meant by salvation: where
is considered, 1. The utmost end and chief happiness of man. 2. His present
state by nature.
2. How Christ has sufficiently wrought salvation for us. 1. Explained, 1. He
has redeemed us from all misery. 1. Of sin. 1. Original impuritie. 2.
Actualimpiety.
2. Of punishment.
2. He has filled us with all good things. 1. Holiness. 2 Happiness

2. Proved, 1. By 3. things in the text, 1. He is Christ. 2 He was crucified
forus 3. He is Jesus.
2. Scripture.
2. Conveyance: Faith is sufficient to make him our Savior. 1. Explication. 1.
What faith is. 2. How it comes to be sufficient.
2. Prooved.
1. Faith in Christ is the sum of Divinity. 1. Doctrine of Divinity, Christ
being, 1. The foundation of faith. 2. The fountain of obedience.
2. The rule of Divinity; considered in a double difference. 1. Before Christ.
1. Before the Law. 2. Under the Law.
2. After Christ. 1. Before the Law, this was the Religion of, 1. Adam. 2.
Abraham.
2. Under the Law, they were lead to Christ by, 1. Their Sacraments. 1.
Ordinary. 2. Extraordinary.
2. Ceremonies.
1. Sacrifices. 1. Propitiatory. 2. Gratulatorie.
2. Holy persons. 3. Holy places.
3. In the times of the Gospel.
2. Christ is the scope of all the Scripture in General. 1. As the immutable
substance of the Rule is considered. 2 As it may be accommodated to the
mutable circumstances of the rule, according to the difference of time. He is
the sum, 1. Of the old Testament in 1. Prophetical, 2. Historical
Scriptures.


2. New Testament.
Application. 1. Confutation of Popish errors, out of the 3. particulars
severally. 1. If Christ be a sufficient Savior, then 1. Saints are no
Saviors. 2. Sinners cannot be their own Saviors.


2. If Christ be the sum of the Scriptures, then 1. The Scriptures are
perfect. 2. They are perspicuous.
3. If Christ be the sum of divinity, then we may know. 1. What is the true
Religion. 2. How to unmask Antichrists counterfeit religion.
2. Exhortation out of all jointly. 1. For Ministers, what is the rule of
preaching. 2. For all, what must be the scope and aim of all our studies.
1. Confutasion, 1 Saints are not Saviors, therefore not to be invocated:
where is discovered, 1. General Idolatry of the Synogogue of Rome. 2. More
especially, the worship of Saints, in which, 1. They have made the way crooked.
2. They have made it wide. 3. They have made the gate wider. 4. They have made
many gates.
3. More particularly, in the worship of the Virgin Mary, convinced both 1. By
Scripture. 1. John 2. 4. 1 John 2. 2. Revel. 19. 20. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Ephesians. 3. 12.
2. By Reason.






1 Corinthians. 2. 2. For I determined to know nothing among you, but Christ Jesus,
and him Crucified.
THis verse, as you see, is linked to the former, not entire of it self, and
independent, as appears by the first particle, being a causall conjunction,
For I determined: and it takes us by the hand, and leads us to the next verse,
of which it is a reason: for,

1. There was registered S. Paul's action, I cannot, etc. and here we have the
cause rendered, which is, Paul, agens consilio, his determination, I did not,
for I determined. And yet we cannot stay there, for we find and another
particle, as it were another stayer, to lead us yet* higher. And therefore, I
pray give me leave to draw the whole pedigree of my Text by the line of method,
that so I may lead your understanding into the meaning of the words, with a
convenient construction, and lead my observations out of the meaning of the
words, without any violent consequution. Wherein if my discourse be tedious, I
will make no apology, but this, necessity forced me to seek further then my
Text, and when I was entered, delight persuaded me to seek farther then I
needed: yet I resolved when I had done, not to trouble you with any thing in
this kind, but then it was too late, I was compelled by another necessity.
Wherefore I must entreat you to accept it as it is. The Apostle Paul, like a
faithful labourer in the Lords Vineyard, had planted a Church at Corinth, and
watered it with a whole years Preaching, as it were, showring down the sweet
dewes of Heaven upon it. After his departure, though he had both his hands full
of other employments, yet, being jealous of the success of his labor, both
his eyes were watchful, if he might by any means further the work he had
begun: being thus desirous, there could not want occasion: For behold ere long,
both his ears are filled with news from Corinth; Those of the house of Chloe,
on the one side, welwillers to the welfare of the Church, have recourse to him,
to inform him of some corruptions wherewith the Church was troubled: for the
envious man had sown Tares among the good Seed, while the good man was
asleep. Those of the Church of Corinth, on the other side, make repair to him
to be informed in some questions, wherwth their conscience was troubled: for
the gracious Lord had blessed the labor of his good servant in planting and
watering, with a blessed increase. And thus you see a double occasion of
writing, which makes a double argument of this golden Epistle. Concerning
corruptions, to the seventh Chapter, where he fixes a transition (...), as it
were a mark of his passage to the second; which beginning there, holds on to
the end of the Epistle concerning questions: Sed transeat ista. The corruptions
were either such as were generally committed by all, not only permitted, as
Shisme, in the 4. Chapter, or permitted only by all, not generally committed,
as unnatural incest, Chapter 5. unchristian quarrels, Chapter 6. Ye see then
the deformities of Corinth, overspreading the whole face, and overgrowing the
whole body of the Church. All the Governors were guilty: The Preachers with
their affected eloquence and ambitious affectation had rent the people in
sunder, from unity to mutiny, from faith to faction. The whole Presbytery was
tardie in their duty, incest, horrible incest was among them, the shame of the
Church, the scorn of the Gentiles, the scandal of the Christians, in cest,
horrible incest was among them, jetting in their streets, and yet they see it
not, or wink at it, crying to Heaven and was heard; and yet their sword sleeps
in his scabbard and cannot be awaked. See yet further, they are but a little
handful, hemmed in with enemies round about, who watch them with a thousand
eyes, and yet they cannot leave wrangling among themselves, they must needs
hale one another to the judgment seats, and there in a goodly Theater set
themselves, Themselves? nay, the Gospel, the precious word of God, the joy,
glory, and jewel of a Christian, for which, a man's life were not dear, if he
bought it so: I say, they set the Gospel to sale, to the derision of the
Heathen. These then were the maladies of Corinth, Schism broken out with
arrogancy, and not bound up with humility: Incest committed by villainy, and
not controlled by authority: lawsutes prosecuted at Heathen courts, and not
taken up with Christian care: and Paul like a skillful Physician, applies Doses
to these diseases. Incest must be cured by cutting; Christian caution, may
prevent unchristian contention: but Schism is a longer task; that swelling
humor of pride and vainglory, must be abased and abated with the spare diet
of a single mind, a simple meaning, and a sincere manner in the Preaching of
the Word, that so the glory of God may be advanced, and all the pride of man
trampled in the dust.

The argument of Schism is continued from the 10. of the 1. to the end of the
4. Chapter, where a double course, used in the cure thereof, is intimated.

1. That which he premises. 2. That which he promises. He premises this Letter
sent by the hand of Timothy, that he might further the business: and promises,
that if this will not do, himself will shortly come and take further order.

The sum of the Letter is an exhortation to unity from one argument
especially, and is couched and concluded in this Enthymeme, You are all one in
Christ Jesus who is one, you agree with one mind, and one mouth: the
Proposition being supposed as very reasonable, and therefore suppressed as not
very necessary. The conclusion is proposed in the tenth of the first, where
because it stands (as it were) in the forefront without the premises, it is
guarded on the one side with a sweet entreatie, I beseech you brethren: on the
other side with a sound authority, By the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, being
(as it were) edged with the one, the sweet entreatie; and backed with the
other, the sound authority, that it might the better pierce into the very tower
of their affections; and force them with a sure charm to all sincere
obedience, and this conclusion iterated in the 14. of the 4. closes up the
whole argument.

The Assumption follows in the 13. of the 1. whetted, as it were, and pointed,
with nimble interrogations, which all speak as Spaniards in the language of
Pike, with invincible power, and unavoidable necessity, that Christ is the
only one, and undivided Savior.

But here the Corinthians bar up the way with an objection, which is
insinuated in the 12. verse, and is but insinuated in the whole progress: yet
so, that you may easily perceive that all Paul's pains in the four first
Chapters, is spent in the remoovall of this rub, the anticipation of this
objection: Now this it is.

Though there be but one Christ, one Master, yet there be many of Christ's
Ministers, and they have different gifts; one likes Paul's simple perspicuitie;
others, Apollos ample plenty; a third, Cephas solid potency; and therefore,
why may not I apply my self to Paul, I, to Apollo, I, to Cephas?

This their discourse (if you mark it) is a discovery of all the causes of
their disorder. They are two: the bewitching tongues of the teachers, and, the
itching ears of the people: the teachers arrogance, the peoples ignorance. The
teachers, faithless teachers, woo for themselves, instead of their Lord: the
people, foolish people, fall in love with the man, instead of the master, the
servant, instead of the sovereign: And therefore Paul instructs them both: the
teachers, what they should do, from the 14. of the 1. to the 5. of the 3. where
embracing an occasion, he sweetly passes to the people, what they should do:
the people must not account too highly of their Ministers, for two reasons.

1. They are but the Lords servants. They may well take up the emblem of a
watering-Pot dropping, with this word, Nil mihi praeterea, praeterea mihi nil.
For Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is the Lord that gives the
increase. And therefore they must not set up the labourer against the Lord.

Nay secondly, the Ministers, they are the Corinthians servants in the Lord,
For all things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world or
life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. And therefore, you must not make them lords of
your faith: and therefore, Let no man glory in men.

Now for the Ministers duty. It is not to seek themselves, but the glory of
God, and the good of the people; and therefore, not to preach themselves in
quaint words, and curious eloquence, but to preach both for matter, Christ
Jesus; and for manner, with all plainness, and without all affectation,
nothing but Christ Jesus with all humility, and without all ostentation,
nothing but Christ Jesus crucified. Christ Jesus, must be the argument of their
preaching, for in him God will be glorified: Christ Jesus must be the ornament
of their preaching, that he that glories may glory in the Lord. This is the
Sum of that which is laid down at length in Paul's example: his story reports
both the fact that he did so, and the causes, both efficients, and ends:
efficients, God peremptorily commanding, Paul voluntarily obeying God as a
royal Sovereign, Paul as a loyal subject, God imperio, Paul obsequio; both
which have their ends the same, to wit, the glory of the eternal God, and the
eternal good of the Corinthians: yet with this different distinction, God
independently, Paul in dependency; God as supreme head prescribing, Paul as
subordinate, subscribing to his holy pleasure: and with this disposition God
intending his glory, is specially treated of in the first Chapter, Paul
attending the peoples good, specially propounded in this Chapter. This is the
series rei, but the series historiae consists in three steps.

1. God commanded Paul, and all, so to do, from the 17. verse of the 1. to the
end.

2. Paul determined so to do, in the verse of my Text.

3. He did so, in the first verse, for thus they lie in order: and therefore
you must observe two things for the method.

1. That the first verse of this Chapter holds hands with the 17. of the 1. and
all which is inserted, is but a commoration in the story, illustrating the
command of God from the cause of his counsel, and the contrary conceit of the
worldlings.

2. That the order of the two latter parts in his determination and action
inverted, this being placed after the 1. verse, which in the accurate method,
should have had the precedencie.

To contract all that has been said: two things may be observed here, a
Precept, and an Example. The Precept is a description of a Minister of the
Gospel, to be such an one, as now being sent of God, is to preach the glad
tidings of Christ Jesus come into the World, for the redemption of mankind,
for the glory of God, and the salvation of his people: This description
contains the chief causes, as is showed. The example is Paul, in whom, as in
a glass, all this is represented, for three Reasons.

1. For Paul's own sake, to vindicate his integrity with the Corinthians,
inveigled with their Rabbinicall Doctors, and thence offended with Paul's
simplicity, began to call in question: as you may see.

2. For the Doctors sake, that if they would not learn their duty from God,
they might learn it from him, so lofty a pattern, of so lowly a piety: as
you may see.

3. For the Corinthians sake, to provoke them to a filial imitation, by the
patriall example of his humility.

To draw now to a conclusion. You see the context is a Commentary upon the
Text: and the Text is a Compendium of the context; for the Text is a
recapitulation of all the severalls above mentioned, the very quintessence of
all the simples before unfolded: and the Context is a light discovering what is
contained in the Text, both for words and meaning, and what may be collected
out of the Text, for instruction. The words may now be easily interpreted:
(...) may be rendered either, with Calvin, in precio habui, or with Beza,
decrevi; for it signifies Paul acting, consilio rei in all actions: and the
word of judgment (...) comprehends both, (...) must be rendered by a Metonymy
of the Cause for the Effect, by the word Preaching, or some such like, for you
see it notes Paul's ministerial function, and it is spoken (...), not so much
as know, even as (...) seem to be not any thing, that is not in comparison or
in competition. (...) is a Synechdoche, for all that was to be taught
concerning Christ Jesus, namely, faith in him, and salvation by him; even as
the last words (...), comprehend all his sufferings in general, of which, this
is a species (...). The meaning then is, as if Paul had said, I thought nothing
worthy to be known, and therefore determined to make show of no other knowledge
among you, but of the counsel of God, for your salvation, by a true faith in
Christ Jesus, who therefore was crucified for you.

This being the meaning, you see what this verse contains in it, namely, a
general precept, and a special example, a general precept in a special
example. The general precept is, that every Minister must preach, for matter,
Christ Jesus only; for manner, with all humility Christ Jesus crucified: this
is in the Text, and the context, as a Commentary, shows why this must be done,
from the efficients.

1. God he commands.

2. The Minister, it is his duty to obey. And from the ends.

1. He must seek Gods glory, not his own applause.

2. He must seek the peoples salvation, not his own approbation.

And secondly, it shows what is here forbidden, all humane wisdom and humane
eloquence, which tend any way to self seeking, and, therefore all these
doctrines are plainly contained in this precept, beside what may be collected:
as.

1. That the only way to seek Gods glory and the salvation of the people, is
by teaching Christ Jesus, and him Crucified, and him only: and therefore,

2. That we can hardly preach in humane eloquence and wisdom, but we shall be
in danger of bewraying our own vainglory, and betraying the Lords honor, and
the souls of his people.

3. The preaching in humility, is the best way to prevent Schisms in charity.

Now all these are made more illustrious in a most illustrious example, to
which every word in the Text pays tribute, that it may be excellent.

1. Paul did not seek the wisdom of words, to seek his own worship; and
therefore no man's greatness, or learning, no exemption can privilege, no
privilege can exempt any man from this necessary humility: for if any, then
might Paul have pretended this, who was brought up at Gamaliels feet, and
accomplished with all humane institution, who was rapt into the third heavens,
and acquainted with all divine revelations: and that you may not think, that
ignorance in letters, was the mother of this devotion to Christ, he was at
Lystry taken for a god, even for Mercury, the god of eloquence: yet Paul did
it not: yea.

2. He shaked off all tickling inticements; and shunned all inducements, for he
determined not to do it: yea.

3. He determined not so much as to know any thing beside Christ, as if he
should say, dele de hinc ex animo, (...), and surely, if we make an anatomy of
the whole body of Paul's Epistles, you shall find, Christ Jesus Crucified,
written in the heart of them, in golden characters, as truly, as they falsely
report that they were seen in the heart of Ignatius.

4. Mark the word, not any thing, not a (...), not a tittle of any thing, but
Christ Jesus Crucified: and yet we have not done, for behold yet a further
wonder.

5. He would not know any thing, no not among the Corinthians; if any where,
then surely he might have showed learning and eloquence at Corinth, a City of
Greece, a famous City, a learned City, where they could understand, and did
expect it, and, as it seems, and as I showed before, were offended with his
homlinesse: yet all this could not draw Paul from his charge, no more then they
could draw the Sun from his Chariot. Me thinks, I see the Corinthians amazed
at the hearing of the first verse, to see that Paul so lightly esteemed, that
which they so highly admired, and assaulting him in this manner.

It was once said, much learning, o Paul, has made thee mad; but now much love
has made thee mad. When we hear of a messenger from God, we looked to have
seen one clothed, clouded with the Moon, crowned with a Crown of Stars, and
looked thou should have spoken in the language of heaven, with the tongue of
Angels: but see what it is, a silly simple man, in a silly simple manner,
something like Archimedes, naked, and yet as earnest in crying (...), as though
it were some great matter, and yet upon trial we find nothing, but Cross, and
foolishness, the foolishness of Preaching, and the word of the Cross; in a
word, nothing but Christ Jesus Crucified: is this the majesty of Gods word? is
this the eloquence of Gods Ambassador? or rather may not we say, as he said
once, much learning has made thee mad; may not we say, much love has made
thee mad?

But here does Paul answer. I am not mad, o Noble Corinthians, but if you will
needs accuse me of my duty neglected to my Lord, I charge you tell him (what
shall you tell him?) I charge you tell him, that I am sick of love. Neither
can I see what you can blame in my preaching, you cannot call it rashness, for
I determined; you cannot call it rudeness, for I might have done otherwise, if
I had not otherwise determined; or say it were both rude and rash, yet you may
stay the censure, for, -- Si crimen erat, crimen amoris erat.

For it was among you, it was for your good: and if all this will not satisfy
you, yet because it was Christ Jesus I preached, I am well satisfied for the
loss of estimation, and the leaving of eloquence, for I count all things
loss, for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may
winn Christ: O noble Apostle! noble Paul! would God not only all we here
present, but all the Lords servants were like thee in all things, like in this
especially, to count nothing worthy to be known, but Christ Jesus and him
Crucified.

And thus much for the entrance into this Text, which I therefore made choice
of, to dedicate my first entrance into the Lords service, because it is the
sum of all Religion, the sum of all, the desire of Paul here, and of all
Christians, and the sum of my desire: for I count all things loss, for the
excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I could suffer the
loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ; For I
determined (and therefore wonder not at my choice) to know nothing among you,
but Christ Jesus and him crucified. And thus much for this time.

1 Corinthians. 2. 2. For I determined to know nothing among you, but Christ Jesus,
and him Crucified.
MArlorat upon this place, observes two things out of Calvin, and those both of
special consequence. 1. Quid docendum: What is the duty of every Minister. 2.
Quid discendum: What is the duty of every man. The duty of every Minister is
expressly employed, in the particular example of Paul's determination: the duty of
every man is directly deduced by an easy consequence out of the nature of
Relation. For if the duty of the teacher be to teach Christ, and nothing but
Christ, as it appears in Paul, who determined to know nothing, but Christ
Jesus, and him Crucified: then the duty of the learner can be nothing else, but
to learn to know Christ Jesus and him crucified.

The Ministers duty is more natural to the scope of the Text: the duty of
every man is more general in the order of nature; so that they may both
challenge and strive for the precedence. Therefore I determined to take an
indifferent course: The last time I handled the former, so far as it made for
the clearing of the Text, but descended not to any specialties: wherein I
pointed only what was the duty of the Minister, generally out of the Context,
particularly in the words.

And least any man should object, that Paul indeed did thus, but we are not
pinned to his sleeve, we live not by examples, and nos habemus Spiritum
Sanctum, I showed how his example did contain, not only a precept concerning
the argument of preaching, but also an argument to provoke us to the
observation of that precept. For it was,

1. Paul, who was brought up at Gamaliels feet, rapt up into the third heaven,
taken for a god at Lystra, even Mercury the god of Eloquence; if Paul then be
exemplified for this humble vain of preaching, who then is exempted?

2. Paul did it not out of rudeness, or rashness, but he deliberated what was
best to be done, and determined of this.

3. He determined not so much as to know, as if he should say, deleo dehinc ex
animo omnes, (...).

4. Not to know any thing, not a (...), not a tittle of any thing.

5. Not any thing, no, not among the Corinthians, among you, rich, learned
Graecians, Corinthians. All which infer, or rather enforce this conclusion.

That if Paul upon these terms would not, then no Minister, upon any terms
must preach any thing, but Christ Jesus, and him crucified.

And thus much I thought good to premise concerning the first, Quid docendum,
what is the duty of every Minister, because it seems to be something more
specially intended in the verse: now I come to the second.

Quid discendum, What is the duty of every man, which I will prosecute, because
it is more generally extended in use: or rather I come to the Doctrine which is
common to both, and out of which both of them are derived. The Doctrine is this.

That the knowledge of Christ Jesus crucified, is sufficient to salvation.

Which in a word justifies both Paul's determination, as a reason, and warrants
Calvin's observation, for the duty both of Preacher and People, as a ground and
foundation: therefore seeing the whole frame of this building lies upon it, it
will not be amiss to take a special view of it.

The rise of this Doctrine out of these words is evident: for if Paul who was
sent by God to preach salvation to those that believe, determined to preach
nothing among them but Jesus Christ and him crucified, then either that was
sufficient to that end, or else it must needs be, that he either weakly
conceived of the means, and so was unskilful; or wilfully concealed some part
of them, and so was unfaithful in his office; but it were blasphemy to say so;
for, as for his fitness he was not inferior to the greatest Apostles; and as
for his fidelity, he revealed to them the whole will of God: and this very
place, (so eminent it was) propounds him as an exemplary pattern: and
therefore I think it is firm out of this place, That the knowledge of Christ
Jesus crucified is sufficient to salvation.

Now that we may the more distinctly conceive of this truth, I will endeavor
to clear these two things.

1. That Christ Jesus is a sufficient Savior.

2. That faith (for this I understand here by knowledge) is sufficient to make
him our Savior: For these two things must considered in our salvation, the
appretiation, (that I may so speak) and the appropriation, the gift, and the
conveyance, and both these are comprehended in that proposition: for, Christ
crucified is the price paid, which is made ours by faith, when his spirit
enlightening our minds to apprehend his mercy, and inclining our wills to
embrace it, unites us to our Savior: and if there be any defect in the
sufficiency, it must needs be, either because Christ is not a sufficient
Savior, or, because faith is not sufficient to make him our Savior: but
neither of these can be.

1. For the first, That Christ is a sufficient Savior: I will first point out
what Salvation is: and secondly, prove that Christ has wrought it sufficiently.

1. By Salvation, I mean the Summum bonum, the utmost end, the chief
happiness of man, which cannot consist in any thing in the world, save in his
conjunction and conformity with his Creator: For the Lord made all things for
man, and man for himself. Indeed he imprinted the vestigia of his power, and
wisdom, and all his Attributes, in the glorious workmanship of the World; but
as for all other creatures, though they contain the arguments of his praise,
written in golden Letters, yet they have no eye to read them, though they obey
the word of his will, for he did but say, let it be so, and it was so, yet it
was without a free and voluntary obedience; therefore it pleased God to create
man, who might glorify him in the careful observation of his wisdom, written
in the volume of his works, and in the cheerful observance of his will
engraven in the table of his heart; and for this cause was he made, as he was
the image of God, in science and sanctity; and on this condition was he made
the Lord of all the creatures, that in their names that could not, he might
that could, offer the tribute of praise to his Lord and Maker. And this was the
reason, that man was the last of all his works, as though all proceeded from
him, but ended in man, and man only stood between them and God, receiving all
the profit of them with the one hand, and re-delivering all the praise of them
with the other hand, into the hands of the Lord. This then was the end of man,
in the observation of his wisdom, and the observance of his will to glorify
God, and this should have been his honor, and his happiness.

Perhaps you do not well understand yet what I mean by Salvation; neither
indeed can you well understand it, till you have considered the state that man
now is in: and therefore I pray give me leave to touch it briefly.

I say then that every man of us, every mothers son is born by nature a
vessel of wrath, a vassal of Satan, an enemy to God, and all goodness. If
you ask me whence this comes, I answer as Christ in another case, Ab initio
non fuit sic: for as I told you before, and now tell you again, Man was
created the most glorious piece of this goodly frame, a Citizen of Heaven,
Inhabitant of Paradise, Brother of the Angels, Lord of the Creatures, Son of
the Almighty, even the glorious image of the Lord of glory, the lively picture
of the living God, his body being graced with many ornaments, and his soul
adorned with many graces, so that Heaven and Earth might seem to have been
married in his making.

Now, then man was no sooner made but he rebelled against his maker, he that
was right, was fat and kicked against his Lord, and we in him: (...)*
we were, sons of prevarication, and the (...)
sons of perdition, Ex illo fluere, from that fountain springs all our
misery: we have all sinned against the Lord, and therefore this great evil is
upon us: hence it is that our minds are blind, the Crows of the valley have
picked out our eyes: our wil's lame to any thing that is good, our nature
caught a fall, like Mephibosheth, in the cradle of her infancy, and we could
never outgrow it: hence it is that our bodies are subject to deformities,
infirmities, death, our souls and bodies to the wrath of God, which lies
heavy upon us here, prosecuting us with armies of plagues, and will never
leave us till it has brought us (unless his mercy prevent us) to eternal
torments, and sunck us into the bottom of Hell.

No marvel then, if Plato complain that the soul has broke her wings: if
Poets tell us of an iron age: if whole volumes be filled with declamations of
the brevitie of man's life, and the miseries of mankind. No, I marvel not, if
they who had but one eye saw these things, even through the clouds of
obscurity: I marvel rather, that among Christians, who have both their eyes,
the eye of reason, and the eye of faith, and besides, live in the Sunneshine of
the Gospel, so few see this, as they did, or at least, the reason of this,
which they could not.

I marvel I hear no more cry out with S. Paul, O miserable man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death! for if Paul so pathetically cried
out, who could so triumphantly give thanks; how much more justly may we, if we
cannot add that which follows, reiterate the same again, and say? O miserable
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death!

Ye see now the misery of a natural man, consisting in the conscience of
sin, and the consequence of sin, the fault and the guilt, malum culpae,
malum poenae: this is the misery of man, which estranges him far from the
state of happiness: and out of this ye may gather what salvation is. For every
Salve supposes a Sore, and the sore is sin and pain, and therefore the salve
is that which will free us from this horrible condition: and restore, and
re-estate us into the favor of the Lord, and so into our former felicity.
This is that which I mean by Salvation.

And thus am I fallen into the second point, That Christ is a sufficient
Savior. The Sun shines not so clear in his strength, as this truth I hope
shall shine, though through my weakness: for, to let pass all that might be
alleged for it, and to make use of those grounds only, which have been laid
already. Yet it will be more then evident: for as you heard, Salvation is the
redeeming us from that miserable condition, in which by nature we lie plunged
most deservedly, and restoring us to that happy state which we should have
enjoyed, had we continued in our integrity: But Christ Jesus has performed
both these for us: therefore he is a sufficient Savior. The proof of the
Proposition was provided for before: the Assumption I will make good in the
parts. For first Christ has redeemed us from all our misery, whether sin,
the root, or punishment, the fruit be considered.

1. He has taken away all sin, both our original impuritie, by the
original purity of his manhood, which was therefore sanctified in his
conception, by the work of the Holy Ghost, that it might be exempted from the
common condition of corruption; and our actual impiety, by the actual
observance of the whole Law of God. The Pharisees could not take him tripping
in a word, though they laid many trains to entrap him. The High Priests could
lay nothing to his charge, though they hired false witnesses against him.
Pilate himself was constrained, through the innocence of his cause,
ceremonially to justify him by washing his hands, though he were constrained
through the importunity of his enemies judicially to proceed against him, and
so spill blood guiltless. Thus was Christ Jesus the Lamb without spot, the
Israelite without guile, fairer then the children of men, that so he might take
away the pollution of our nature, with which we were wholly defiled. And this
was his active obedience, wherein he did that which we should have done, but
could not, exactly fulfilling even the rigorous exaction of all Gods
Commandments.

2. The Punishment of sin he took away likewise by suffering and overcomming
that which we must have suffered, but could not overcome, even the full viols
of Gods wrath, and the weight of his hand, the heavy weight of his heavy
wrath, which was due to us for our offenses: for he took not on him our nature
only, but the infirmities of our nature: he that was rich became poor for our
sakes, that we which were poor might be made rich: he that was clothed with
majesty as with a garment, became naked, that we might be decked with the
robes of his righteousness: he that was anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows, wept; that all tears might be wiped from our eyes: he
whose throne was in the Heavens, wandered and had not whereon to rest his head,
that he might lead us, who had lost our selves in the Labyrinth of sin, to
eternal rest, and fix us like stars in the Firmament.

Do you believe in him for these things (as he once said to Nathaniel) follow
me a little with your attention, and you shall see greater things then these:
For he took upon him the chastisements of our sins, and bare the burden of
our iniquities: he was accused, that we might be acquitted; he was condemned,
that we might be condoned; he was accursed, that we might be acquitted; he
was hanged upon the Cross and accounted a sinner, that our sins might be
crossed out of the book of accounts, and we might be accounted holy and
righteous, and wholly righteous. Who now shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods elect? Take a view of all the enemies, they were three, like the three
sons, all terrible Giants, terrible to all the sons of Adam, Sin, Death,
and Hell. If the Lord had not been on our side, may we now say, if the Lord
had not been on our side, they had swallowed us up quick: But thanks be to
God in Christ Jesus, the net is broken, and we are escaped, and behold, they
are dead that sought our lives.

The Devil, like a Serpent in the Garden, stirred Adam to sin; and Sin,
like a Serpent in the Wilderness, stung Israel to the death: but our Savior
has overcome them all: he tamed the Serpent in the wilderness, that tempted
Adam in the Garden to sin: and he took out the sting of sin, the Serpent
of the Desert, by the desert of his suffering: for sin was the Serpent, and
the sting of sin was death, and death he vanquished in the grave, even in his
own den, even on his own dunghill. So that if death should now reason that
he has us still in captivity, because he has us still in keeping, we may say
as Tully once to Atticus, O mors, ubi est acumen tuum? or rather as S. Paul
prompteth us, O death, where is thy sting? o grave, where is thy victory?

And thus was Christ the Lamb sltaine, the price paid, the propitiatory
sacrifice for his chosen: and this was his passive obedience, whereby he
suffered and overcame that which we should have suffered, but could not have
overcome, satisfying even the rigorous exaction of Gods exact justice: and
these are both the parts of the payment, which he tendered up to God in our
behalf and for our behoof: by which he has not only freed us from our
natural misery, which was the first part of Salvation, and has been showed
hitherto, but has also filled us with all good things, which, as the former,
consists in two things, Holiness, and Happiness.

Both which Christ has furnished us withal, out of the rich storehouse of his
merits; for what he did he did for us, and we are righteous in his
righteousness; and what he merited, for us he merited; and we are victorious
in his victory: in a word, he has clothed us with an undefiled immaculate
(...).
robe of righteousness, and crowned us with an immortal (...).
crown of glory: even in incorruptible crown of inconceivable glory: with
righteousness irreprehensible, with glory incomprehensible.

And if any man doubt yet of the sufficiency of his satisfaction, weighing the
heinousness of our transgression: let that man consider but who it was that
did these things, and what the things were that he did and suffered, and then I
hope he shall be sufficiently satisfied. It was the Lord of glory that emptied
himself into the form of a servant, it was the Lord of life, that shed his
precious blood for us: he humbled himself to be a man, yea a servant, of whom
it was every way true, if ever it were true, (...).
there is one servant only which is master of the house: yea, not a man, a
worm and no man: he humbled himself to the death, the death of the cross,
the most ignominious, and ignoble death of all other^ he descended out of the
bosom of blessedness, into the bottom of baseness: and therefore needs
must his passion be very meritorious, whose person was so magnificent: his
desert must needs be great, whose descent was so glorious.

Neither need any man doubt of Gods acceptance: for beside that which has
been said, that what he did, and what he suffered, it was for us, because he
was man: he took not the nature of Angels upon him, but of man; and it was
sufficient, because he was God, which adds infinite value to both: beside
this, I say, who could be so fit to reconcile man to God, as he who was both
God and man? Man, quia solus Deus sentire; God, quia solus homo superare non
potuit mortem quam pro nobis obire debuit: yea, and it was the counsel of the
Lord, that this should be the means to bring this to pass, and therefore he
laid his wrath upon him, which otherwise had been injustice: his wrath, I say,
so heavily upon him, that it wrung out strange words, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? and therefore, he that accounted him a sinner for our sakes,
must needs accept of the sacrifice that he offered for our sins.

Now when I review all that I have said for his sufficiency, me thinks I need
not have gone further off my text, for demonstration of this truth; for Paul
says, he determined to know nothing but Christ Jesus, and him crucified:
therefore he is Christ, and Jesus, and crucified, therefore he is an
alsufficient Savior: for these three, like the three terms of a Syllogism,
draw in a demonstrative Conclusion: like the three tongues that were written
upon the Cross, Greek, Latin, Hebrew, to witness Christ to be the King of
the Jews, do each of them in his several Idiom avouch this singular Axiom,
that Christ is an alsufficient Savior: and a threefold cord is not easily
broken.

He was that Christ, which was anointed and appointed of God, for that
purpose; and therefore, filled and furnished with all graces fit for the
accomplishment. According to the smell of thine Ointments, thy Name is an
Ointment powered forth, therefore the virgins love thee, says the Spouse in the
Canticles. His name is (...).
the Anointed, and in him many graces concurred to make a full performance; as
in a precious ointment, many spices concur to make a sweet perfume:
Therefore the virgins love thee, the virgins that are pure in heart: hence they
fetch Oil for their Lamps, and therefore they burn in love: virgins love
ointment for their beauty, thy Name is an ointment powered forth, therefore the
virgins love thee: the wise virgins love thee, because they are wise; and so
would the foolish too, but that they are foolish:

2. This Christ was crucified for us: there was the whole box of ointment
broken, and powered forth, there all the spices gave their smell, (...)
a sweet smelling savor, which ascended into the nosthrils of the Lord, and
became to him (...)
a dutiful smell, in which he is well pleased: And therefore.

3. He must needs be Jesus, whether you derive the name from the Greek, as
some have done, (...).
, to heal, more finely then fitly, and yet, more fit then finely: for he has
healed all our infirmities, by the merit of his blood, and the anointing of
his Spirit: or from the Hebrew, as it is most truly, for he has saved us from
our sins, from all our sins, and therefore is a true Jesus, a Savior, a
perfect Savior, (for so the Angel that imposed his name expounded it) And
therefore is an Angel from Heaven preach any other doctrine then this, let him
be accursed, says S. Paul.

I need not heap up any more, yet it will not be amiss to let you hear the
voice of the Scripture, where, to omit the common consent of the whole frame
and phrase of the book, and the murmr of every letter, which all of them
proclaim this truth: and beside those words of note, which note thus much
every where, as, (...)
Grace by Christ did overflow and superabound, and (...).
the riches of grace, (...).
the exceeding great love of Christ, and (...).
the breadth, and the length, and the height, and the depth of love. A man would
think that Paul had spent all his Arts, all his Rhetoric, in Pleonasmes, and
Hyperbolies: his Geometry, in taking the height of his desert, and could not
attain it. And indeed, they are words of wonder, wondrous words, or rather, as
he says, (...).
wonders, not (...).
words, to express his absolute perfection: to omit all these, I say, I will
content my self with two or three witnesses to ratify it, which shall be past
exception.

John 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world,
says John Baptist of Christ. Will you believe the Lords Messenger, Behold the
Lamb, what shall we behold in a Lamb? Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away
the sins of the World, John 19. 30. It is finished, (says Christ Jesus
himself) It, what? the Redemption of mankind: what of the Redemption? It is
finished: will you believe the Lord and Master? Let no man think to thrust his
Sickle into another man's harvest, for it is finished. Matthew. 3. last. This is
my welbeloved son, in whom I am well pleased, says God the Father: This,
which? even Christ Jesus: what of Christ? This is my welbeloved son, in whom
I am well pleased: will you believe the Lord and Maker? Let no man fear any
after reckoning, the Lord will look for no more, he will take no more, for he
is already pleased, for in his welbeloved son, he is well pleased.

I think there is no man can slight the credit of these witnesses: for John,
(...),
he said no more then he saw: and Christ, (...),
he affirmed no more then he performed: and God, (...).
spoke that which be received, his acquittance could be no larger then his
acceptance: and therefore needs must all these make it irrefragable.

Neither was their witness a perfunctory testimonial, but a peremptory proof
of his fufficiencie: for John was nothing but a voice, and (...)
the voice of a crier, and yet this is all that he said with such earnest
contention, and God said it, not in a silent manner, whispering; not in a
secret place, but it was a (...).
voice from Heaven: and Christ said it not in his ordinary speech, but when he
was upon the Cross, then he said a (...).
great voice, as S. Matthew and S. Mark note: then he said it with his last
breath, and sealed it with his dearest blood. And therefore I hope that this
will suffice to have spoken of his sufficiency.

I come now to the second point, That Faith is sufficient to make him our
Savior: which I will handle according to my former order, but exceeding
briefly. 1. What faith is, viz. out of the true sense of our own misery by
nature, and sweet apprehension of Gods mercy offered, an humble denial of our
selves, and all creatures, and confident relying on the mercy of the Lord in
Christ Jesus: This may serve for a weak delineation of that worthy grace,
framed according to the proportion of my former principles.

And that this is sufficient, needs no more proof, but to point at that which
ye have heard already: for seeing our Salvation must be wrought by another, and
he that wrought it is Christ, what can be further requisite, then that Christ
and his merits be made ours, which can be done by faith only: beside which,
there can be no other affection between God and man: for the Spirit of God is
the bond that unites and knits us to Christ by faith: and faith is the hand
that receives the treasure of Christ's merits, that enrich us: and Christ is all
our riches: for being once transplanted out of the old Adam, and ingrafted into
the new, which is Christ, and made one with him, the Lord cannot choose but
repute us righteous, through the imputation of his righteousness.

Hence it is, that all our sins are remitted and blotted out of the book of
remembrance, and our selves readmitted into his favor, and into his family:
hence it is, that we are adopted to be his sons, and adorned with his sons
holiness: hence it is, that the curse of our sins is take away, and we have
peace with God and all his creatures, the Angels pitch their Tents about us,
and the stones of the field are in league with us: for it is written, He has
given his Angels charge over us, to preserve us in all our ways, least at any
time we should hurt our foot against a stone: hence it is, that the old man,
with the lusts of the same, dye in us, and decay, and the new man is renewed
daily.

As soon as we begin to believe in the Lord Jesus, the scales fall from our
eyes, that we can not only read in the book of the Scripture, the will of God,
which before, was a book closed, a book sealed up to us, but also lift up our
eyes to Heaven, and look into the volumes of eternity, and read our names
written in the book of life: The shackels also fall from our feet, and we
being enlarged, are enabled, not only to walk in the Lords Statutes, but also,
to run the way of his Commandments.

And though we groan under the burden of our sins, so long as we live here
clothed with this body of death; yet we are freed from the bondage of them,
and still grow on to perfection: which then we shall attain, when we shall
be translated into the Heavens: where we shall receive the end of our faith,
even the salvation of our souls, through his mercy, who has so dearly bought
us, and brought us thither: where we shall enjoy the blessed presence of God,
in whose presence, there is fullness of joy, and pleasure for evermore.

Blessed are the people that are in such a case, in such a place, yea, blessed
are the people whose God is the Lord. But all this is made ours by faith only,
which entitles us to the merits of Christ, who purchased it for us: therefore
faith is sufficient. I should now justify this by Scripture, but to say truth,
this truth and this Text, is the only scope of the Scripture, the theme of
Theology, the pith of all piety: and therefore because it deserves some better
observation, I will defer it to some better opportunity.

n t THe dxa.
1 Corinthians. 2. 2. For I determined to know nothing among you, but Christ Jesus,
and him Crucified.
WHen I first took this place in hand, I thought to have finished it out of
hand, the same time I began: but it fared with me, as it did with Simonides,
who, the more time they gave him to assoyle the question, what God was, the
more he craved. And what marvel, since Christ is the argument we have in
hand? They talk of a fabulous purse of Fortunatus, I think few are so
credulous to believe it; but this we may and must believe, for the Spirit of
truth avouches it, that in Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge: and who is so impious, as once to call it into question? We read in
the golden Legend of Poets, of a fruitful tree, of which he says, -- Vno
avulso non deficit alter Aureus -- and something like, in Alcinous's Garden:
but Christ is the tree of life, in the midst of the Paradise of God, whose
fruits are of twelve sorts, according to the seasons of the year, and
according to the families of the house of Israel, whose leaves also were for
the healing of the Nations: how much more golden then that one, fruitful then
those other? We are beholding to Polydore Virgil and ancient Histories, that
call our England, Puteus inexhaustus, for the store of commodities: but Christ
is a fountain, better then that Well of Jacob, a Fountain, of whose water
whosoever drinks, shall never thirst again: For, he is a fountain of living
water, springing up to everlasting life. What do I speak of Fables? They say
it is true of the Oil at Rhemes, that though it be continually spent in the
inauguration of their Kings of France, yet it never wastes; and this they
attribute of the cross to the blessing: I am sure, it is true of the Oil in
the Cruse of the Widow of Sarepta, that it fed her house, and failed not:
though they be false and foolish which would father that miracle upon the
Cross too, which they find in the sticks that she gathered, which they say lay
a cross, as well it may be, as Helena found her cross: and as true, I am sure
it is, that Christ crucified is the pot of Mannah, the Cruse of Oil, a
bottomless Ocean of all comfort to the faithful: he is rivers of oil, and
his steps drop fatness: for this cause received the Spirit without measure,
and was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows: and in him God
is, as he calls himself, I am, because in him he is all good, that the heart
of the godly can wish or want: he is that benedictum medicamentum, (...).
that anointing medicine, the only (...).
all-healing medicine against all diseases, the only (...), against all danger.
To conclude, as Demosthenes said of Pronunciation, that it was primum,
secundum, tertium, in all Rhetoric: so may I say of Salvation, it is primum,
secundum, tertium, in all Divinity, and in it, Christ is all in all.

And thus I see I have taken up my speech where I let it fall the last time:
for if you remember, when I ended I said a great word, That faith in Christ
crucified, was the theme of all Theology, the scope of all the Scripture;
which now that I may liberare fidem, I must endeavor to make good.

I fear not that you should think I make quidlibet ex quolibet, as Alchymists
they say can fetch oil out of flint, and as the Papists say, the Scripture is
a nose of wax, and make it so, when they conclude the Popes supremacy out of
Peter's walking on the waters: for I see my Text will warrant me in what I have
said: for if Paul would preach nothing but Christ Jesus, and him Crucified, and
yet was to preach all that was necessary to salvation, then questionless he
judged Christ crucified to be the sum of all: beside this evidence that
convinced me, necessity compelled me to take this course: for when I sought for
witnesses of that I had delivered in the Scripture, the whole book of God
offered it self: and therefore in such copious plenty, I deemed this the most
compendious path, to prove that in general, which otherwise would have proved
infinite, if I had once minced it into the particulars.

Having thus scoured the way, I come now to enter upon the point, to show, that
faith in Christ is the sum of Divinity, the scope of the Scripture: and
first, I will begin with Divinity, because the rule of it being the Analogy
of faith, will light us in the search of the secrets of the Scripture, and lead
us into the native meaning thereof with more facility: and this I will apply to
the double consideration of Divinity, both in the maine substance, which was
always the same, and the mutable circumstances thereof, which according to diverse
times had some diversity.

The maine substance of Divinity was always that Doctrine and Rule that chalked
out the way, in which man was to walk to eternal salvation, and eternal
happiness: which will easily appear to be summarily comprised in faith, if
that be true, which is most true, which I have already proved, that it is
sufficient to attain salvation: and the same will shine yet more brightly, if
we do but lay down the severals of the art, for this will be the sum that
all will amount to, this will be the Epitome of all, even Christ Jesus, who is
the foundation of faith, and the fountain of all obedience, which are both,
and all the parts of Divinity.

Take these asunder now, and consider them severally: That Christ is the
foundation of our faith, I will allege but one place for it: hear what Paul
says, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the
flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached of Men, believed in
the World, received into glory. See here the mystery, the whole mystery of
godliness, and that a great mystery, yea, and without controversy, great is
the mystery of godliness; and yet this is all, even Christ Jesus.

Reason it self will subscribe to this Article, and prove it too: for you
know, the object of faith is God alone, and by it we are united unto him, and
this was the condition of our integrity: our bodies were temples of his
blessed Spirit, and the delight of the Lord was in the sons of men: but now
having provoked him to indignation against us, by our voluntary transgression,
his mind is alienated, and the case is altered: his good Spirit being grieved,
is departed from us, and he frowns upon us with an angry countenance: neither
can it be otherwise, for he could not love his own justice, if he did not hate
our iniquity.

We may read our misery in Adams story, who after his sin, when he heard the
voice of the Lord walking in the Garden, was afraid, and hid himself: And
again, in the children of Israel, who hearing the terrible thunders, and
seeing the thick flashes of lightning, and the mountain smoking, when the Law
was given at Mount Sinai, in a great fright, came to Moses, and said, Speak
thou unto us, and we will hear, but let not God speak to us, lest we die: and
the reason of this is, because our guilty conscience suggests no other conceit
of God unto us, but as of an angry Judge, who is clothed with revenge and
terror, as with a garment, and whose garments are dyed in blood, as the
Prophet elsewhere speaks. Moses a (...). And these examples teach us, in what
need we stand of a Mediator, who might treat of peace, and make an atonement
for us; for otherwise, what faith, what confidence can we have in God, whom
sin has made our enemy? Now Christ alone is that Mediator: for he by his
suffering has smoothed his Fathers brow, having satisfied his justice: and
beside has purchased his Spirit for us, who teaches us to call him Abba
Father; and through whom we have access with boldness to the throne of grace:
therefore he is the foundation of our faith, which was the first part of
Divinity.

He is (in the second place) the fountain of all obedience: I will content my
self here also with one place, look Phil. 1. 9 And this I pray (says S.
Paul) that your love may abound yet more and more, in all knowledge, and in all
judgment: and in the 11. again, that ye may be filled with all the fruits of
righteousness which are by Jesus Christ, to the praise and glory of God:
behold here, love in all knowledge, and that love in abundance, and that
abundance yet more and more: behold again the fruits of righteousness* and
all the fruits, and a fullness of all the fruits, and yet all this, and more,
if more may be, by Jesus Christ, for he is the Tree planted by the rivers of
water, of which the Psalmist speaks, who is transplanted out of the old Adam,
and ingrafted into the new, which is Christ, he is the tree that brings forth
her fruit in her season: for as soon as we are in him, ingrafted into his
stock, watered with his blood, warmed with his Spirit, who is the Sun of
righteousness, we are enabled to bring forth the fruits of Righteousness.

And well may he challenge this interest in all our obedience in a triple right.

1. Because he has performed all obedience in his own person, but in our
name, and therefore for us.

2. Because all the ability we have to perform any thing, is his gift, and
the work of his Spirit in our hearts: For of our selves, as of our selves, we
can do nothing, but it is he that works in us both the will and the deed.

3. Because he hides the deformities and washes away the spots of our actions,
for otherwise, all our righteousness is as a menstruous cloth: he perfects all
our imperfect performances. Survey but all the parts of obedience, you shall
find this true. In the observation of the Decalogue, it is worth the
observation, that this is the preface, I am the Lord thy God, which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: we must be let at
liberty by Christ, out of the bondage of Egypt, out of the fetters of sin
and Satan, before we can set a step in the way of Gods Commandments. And for
our prayers, we need no other Beads, or bed-roll, Christ is the only Pearl of
price in them: it is his Spirit that kindles the fire of our zeal, that
teaches us how to pray, for we know not how to pray as we ought: and it is
himself ascending in the flame of our ardent desires, as he did once in
Manoahs sacrifice, that makes God smell a sweet savor, which otherwise, would
stink in his nosthrils, would be an abomination, and turn to sin. For as
Themistocles presented himself to the King of the Molossi, under the
protection of his son, and that was (...), as Plutarch observes: so unless we
come to God, in the name of his son, there is little hope of speeding:
unless Jacob come in the garments of his elder brother Esau, there is small
likelihood of a blessing; and so unless we come clothed with the Robes of
Christ our elder brother: but if we do, behold it is (...), yea, the Lord will
bless us, as Isaac said, and we shall be blessed: The Sacrament receiving, is
the last act of our obedience, which without Christ are but cold and dead
carkases of Lions, unprofitable.

In a word therefore, Christ alone is he that adds value, and virtue to our
weak faith; beauty, to our stained obedience: being the very foundation of
our faith, and the fountain of our obedience: as I have showed of each of them
severally taken, and will endeavor to the do same of both jointly considered.

If you look for the proper place of faith in Christ, in the body of
Divinity, you shall find it seated in the very center, where it stands in a
double relation, of that which goes before, and that which follows after.

That which goes before, is the former part of the Rule of Faith, which all
mooves to it: that which follows after it, is the Rule of life, and is all
moved from it, and all the lines of either meet in it.

As it represents a Center, it is the heart of Divinity. For, as in the
natural generation, the heart is first articulated, and then the other parts:
so in our spiritual regeneration, faith in Christ is first formed, before any
other graces; and therefore Paul calls the Galatians, his Children, of whom he
traveled in birth, till Christ were formed in them: (...).

As we look upon it in that double relation, (me thinks) upward and
downward, it expresses Jacobs ladder which appeared in a vision, by which he
saw Angels ascending, and descending, and God standing on the top thereof: for
Christ, by the consent of all, is that scala coeli, by which we ascend to God,
and descend to good works: and Paul has excellenty described that comparison
in a most sweet gradation, Romans 8. 29. Those whom God has foreknowne, those
also he predestined to be conformable to the image of his son; whom he
predestined, those also he called; whom he calls, them he justifies; whom
he justifies, those also he glorifieth: behold a scala coeli, a golden chain,
and in it a descent of God to man, by the stepps of election and vocation, and
an ascent of man to God, by the stairs of justification and sanctification, to
the highest state of glory.

I think now that I may conclude this point, That Faith in Christ is the sum
of Divinity, considered in the constant truth thereof; for in him it pleased
God (...), to recollect and recapitulate all, even in this sense: in him it
pleased God that all fullness should dwell, and in him dwells (...), the
fullness (...), and it may be (...) too, for the fullness of the Divinity
bodily, and the body of Divinity fully dwell in him.

Let us come yet a little lower, and take this truth in the Rule of Divinity,
as it is in a double difference, before Christ, and after Christ: before
Christ, again as it was before the Law, or under the Law.

Before the Law, Genesis 3. 15.
I pray, what was the Religion of Adam? Moses touches it in a word, The seed of
the woman shall break the head of the Serpent: see the first prophecy
concerning Christ, and that by God himself: he that promised him, prophesied
of him: for Christ was that Seed of the woman, which brake the head of the
Serpent, and therefore was borne of a woman only, a Virgin that had not known
a man, the Virgin Mary: and therefore at the very time when he fulfilled this
promise, when he hung upon the Cross, he said to his Mother, woman, behold
thy son, (meaning John to whose care he committed her) woman, not mother,
intimating, that he was that seed of the woman, of whom God foretold so long
ago, that seed of the woman that brake the head of the Serpent, the counsel of
the Devil.

Go now to Abraham, what was the Religion of Abraham and his family? the Lord
himself has left it recorded, Abraham saw my day and rejoiced: Ioh. 8. 56.
this then was Abraham's joy, and Abraham's Religion, even the expectation of the
promised seed, which was the soul of the covenant that God made with him, the
seal whereof was Circumcision, an image of his bloodshed: and therefore Isaac
the son of promise, if he had not been called Isaac the son of laughter,
because Sarah laughed in the Tent door, when she heard the news of a son,
saying, Shall I that am barren bear a son in mine old age? he might have
been called Isaac the son of laughter, Genesis 21. 3 6.
because Abraham saw his day, who was indeed the son of promise, and rejoiced.

For Isaac was not that promised seed, of which God said, in thy seed shall all
the Nations of the earth be blessed: for by the same reason should many more be
that seed, even all, that proceeded out of the loins of Ahraham in the line of
Isaac, which were like the stars of the Heaven in number: but God said, not in
thy seeds, as of many, says S. Paul, but of thy seed, as of one, which was
Christ, in thy seed, in this thy seed, shall all the Nations of the earth be
blessed.

For Isaac was but a type of that seed, and represented him in many
resemblances: Isaac was borne of Sarah a barren woman, and past beareing: Jesus
was borne of Mary an unspotted virgin, springing like a branch out of a dry
land, as Esaias speaks, like a stone hewn out of a rock without hands, as
Daniel says: Dan 2. 45
Isaac bare the wood which should have consumed him: Jesus bare the wood of the
Cross, on which he was crucified: Isaac was bound, Jesus was bound, Isaac
should have been offered for a sacrifice, Jesus was offered a sacrifice for
the sins of the world: Isaac on Mount Moriah, Jesus as some think on Mount
Moriah, from Isaac arose the proverb, in the Mount will the Lord be seen, in
Jesus it is much more true, for no man has seen the father at any time, but
the son, and no man can see the Father, but he to whom the son has
revealed him: and in him we see all the love of God, for behold what love the
Father has given us, that he has sent his only begotten son into the world,
that who so believes in him, might not perish but have life everlasting.

Many such like types had those times, like prospective Glasses, to conveigh
their glimmering sight to the only object of happiness, Christ Jesus; as
Jacob, who got the blessing in his elder brothers garment, and Joseph, who was
stripped of his coat, sold by Iudahs motion, stood before Pharaoh at thirty
years old, whose coat dipped in blood turned the wrath of his Father from his
brethren, even as Christ was stripped by the Soldiers, sold by Judas treason,
stood before God in his office about thirty years old, and in whose blood we
being dipped, are delivered from the wrath of God the Father.

From hence then we pass to the time under the Law, where we shall find
nothing but Christ neither: Indeed, all things then were more obscurely
delivered, until the day came, and the shadows fled away, Can. 2. 17.
as Solomon speaks: even until Christ came, who was the substance of those
ceremonies; and until the ceremonies fled away, which were the shadows of
that substance: yet were they not destitute of all light.

Take an Emblem of their condition. The children of Israel in their journey
into the Land of Canaan, where guided by the conduct of a Pillar of cloud by
day, and a pillar of fire by night: their day was something overcast with a
cloud, and yet their darkness was something overcome with a light: they had a
day, but not without some eclipse of a cloud; they lived in a night of darkness,
yet not without some glimpse of light, for the Lord led them to the heavenly
Canaan with a pillar of cloud by day, and by night with a pillar of fire.

And perhaps the Psalmist may insinuate so much, where he says, Thy word is a
Lantern to my feet, for a Lantern argues much darkness, and is used in the
night only; as for the day, madness it were, splendente sole lucernam
accendere, but again, it argues some light, for otherwise, why was it kindled?
Neither is Peter far from this allusion, 2 Pet 1. 19
when he compares the Word of the Prophets, which the Israelites enjoyed, to a
light shining in a dark place. Agreeable to the first adumbration, there was a
day, but with a pillar of cloud, and a pillar of fire, but by night: and here
we have a light, but of a Lantern, a light shining, but in a dark place:
this was then the state of Religion.

Now all the light they had was borrowed from Christ, as the stars do theirs
from the Sun: and all lead us to Christ again, as little Rivers to the Ocean.
See this.

1. In their Sacraments, their ordinary Sacraments were Circumcision and the
Passover, answerable to those, we have Baptism and the Lords Supper: which
both, had reference to the same inward grace, though there were a difference in
the outward elements: for what meant the blood, shed in Circumcision, and
sprinkled on their dooreposts in the Passover, but the blood of Christ, shed
for the remission of sins, and sprinkled in our hearts, to purge and cleanse
all our iniquities: for Christ was the true Paschall Lamb, in whom therefore
the law of it was fulfilled, Ioh. 1. 29
Not a bone of him shall be broken: and of whom John says, Behold the Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the world. Christ is the Lamb slain from
the beginning of the World for that purpose, and the very name of Passover
notes as much: for in Christ it pleased God, when he judges all the World, in
mercy to pass over us, and when he passed over all the World in justice, to
take his elect in mercy, and make them his children. Yea Christ himself
therefore when he had celebrated the Passover with his Disciples, instituted
the Sacrament of his body and blood, to show that he was that truth, of which
the Lamb was but a representation. And in that Passover we may discern a
model of our Supper: they must eat it with sour herbs, to wit, repentance
and mortification, that they may the better taste the sweet mercy of God, in
their delivery from the bondage of sin and Satan, shadowed out in the
bondage of Egypt: so it is unto us a Sacrament of our union to Christ our head:
then they were to eat it with sweet unleavened bread, that they might be
taught to take heed of the sour leaven of malice: so is ours to us, a
Sacrament of communion with Saints, the body of Christ.

The difference between ours and theirs is, that their Sacraments were not
without blood, because Christ as then had not shed his blood, but ours are,
because the truth being come, the type is needless.

Again, what were the pillar of cloud and fire, and the red Sea, in which they
were baptized, as Paul says, but that which the Gospel calls the Baptism of
water and fire, even the effusion of the blood of Christ, and the infusion of
his graces; the merit of his passion, and the efficacy of his Spirit in our
hearts, to make it ours by application. What was the water that Moses stilled
out of the Rock, by striking it with his Rod, when the Israelites were like to
perish in the wilderness for want of water, but the blood of Christ issuing
out of all his body in a bloody sweat in the Garden, when the very wrath of
God, the Rod of God (for the chastisements of our sins was upon him) lay
heavy upon him, and streaming out of his blessed side, when the Soldier
pierced it with his spear, I say the blood of Christ spilt for our sakes, who
otherwise had perished.

And that Mannah, that heavenly food, with which they were sustained in the
wilderness, what was it, but Christ, as Christ himself expounds it, John 6.
that he was the bread of life that descended from Heaven: and Paul accommodates
both of them, 1 Corinthians. 10. For they all ate the same spiritual food, and
they all drank the same spiritual drink (even the same with us) for (...).
they drank of the spiritual Rock, and that Rock was Christ: Christ is the
only Rock, on which his Church was built: (...) not (...), not Peter, but
Christ.

The Brazen Serpent, tell me, what can you see in it, but Christ, who was
lifted up on the Cross, as that was lifted up in the Wilderness: and as that
saved all that looked to it, from the stinging of the poisonous Serpents, so
has Christ saved us from the power of the old Serpent the Devil, and all the
power of darkness: he has healed all our infirmities, for by his stripes we
are cured, and by his wounds we are healed.

You see then, how all their Sacraments, ordinary, and extraordinary, receive
all their life from Christ, and give all their light to him again.

All the laborious and teadious paedagogy of their Ceremonies, was to no other
end then this neither: in which this truth was written, as it were in great
Letters, that he that ran might read them, because all words of a thing not
sinsible, but so far off, could not be half so legible.

So the blood of all the Sacrifices propitiatory, and gratulatory, of Bullocks,
and Rams, Goats, and Lambs, Sheep, and Dove, were all but types and copies
drawn from Christ, and drawing to Christ, who was the true sacrifice in which
all the other were sanctified, (which otherwise were of no value) and by which
Gods justice is satisfied: and they were so many, in such variety to seal to
them his alsufficiencie.

So were all their curious ablations, and chargable oblations of roast, baked,
sod, fried, to teach our perfect washing by his blood, and perfect nourishment
by his body, which suffered the heat of Gods wrath, and so was dressed to our
appetite, and sauced with such diversity, that he might take away our satietie.

Sweet was the figure of the two Goats, one of which was offered as a
Sacrifice for the sins of the people, and the other (the Escape Goat the
Scripture calls it) being charged with all their sins, Aaron laying both his
hands upon his head, and confessing the sins of the congregation over him,
was let go into the wilderness: both which express Christ in a double
respect, either because Christ was slain that we might escape, or because
Christ the same was dead and is alive, as the Revelation speaks, because he
dyed for our sins, Rev. 2. 8. Romans 4. 25
and rose again for our justification, as the Apostle elsewhere applies it.

Much like another in the purgation of the Leper, where two Birds or Sparrows
were to be brought the one was to be killed, the other to be let fly, being
dipped first in the blood of the former, reserved in a vessel for that
purpose, even as Christ dyed for us, and we being dipped in his blood, escape,
for by him the nets are broken, and we are escaped.

Yea and all their holy persons did but represent unto the people the person of
the Messiah, all their Priests, especially the High Priest, they sacrificed,
and blessed the people in his name, who was that Benedictum semen, in whom all
the nations of the earth were to be blessed, even Jesus Christ, who is God
blessed for ever, and who gave himself for us, a pleasing and acceptable
sacrifice to his father. And the High Priest many ways, he bare the names of
the Tribes of Israel on his shoulder, when he appeared before God: so did
Christ of all his faithful: he entered into the Holy of Holies once a year not
without blood: so did Christ by his own blood, open the way for us into the
highest heavens, and make a passage into Paradise, in which we could not keep
our selves, and out of which we were kept, by the flaming sword of a Cherubim:
upon which the Poets harping, have hatched a pretty Fable, that the aurea
Hesperidum mala, are kept by the vigilant guard of a fiery Dragon, but
Hercules overcame him: which in sober truth is thus much, that the way to the
Tree of Life in the Garden of Eden is guarded by the glittering blade of a
glorious Cherubim, but Christ has removed him.

Lastly, the Holy places themselves, were teachers of the same truth, so that
if those (the Priests I mean) should hold their tongues, these (the stones I
say) would cry thus much.

1. The Tabernacle was a visible sign of Gods presence among his people, and
therefore in it were placed (among many other things) the Mercy seat, even
Jesus Christ, in whom it has pleased God to have mercy on whom he will have
mercy; and the Table of Shewbread, is the same Christ, whose body is the true
bread, by which we are fed to eternal life, which, as one observes, was panis
propositionis, in the Law, but is become panis assumptionis in the Gospel,
even the bread of the Lords Table.

So was the Temple, and therefore they were to offer their Sacrifices at the
Temple, and their prayers in or toward the Temple, because all were sanctified
and accepted in Christ, who was the true Temple, for so he says of his body,
destroy this temple, and I will raise it again in three days: and therefore
when Christ was come into the world, the true light which enlightneth all men
that come into the world, all these shadows vanished at his presence and fled
away.

The Leviticall Ministry ceased, as you may see in a sweet allusion which
some have observed: When God promised John Baptist to Zachary, as he was
discharging his office in his course, he was stricken dumb, and therefore;
when the people expected he should have blessed them, he could not speak,
tacuit Zacharias generaturus vocem, says one: this silence proclaimed that
that service was at an end: the silence of a Leviticall Priest, made way for
the voice of an Evangelicall Preacher, even John, who was a voice preparing the
way of the Lord Jesus, the only High Priest of our salvation.

You have heard that the Heathen Oracles ceased at the birth of Christ; so did
the Jewish Oracles too, before his birth, for they had no answer from God by
Vrim and Thummim, all the time of the second Temple, and so you see that the
Jewish Priesthood ceased too: and at the death of Christ, the veil of the
Temple rent insunder: Theophylact has a witty conceit, a pretty gloss, that
the Temple rent her veil, hearing of the blasphemies of the Jews uttered
against Christ, according to the fashion of the Jews, who rent their garments
when they hear any blasphemies: but this was the meaning surely, to show that
by the rents of his body the true Temple, the way was opened to all the
faithful into the Holy of Holies, the highest Heavens.

And no marvel it is, that Christ upon the cross should cause all shadows
to vanish: the T (which men make the figure of the Cross) in the Egyptian
mysteries, is an Hieroglyphick of eternal life, which (say they) when it
comes, shall put an end to our Religion. It may be they had some notion of such
a thing from the Jews, or rather it is an afterbirth: but this is certain,
that Christ lifted up upon the Cross was in his Meridian exaltation, no
marvel then, if the shadows vanished.

We read of one that wondered how his Host had furnished his table with so rare
variety, his Host answered, that all was but Swines flesh, only the art of the
Cook had made the difference: and I according to my ability have discovered,
that all the dishes of the old Ceremonies, furnish us with no other thing but
Christ, only the wisdom of the Lord diversely dressed his sons flesh, in
proportion to the times, and palats of his people, in such admirable variety.

Come we now to the last period of times, the time of the Gospel, and see the
musical harmony thereof with the former: wherein me thinks, I presage already,
that my talk will be more easy: for what means the departure of all the
Legal shadows, at the approach of Christ; if he were not the substance of
all: and therefore the abolition of those is a clear evidence, that Christ now
is all in all.

The Doctrine preached every where, is a silver Trumpet of this sacred truth:
but that having been always the same, my course propounded, permits me not to
insist upon it: only this difference it has, that as it pointed forward before
to Christ to come, so now it points backward to Christ come, in whom it
teaches every man to look for salvation, and no other: the outward signs
that are left are few, but they conspire in the same testimony with the
Doctrine, and the old ceremonies, sealing the same thing, but with more
simplicity, and with more significancie.

The water of Baptism has a suitable Analogy with the blood of Christ, by
which we are purged from our spiritual uncleanness of sin, as we are purged
by water from all corporal uncleanness. In the Lords Supper we have bread and
wine, meat and drink perfect nourishment: bread the staff of man's life, and
wine that makes glad the heart of man, the best elements to express the best
aliments: which how fully do they set forth Christ Crucified: the Bread is
broken, so was his body broken; the Wine is powered forth, so was his blood
powered forth upon the Cross, for the remission of sins, to all those that
come to him with an hunger and thirst after his righteousness, and feed on him
by a lively faith.

The signification is so emphaticall, that I may say of those that are
partakers of this, as Paul said of the Galatians, who had heard him preach
Christ crucified, (...).
before whose eyes Christ crucified was set forth, I may say it of all such,
except they be foolish Galatians, and except they be bewitched.

And thus I conclude this point, That Christ Crucified, is the Sum of all
Divinity, the substance of all ceremonies, the soul of all Sacraments, the
Kernel, and Key of all knowledge, the Center, and circumference of all Divine
wisdom.

I had thought to have gone a little further, as Christ in the Gospel, beyond
Emaus, but the importunity of the time, which will take no denial, forces me
to turn in here against my will.

1 Corinthians. 2. 2. For I determined to know nothing among you, but Christ Jesus,
and him Crucified.
AS often as I read these words, me thinks I conceit, how some Pharisaicall
Doctor might step up from among the Senate of the Corinthians, accusing Saint
Paul laesae Majestatis, as though he had spoken treason against the Scriptures:
even as their Predecessors accused Christ his Master of Blasphemy, when he
said, He was the Son of God, and when he said to the sick of the Palsy, Thy
sins are forgiven thee, arise, take up thy Bed and walk. And as the
Athenians once, (...).
What babbler is this, that is so lavish of his assertions? And what? Is Christ
the sum of all Divinity? Is the knowledge of Christ Crucified alone
sufficient? (...), this is an hard saying indeed, this is short work. But what
shall then become of that goodly frame of the Scripture, with the monuments of
Antiquity treasures of Poesy, Oracles of Prophecy? Ergo ibit in ignes? Yes
Paul, go and take those Tables of stone, and in a fit of zeal (forsooth) dash
them in pieces, or scrape out those divine characters engraven therein by the
finger of God himself: Nay, go ransack the Arc it self, with sacrilegious
piety, not only look into it, as the men of Bethshemesh did, or touch it, as
Vzzah, but ransack the Arc it self, and sacrifice those sacred volumes to the
devouring flames; as the Jewish Princes served Ieremies Role: go break those
golden Pens of all the Prophets and Apostle, which have dared to speak any
thing, but that: I, and digg them out of their graves again, and burn their
bones for Heretics* as the Papists did the bones of Bucer and Fagius, in
Cambridge, in the days of Queen Mary: or else, (after a new kind of
persecution, for so Christ seems to account it) erect them new Sepulchers, and
adore them, as the Pharisees did in Christ's time. If Christ be sufficient, then
why do you not make an Index expurgatorius for the Bible, (as the Jesuits
have done already for the Fathers) and spung out all but Christ crucified, for
that is sufficient? whereas the Scripture says (...).
all Scripture is inspired of God, profitable, etc. and Christ himself says,
that he came to fulfill, not to disanull the Scripture.

You hear what the curious Rabbis may object, I dare not undertake to relate
what answer the Apostle might make them, lest I should sink under the gravitie
of so great a person; you may presume it was divine, sed nostro non referenda
sono. But yet because it concerns the Text I have in hand very nearely, I will
endeavor in that respect to give satisfaction.

Every word of God is pure, like Gold tried in the fire seven times, and what
was said of the Orator, that the addition or detraction of a word would mar
the grace or clyp the meaning of their sentence, is most true in Gods word: and
therefore we read this just and severe sanction of his Books authority, he that
adds to this book, God shall add to him all the plagues that are written in
this book; Rev. 22. 18 19.
he that detracts any thing, his name shall be razed out of the book of life:
and what was said in another case, is most true in this, not an (...), nor a
(...), not the least letter, nor the least tittle thereof shall pass, because
not so much as one of them is idle, or superfluous. And for profit, the very
leaves thereof are for the healing of the nations, and the fruit, is the fruit
of the tree of life; the leaves are physic, and the fruit is meat; the fruit
is preservative, and the leaves are restorative; the leaves are health, the
fruit is immortality: for this book is not for sight, but for meat, as appears
by John, who ate the book that the Angel gave him, beside that, it is sweeter
then the honey and the honey comb, as David, that has tasted, has testified.
How then? this resolution of S. Paul does not abolish the Scripture, but
establish it: for Christ crucified and faith in him, is the sum and scope of
all the Scripture.

And thus you see, I have overtaken, or rather, met with the same point, and in
the same place where I left it the last time: for, as you may remember, after I
had treated of the sufficiency of faith in Christ, I propounded consequently,
that it was the sum of Divinity, and the scope of the Scripture: that it was
the sum of Divinity, as I could, I then evinced, by casting up the reckoning
of both the parts thereof, faith, and obedience, which amounted to no more but
this: for we found that Christ was the foundation of faith, and the fountain
of obedience, the Jacobs Ladder, of ascent and descent, descent of God to man,
ascent of man to God: and as the Spouse speaks in the Ganticles, he is Sigillum
cordis, and Sigillum brachii, for he is the stamp of faith in the heart, that
is Sigillum cordis, and he is the stamp of good works in the hand, that is
Sigillum brachii: in the hands (...).
the following character, but in the heart the (...).
leading character, for he is both Sigillum cordis and Sigillum brachii, as the
Spouse speaks in the Canticles. Thus is Christ the sum of Divinity.

It remains now then that we should clear the other, that he is the Scope of
all the Scripture: which I will do first in general, and so lead you on into
the particulars. In general, this may be demonstrated, by that which has been
before delivered: for if faith in Christ be the Epitome of the Rule of
Divinity, then needs must it be so likewise of the Scripture that contains
that Rule: and that in a double respect.

1. As the immutable substance of the Rule is considered, the substance was
always that which leads man to eternal Salvation, which is by Christ Jesus
only: and this is the maine scope of the Scripture in general.

For all the sons of Adam being guilty of high treason against the most High:
the hand writing of the Law inditeing us: Heaven and earth witnessing against
us: the Grand jurie of the blessed Angels finding us guilty: our own
consciences answering guilty; what remains, but to hear the terrible sentence
of condemnation pronounced against us, by the mouth of the most just Judge, the
Lord Almighty? Yet the mercy of the Lord was such, that when the Law had cast
us, the Lord called us to pardon. And as the Clergy of our Land is privileged
in many cases to have their book: so was it his pleasure, to give his (...),
his inheritance, his peculiar, their book, that by their book they may be
saved, and this book is the book of the Scripture.

The Scripture again is the Letter of the Almighty to the sons of men (as
one calls it) indicted by God himself, and the Angel of his great counsel
Christ Jesus (for so Esaias styles him) together with his Spirit, penned by his
principal Secretaries the holy Prophets and Apostles, and sealed with the
blood of the Lamb: let me go a little further, they are the Literae laureatae,
the Superscription is, To the faithful, the Salutation is Salutem in Christo:
The Argument is nothing but a Proclamation of a general pardon in his name to
all penitent and believing sinners.

This is the Sum of the Scriptures in general, and this is the first
demonstration that Christ is the sum thereof: because Divinity and it, like
two twins, keep pace with a mutual correspondency, like two parallels,
run on in equal extent, beginning and ending both together, and the sum of
the one is the sum of the other, and the sum of both is eternal happiness,
which is to be looked for, and can be found in Christ alone.

2. This is the first proportion we find between them: the second offers it
self to your consideration, as the Scripture may be accommodated to the
mutable circumstances of the Rule, according to the difference of time before
and after Christ.

The Lord made in the beginning duo magna Luminaria, the great to rule the day,
and the less to rule the night, the Sun and the Moon. Much like to this,
there be two portions of the light which God has revealed, concerning our
salvation, given to guide two times: the old Testament, the lesser light, like
the Moon, to rule the night of ignorance, when the Doctrine of the Messiah was
more obscurely delivered: the New, the greater light, like the Sun, to rule the
day of knowledge, which the faithful have enjoyed, ever since Christ the Sun
of righteousness appeared. When it was night there must needs be many
Ceremonies, like many shadows, and many humors, by reason of the feeble
light* and heat the influence of the Moon afforded, which the virtue of the
Sun has since dried up or driven away.

Or, the Old Testament is like the light created the first day, which though it
wanted that glorious and resplendent luster, yet it separated between night
and day, Goshen and Egypt, the beloved City and the Gentiles: and the
porportion holds of a day to a thousand years, for a thousand years is as but
a day in thy sight, says the Psalmist: and so as the Sun was set in his
Tabernacle the fourth day of the world; so the Sun of righteousness came in
the 4000. year of the World, in the Tabernacle of his flesh, to fulfill all
righteousness. And perhaps the 19. Psalm may have some relation to this
comparison: for there the Sun is described, tanquam Sponsus, as Christ is
described, tanquam Sponsus Ecclesiae: and the Prophet slides there from the
Sun, it may be because of this Analogy, to the Elogies of the Scripture.

Now both these were the same light, for the Moon receives hers from the
Sun, and the light of the Sun is but the conglobation of the first light:
Even as both the Testaments teach but one Christ, for he only dyed for us, and
therefore they are both his Testaments.

The Old Testament contains him in the Hieroglyphics of Sacrifices, and
Types, and Ceremonies: the New, in legible and ordinary characters: in the old,
he was like the corn in the ear, in the New, like the corn shaken out. in
the Old, like the Mannah which was hidden in a pot, for he is that hidden
Mannah, in the Arc: in the New, like the Shewbread, that was set upon the
Table: in both of them, the same Christ, heri, hodie and in aeternum idem
Christus: yesterday, in the Old Testament, under the time of the Law; to day,
in the New Testament, under the time of the Gospel: yesterday and to day and
for ever the same Christ, who is God blessed for ever.

For they both are but one book, but the book that was shut before by the
coming of the Lamb is opened, for the Lamb opened the book that we may fetch
a resemblance of this Revelation, out of the book of the Revelation. Compare
the Ministers of both the covenants, and we shall see the same: for as it was
said once, (...).
What is Plato or Moses Atticizing? so we may say now, (...).
What is Jesus or Moses Evangelizing? Nay, it is even the same Moses, only the
veil is removed, and we see him retecta facie.

Divines have said as much, that the Old Testament is but Novum involutum, and
the new, but Vetus revelatum: as the Stoics of old said of Rhetoric and
Logic; comparing them to pugnus and palma, as though the difference were no
more but in contraction and explication, obscurity and perspicuitie. This shall
serve for the proposition of my second general Reason: that the Old and New
Testament, contain nothing but faith in Christ Jesus.

But these two are the whole Scripture: some have gathered out of those words
of Christ, Matthew. 13. 52. Every Scribe learned to the Kingdom of Heaven, is
like a certain houshoulder, which brings out of his treasure old and new: The
consequution is but idle, but the conclusion is infallible, that there is no
more Scripture, but the old and new Testament.

And thus many God would have for the confirmation of our Faith, that in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word might stand. For though Origin do
but descant upon those words, when he says, in the mouth of two, that is the
old and new Testaments; and in the mouth of three, that is, Prophets,
Evangelists, Apostles, the truth of the word, the word of truth shall stand
assured: yet this is most certain, that the foretelling, and fulfilling of the
same thing, I say, the same thing foretold so long before it was fulfilled, and
fulfilled so long after it was foretold, makes exceedingly for the supporting
of our faith, as being an invincible argument, that this word is the word of
the eternal God, before whom all times are present.

The second Testament then, like Rachel and Leah, build the faith of the elect;
like two sisters inseparable companions hold hand in hand: chained faster
together then the invincible Armado: for Malachie gives his Lamp to Mark, as
they did in the games at Athens, and Mark takes it where he leaves it, the end
of Malachie reaches to the beginning of Mark: Mark begins, and Malachie ends
with John Baptist: so are they secretly sodered together, and holding hands
(take this by the way) they pluck a Crow with the Apocrypha, if I may so
speak in so grave an argument.

Upon these premises, that the old and new Testament contain nothing but the
doctrine of Faith in Christ, and salvation by Christ, and yet they two make up
the entire body of the Scripture, and this is my inference, that Faith in
Christ is the scope of the Scripture.

I descend now from the general to the particular declaration of this point:
And first, for the old Testament.

To let go all their Types and Ceremonies, with the whole ancient state of
Religion among the Jews, which all had reference to the coming of Christ the
promised Messiah, which make a great part of the argument of the book of the
first covenant, because I touched them the last time: and to let pass whole
books which have nothing but this, as the book of Ruth, a Grandmother of
Christ, and the Book of the Canticles, a sweet Epithalamie, or spousall of
Christ and his Church, I will divide it for this time into two portions,
Historical and Prophetical, and make good the point in either of them, and
that briefly, because I perceive that my entrance has exceeded already the
scantling of time allotted to this exercise, and because I resolve to end this
at this time, that so I may set afresh upon the use of this Doctrine.

The Historical part of the old Testament, beside the history of life openly
propounded, contains the mystery of faith also sweetly couched therein: as
will easily appear, if you do but consider the periods of times, the context
and continuation of the story, with the remarkable examples here and there
dispersed.

A man would think those many Genealogies and many names very harsh and
teadious, like craggy mountains full of stones, but barren of all fruit: but
if you will vouchsafe to make but a little inquisition, (...), to dig into
the bowels of those mountains, you shall find a golden vain, a golden chain,
consisting of many linkes, from the first Adam to the second Adam, to derive
his pedigree and show his generation, of whom Esaias says, Who can tell his
generation, for he is the eternal Word of his Father, and the ancient of
days.

And I pray tell me, wherefore is there such a curious context of succession
from Adam to Noah, from Noah to Abraham, from Abraham to David, from David to
Zorubabell, from Zorubabel to Mary, but to draw a golden line (as you have
seen the golden line in the Genealogies) a via lactea to lead to Christ, in
whom all Genealogies are ended, and accounted by Paul in the same rank with
Mataeologies, and old wives Fables. And therefore Matthew begins his Gospel
with this, and calls it (...), a Book, a Bible, because this is the very Map
and Epitome of the whole Bible, as it was in the old Testament, that he might
by this divine art of insinuation, teach the end and use of all that was then
written.

The like may be picked out of the very names there registered; for though the
conceit of the Cabalists be fond and vain, that patch up the names of Mary and
Jesus, by a strange Alchymie of Rapsodies and Anagrams, out of diverse passages
of the Scripture, yet this ought to be of some importance, that religious
parents imposed such names to their children, as might be monuments of the
Messiah: Master Broughton has observed many, and I spare to repeat any.

View again the Succession of Kings, Priests and Prophets, you shall find
that all those several currents empty themselves into Christ, as rivers into
the Ocean, and Crown him with a triple Crown, for he is the King, Priest and
Prophet of his Church, of whose coming all the rest were but Harbengers. I
say, they three, like the three Wisemen, offer Gold, and Myrrh, and
Frankincense, and so make a triple Crown for Christ: and so again, make a
three twined scourge, to whip the usurping Whore out of the Temple of God, as
Christ served the Trucksters, buyers and sellers, and money changers.

Thus is the series of the story contracted into Christ the sum of all, the
same lesson may be read written in great letters (that he that runs may read
them) in those many illustrious examples, of all those three kinds recorded in
Scripture: so that if there were not many express notes, yet there were many
notable impressions, many vistigia omnia te adversum spectantia, all looking to
Christ-ward, each of them giving a taste of that which Christ performed in all
fullness.

1 For Priests, I need not name any, because they all represented Christ, if
not in their personal excellencies, yet in their official performances.

2. For Prophets, I will name a few, because they were so many: Two ascended
into Heaven, Enoch before the Law, Elias in the Law: thus was Christ's
ascension, who was primitiae dormientium, a maine Article of our faith
prefigured: Three before Christ were raised from the dead, one by Eliah,
another by Elisha, a third, by touching the bones of Elisha being dead,
revived: even as three were raised in the Gospel, the daughter of Iairus in
the house, the Widows son in the gate, Lazarus stinking in the grave: thus was
one of the greatest miracles of our Savior, and his own resurrection, who was
primitiae dormientium, prefigured. Elias after his weary persecution by Ahab,
lying under the Juniper tree, complained, and desired that he might die: so did
Jonas, when the Sun beat upon his head, after the Gourd was withered, and
something more frowardly: thus was the passion of Christ prefigured, and the
most uncouth exigent thereof: for when the wrath of God the Father, like the
rays of the Sun, beat upon him, when he hung upon the Cross, then was he
brought under the Juniper tree: for the heat of the heat of the wrath of God,
was hotter than Juniper coals, yet he underwent it for the love of us men, and
our salvation constrained him, for the fire of love is hotter then the coals
of Juniper: Moses and Elias fasted forty days in the Wilderness, so did
Christ; who notwithstanding fed five thousand with five loaves, as Elisha
typically had done before him.

I had intended to have propounded more; but it shall be enough digitum ad
fontes, as they say, to have set the wheels of your better meditations a going.

3. Many Kings and Judges were types of Christ, in the story, as Moses a
lawgiver in the Wilderness, Joshua a (...) of the true (...), a Mediator of the
true Mediator, a leader of Israel into the land of Canaan, a Joshua of the true
Joshua, the true Jesus; David that fought the Lords battles, and foiled the
great Goliath, that defied the host of Israel, Solomon the beloved of the Lord;
the Prince of peace, and otherwise were they but glasses which did not bound
the light, but transported the godly to the contemplation of Christ.

The accommodation is easy, but I hasten: yet I cannot pass by the type of
Sampson, it was so lively: for as Sampson by his own death was the death of
thousands of Philistims, and David slew Goliath with his own sword: so Christ
overcame death, by undergoing death, and brake the head of the Serpent, by
suffering him to bruise his heel: for in him the fiction of Achilles is no
fiction, that being otherwhere impenetrable, his heel was not: for Christ was
only penetrable in his heel, his humanity, his Deity remaining altogether
impassible.

I am ravished with delight in these sacred relics of antiquity: yet I must
cut off what I thought to have added: and me thinks I hear some wondering, what
all this makes to the argument in hand: I answer, as Tamar convinced Judah by
his staff and his signet, and Theseus his (...), that made him known, were a
pasport and certificate to his father of his legitimation: so Christ is
acknowledge to be Jesus, to be Messiah, by these performances: for these are
the tesserae of commerce, the watch word between the old and new. Testament:
the badges of the whole book, proclaiming to us they do belong: the joints
and gimmers by which either of them is (as it were) scrued into the other:
Mercuriall statues, pointing the way to Christ: Stars in story, like the
star that appeared to the Wisemen, guiding them to Bethlehem, where it stood
still: for all ended in Christ, and he is the end of all.

Thus the Historical part of the old Testament is full of Asterisks, and
hands, and lines, that draw the intelligent reader to Christ. To conclude this
point, this is the use of Genealogies, to track the way of salvation, by the
golden line that leads to Christ: and this is the wisdom of wisemen, to
follow the conduct of the star, till we come to him, who is the true
morning star, the true Load-starre that guides our wandering feet in our weary
pilgrimage to eternal rest in the heavenly Canaan.

The Prophetical part is more plain by many degrees almost palpable: for
there was not any thing almost fulfilled by Christ, but it was foretold by the
Prophets, as there was not any thing foretold by the Prophets, which was not
fulfilled by Christ. See this, 1. In the maine Articles of the Creed: he was
borne of the Virgin Mary, Esaias 7. 14
so Esaias, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear: Suffered under Pilate; so
Jacob, Gen 49. 10
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, till Shilo come: Crucified, As the
Serpent was lifted up in the Wilderness: Dan. 9. 26.
Dead, The Messiah shall be slain, says Daniel: Buried, Thou will not leave
my soul in grave, said David in his person: the third day he rose again, for
it was impossible that the pains of death should hold him, as was signified in
Jonas, coming out of the Whales belly: He ascended into Heaven, as Enoch and
Elias, types of him had done: Sits at the right hand of God the Father, so
David, the Lord said unto my Lord, Psa. 110. 1.
sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool.

2. Because Christ crucified more specially makes for our purpose; consider it
of his passion in special: he was betrayed, he that eats bread with me,
Psalm. 41. 9.
my familiar in whom I trusted, says David: sold for thirty pieces of silver:
some would have it to answer to the price of the ointment that Mary powered upon
his feet, because Judas murmured: and so that he did it, ut impleretur, that
the bag might be filled: thus the covetous Traitor should have sold the
anointed of the Lord, to have gained the ointment, but this was not it: here
was the true reason, ut impleretur, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, that
said so much, Zach. 11. 12. So they weighed my price thirty pieces of silver, a
goodly price, that I was prized of them: he was Crucified between two Thieves,
for so says the Scripture, with the wicked was he counted.

3. Nay, even petty things were not omitted: he thirsted, well might he thirst,
who was so scorched with the heat, and pressed with the weight of Gods wrath
that he sweat water and blood, and therefore well might he say he thirsted, ut
impleretur, that he might quench it, but this was the maine cause, ut
impleretur, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, for it was meat and drink
for him to do his fathers will: they gave him vinegar to drink, so David:
They cast lots for my garments, so said he, upon my vesture have they cast
lots: his side was peirced with a spear, Psalm. 21. 18. Zac. 12. 10
even that spear was guided by a prophecy: so says David (...) not (...): so
Zachary, they shall see him whom they have pierced. I might be infinite: and
Matthew alone has gathered thirty two prophecies, and applied them to him,
with this burden or undersong, ut impleretur quod dictum erat per Prophetas*

I end this point with that of Peter, Act. 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him shall receive
remission of sins: the place is very plain, and those words of the Prophets
are thrice repeated in the third of that book: for all the Prophets are many
times Boanerges, sons of thunder, and then indeed they fetch all from Mount
Sinai, where there were thunder and lightning and earthquakes when the Law was
given: but all these storms usually end in some calm of consolation: and when
they would be Barnabas, sons of consolation, they fetch all from Mount Sion,
the sweet promises of the Messiah, and steep all their words in his blood.

Thus Christ is the scope of the Prophetical part of the old Testament: I
should show the same in the new also, but it will be needless: every letter
(...), by the very sound, as the Orator speaks, avouches this truth: The four
Evangelists, what are they but the story of his life and death? Ioh. 20. 31
Let John speak for them all, These things are written, that ye might believe
in Christ Jesus, and believing have everlasting life, through his name: I will
not hunt for comparisons, nor show what reference they have to the four beasts
in Ezekiel: but me thinks all the rest aim at his humanity more principally:
John only, like the Eagle, is quicker eyed, and as though he had some window
into his breast, as well as he leaned on his breast, he peirceth through the
veil of his flesh to his Divinity, and draws his pedigree from heaven through
eternity.

And the Providence of the Lord is worth observation, that he would have four
to write this story, all in a most celestial harmony; two of which, the two
Apostles Matthew and John were ocular, and two, the two Evangelists Mark and
Luke auricular witnesses of that which they wrote, that all pretext of doubting
might be excluded.

The Acts have nothing but the same Christ preached among the Gentiles, for he
brake down the wall of separation. And as after the flood, there was a
confusion of tongues, to hinder the building of Babel: so was there the
effusion of the gift of tongues, to further the building of the heavenly
Jerusalem, that all knees might bow, and all tongues confess that Jesus is the
Lord.

All the Epistles have no other argument but salvation by Christ, as may
appear out of the salutation, Grace and peace in Christ Jesus, grace the
beginning, and peace the perfection of all happiness, and both by Christ Jesus.

And it is observed, that the very name of Jesus is used by Paul alone, above
five hundred times: and no wonder, for there be in it a thousand treasures, as
Chrysostom said, yea all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge and comfort,
are hid and locked up in him: The whole Revelation what is it but a Commonitorie
for the observation of the government of the Church by Christ, the King
thereof, and the expectation of his glorious coming, as the conclusion of all
evidences, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Tanquam habeat scriptum tota tabella,
veni.
That I may didicate an Egyptian Jewel to the service of the Tabernacle.

And thus I shut up this part, that Christ is the sum of both Old and New
Testament: in these three differences, as to come in the Old, and in the New as
come, and to come again to judgment.

And me thinks, those two are like the two Cherubims, that shadowed one
Mercy-seat, their faces were one toward another, and their wings; but both
toward Christ the Mercy-seat: like Ezekiels vision, where the four creatures
stirred and stood still both together: whose wheels were, as it were, one
wheel within another, and Christ in all: like the Spies, that returned to
Moses out of Canaan: for as they brought the clusters of Grapes (a map of that
good Land) between them, so the two Testaments bring nothing but Christ
between them: now Christ is the true Vine, as himself says, like the clusters
of Grapes, as the Spouse speaks: and his blood is the Wine of the Sacrament,
the wine that makes glad the heart of the faithful, which was scruzed out of
his body upon the Cross, the Winepresse of Gods wrath; where you may behold
him excellently, tanquam uva passa, Christ Crucified.

And therefore Christ is like the hinges, upon which the whole frame of time,
upon which the bifores valvae of the house of the Sun, the two Tabernacles,
the two gates of Heaven, do hang and turn themselves.

And now I hope, though this my discourse be very imperfect, yet it will not
be altogether impertinent or unprofitable: for this one point, that faith in
Christ crucified is the sum of all the Scripture, well considered, must needs
give very much light to the reading of every part thereof: it will be like a
key, to unlock the meaning, and so make way to the rich treasure therein, like
a clue of thread, to lead us through many intricate Labyrinths thereof. And this
makes me call to mind, what I forgot even now, that the red thread that Rahab
hung out of her window, when Jericho was beseiged, was an Emblem of Christ
Crucified, by whom all the faithful must be saved from eternal death, as she
was then preserved from present destruction: much bettet then Leucotheae vitta,
or Ariadnes filum.

Let me wind up all that has been said, Christ is the sum of all Divinity:
me thinks the Clypeus fidei, is like that Clypeus Phidiae, the Buckler of faith
like the buckler of Phidias, that Historians speak of, I mean the Buckler of
Minerva, which Phidias made: for as in it he had so curiously intrailed his
own name, that it could not be taken out without the dissolution of the whole
frame; so has Christ so divinely wrought his name in the work of salvation,
the rule of Divinity, that it cannot be taken out, but that golden chain,
that series causarum, will all fall in sunder.

The Ephesians, when Croesus beseiged them, chained their City to the Temple of
Diana, the Tyrians theirs, when Alexander, to the Statue of Hercules: and so
all the precepts of Divinity seem to be chained to the Cross of Christ: he is
the umbilicus, where all the intrails are knit together, the Center, where all
lines meet: and therefore in the Creed of twelve Articles, ten of them concern
him, and beside the other two of God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, have their
dependence on him too, for he has obtained the Spirit for us, and by him we
have access unto the Father, as I showed before.

And therefore as in the first book we learn, the Cross begins the row, as
though all the 24. Letters were but Commentaries upon the Cross: so surely,
this is the sum of all our learning, to learn to know Christ Jesus and him
Crucified.

Again, Christ is the Scope of all the Scriptures, Me thinks, the Scripture is
a Ring of Gold, which Christ has given his Spouse the Church, as a token of
his love, and himself, like the Diamond in the Ring: the Scripture is the
field mentioned in the Gospel, and Christ like the jewel in the field, which
a wise Merchant knowing of, would sell all he has to purchase: the Scripture
the box, and Christ the ointment, preciosum opobalsamum in gemmeo myrothecio:
and therefore Christ is called (...) the Word, as though every word sounded of
Christ, and all the Word of God were nothing else: and Christ is the Alpha and
Omega thereof, as himself says, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end;
for all the Letters, without which the Spirit in the Scripture breaths not, for
so (...) signifies, or Alpha and Omega, the two principal for all the Vowels,
without which all the Scripture is but a mute Letter, a dead Letter, I may say,
a killing Letter: and for him the Scripture it self is called (...), the
Bible, the book, because it is the only book, containing this knowledge, which
alone is sufficient, and which is only necessary to eternal salvation.

In a word to close up all, the knowledge of Christ crucified, is the Theme of
Theology, the Scope of the Scripture, the Pith of all Piety, as Paul
excellently lays it down, Ephesians. 2. 19. For through him we have access by
one Spirit to the Father, being no more strangers, and forreiners, but
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, and are built upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief cornerstone, in whom all the building fitly framed together, (...),
grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. etc. you see the knot that holds all
together. And thus much for the explication of this Text.

1 Corinthians. 2. 2. For I determined to know nothing among you, but Christ Jesus,
and him Crucified.
THe handling of the Word of God, is a divine kind of husbandry. And this
portion of Scripture is that parcel of holy ground which I began to till long
ago, but have not yet finished: I have hitherto broken up the ground only: it
remains that I should now break the clods, which might hinder the
fruitfulness, and cast out the stones, that so at last, I may sow the blessed
seed of exhortation, in hope of a blessed harvest.

Or rather this portion of Scripture is the seed, for so says Christ, the seed
is the Word, and I have hitherto beat this seed out of the ear only, and must
now winnow and fan it out of the chafe, that at the last I may cast it again
into the ground of your heart, (for so says Saint Paul, (...). 1 Cor. 3. 6 7
you are the Lords husbandry) in hope of a fruitful increase, from the
blessing of the Lord, the Lord of the harvest, for Paul may plant, and Apollo
may water, but it is the Lord that gives the increase: he that planteth is
nothing, and he that waters is nothing, but the Lord that gives the
increase, for without him, the seeds-man is but (...), semini verbius, a
babbler, according to our translation, as the Epicures scoffed at Paul, or (...)
seminilegus, such an one as they that stood in the Corne-markets, and gathered
up the Corn that fell beside the Sacks in emptying, as Casaubon observes, that
is, a man of no worth, an earthen vessel, as the Apostle calls Ministers
elsewhere, and the word will bear it.

I presume the meanest in this place conceives my meaning, yet I will endeavor
to speak more plainly, that if there be any seeming riddle, you may plow with
my Heifer, as Sampsons companions did, and reed the interpretations. I have
hitherto given you the explication of these words, and so, as it were, threshed
the Corn out of the ear, with the flaile of the Spirit: I come now to the
application in two parts.

1. For confutation of popish errors, and so I will chide away the chafe out
of this stoore with the fan of Christ.

2. For exhortation, and so I will cast the seed into your ears, and charm it
in the phrase of the Spouse in the Canticles, Arise o North, and come o South,
and blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow forth.

In the Explication I have handled already these three points.

1. That Christ crucified is a sufficient Savior.

2. That Christ Crucified is the sum of the Scripture.

3. That Christ Crucified is the sum of Religion: Which may stand as so many
reasons, to warrant the wisdom and equity of Paul's determination, to know
nothing among the Corinthians, but Christ Jesus and him Crucified.

Now out of these shall be deduced, First, for Confutation: out of the first
two things.

1. That Saints are not Saviors, and therefore not to be invocated as Saviors.

2. That Sinners cannot be their own Saviors; and therefore, that our works
on earth, are not merits of Heaven.

Out of the second, two things.

1. That the Scripture is most perfect, and therefore needs not to be patched
up with Tradition.

2. That the Scriptures are perspicuous, and therefore need not to be locked
up from the Laity.

From the third, two things.

1. How a man may know the true Religion, by Christ the cornerstone, the
Lydius lapis, the Touchstone of Religion.

2. How a man may unmaske Antichrist, and his counterfeit Religion, by Christ,
and his.

2. For Exhortation, out of all jointly.

1. For Ministers, what is the true Rule of Preaching, the Art, (and that I may
so speak with reverence) the very trick of Preaching, viz. to Preach Christ,
and him crucified.

2. For all, what should be all our chief study, the aim and scope of all our
studies, viz. only to know, believe, and love Christ Crucified. If any of you
think any of these too far fet, rather haled then drawn out of this Text,
when I come to the particulars, I hope to give him a reasonable satisfaction.

And thus I have drawn a Map of the holy Land: or rather as God brought Moses
to the top of Mount Nebo, where he showed him a sight, a Synopsis of the Land
of Canaan, so have I you: but as it was then, so it is now, and so it will ever
be, we must travail some days journies, before we can enter into that good
Land: we must winn it, and wear it, we must fight with the enemies of God,
before we can fill our selves of the milk and honey, of that Land which flowed
with milk and honey.

Thus much I think I may be bold to say in general, that he that is
indifferent, if he think advisedly on the matter, will say, that I have taken
an indifferent course: I have taken these to try my self, but I have refused
more which I might have taken, because I would not tire my auditors: I have
selected these to exercise my meditations, out of many other which I neglected,
that I might not exceed the proportion of this exercise: for who sees not that
Antichristianisme is nothing else but an opposition in a mystery, to the
mystery of godliness revealed in Christ, either by open oppugning, or secret
undermining: or if there be any that cannot see, he may well hear the Proverb,
Who is so blind, as he that will not see: so that if I had a mind to favor my
self, I have a fair occasion to make choice of mine enemy, among all the
troops of the Romish Antichrist, and single out the weakest: but I rather
follow the direction of the lot that is fallen into my lap, and set upon him
that stands nearest, though he strout wide, and speak boistrous, and look big
with horror and disdainfulnesse.

I remember, how David with a little stone which he found by the brook, branded
that proud Goliath in the forehead, and foundred the uncircumcised Philistim,
that defied the Host of Israel, and the Lord of Hoasts. And Daniel makes
mention of a stone that was cut out of the mountain without hands, which brake
the glorious image of Nebuchadnezzar, whose head was of gold, the arms and
breasts of silver, the thighs and legs of brass, the feet of iron, (a man
would think all metal) and yet that little stone battered it all to pieces.
Behold, I stand by the brook of water, by the book of God, for the Scripture
is the river, that makes glad the City of God: behold in these crystal
streams, the stone, the Lord Christ, for Christ is the stone which the proud
builders of Babel refused, but is become the head of the corner, which the
Master Builder has put in Sion, and elect and precious stone: me thinks I want
nothing but David's hand, or David's sling, to check the scornful Whore with a
blow, and spoil the mystery that is written in her forehead: and yet again
me thinks I need not David's hand, since I have his stone: for his stone is the
same, that Daniels stone, and Daniels stone (like the Phoenician ships in
Homer) is guided by an higher Intelligence, and can do the feat without hands:
and as the stone without hands intimates, according to our interpreters, the
Virginity of Mary, out of whom Christ was hewn, without the help of man: so
Christ in my Text, may be taken out without hands, without any great pains of
man, to break the clay feet, the brittle pillars of that brasen-faced Whore,
to break them like a Potters vessel. And though I know the Fathers and
Councels, like Saul's Armor, are not needful for David in his combat: yet
perhaps it were no hard matter for the happy champion, when he has foiled his
enemy with a stone out of the Scripture, and laid him grovelling in the dust,
to set his victorious foot upon his neck, and strike off his head with the
edge of the Fathers, as it were with his own sword, in which he gloried.

Perhaps you wonder where is the point all this while: is that lost? is that
forgotten? it is true: but I choose rather to lead you into my further
discourse, though with an unseasonable preface, then trouble you with an
unseemely repetition of the former: though I might plead the prescription of
time, enough to secure me from exception or obloquie: and yet I presume that,
with your favorable construction, I have erred indeed, but so as not praeter
casam, no nor praeter causam neither. I come now to it.

The first point of the Explication was, that Christ is a sufficient Savior:
out of it I deduced, 1. That Saints are no Saviors, nor therefore to be
invocated as Saviors: here is no such magneticall and invisible Sympathy,
that any man should wonder what necessity ties these two together: neither is
their any such forced deduction, that a man should need to pumpe or cherne to
make it come: the dependence is easy* as it is in the links of a chain, draw
one, and the rest will follow: as it is in water spilt upon an even table, it
is very docible to go which way soever the finger will lead it; so willingly
does this consequent offer it self to your consideration, out of the precedent
position. Well then, this is our Theme, for this time, that Saints are not
Saviors, nor therefore to be invocated as Saviors: wherein I purpose first to
represent unto your view a light adumbration, a rude draught of it, instead of
an exposition of the state of the question, which shall contain (as it were) a
Sciagraphy of the truth, and a Sciamachy against the falsehood: I shall measure
but three paces in this porch, before I bring you into the maine building, the
first will be in the general Idolatry of the Synagogue of Rome, which offends
against Christ crucified: the second, in that which is committed with the
Saints in general: the last, in that which particularly concerns the Virgin
Mary.

For the first: It was said of old Rome, that it was (...).
The Epitomie of a Family, or rather of superstitious folly. But it is more
true of new Rome: good Lord! what a world of trinkets, and trash, and
trumperie, is their great Colossus stuffed withal? what apish imitation, what
sottish devotion, what popish superstition is among them? insomuch that a man
would doubt, whether he should laugh, or scorn, or abhor those fardels of
folly; whether he should laugh at the act, or weep for the actors; whether he
should pity their simplicity, or spit at their sinfulness.

If ever the saying of the Preacher were verified in simple truth, Vanity of
vanities, all is vanity: here it is more then true, and that with advantage,
by a kind of transcendent supereminency of truth, Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity: or if there be any thing viler than vanity, they shall vie with it
for vileness: or if there be any thing lighter then vanity, they shall weigh
with them in the balance for lightness.

The Egyptian blindness was nothing comparable to this; the Egyptian
darkness, not half so palpable: or if that were more palpable, I am sure,
this is more culpable: The Egyptians worshipped vile creatures, but yet living
creatures; the Romans worship stocks and stones, and dead carkases: they
worship Oxen, and Owls, and Rats, and Mice, and Cats, and Crocodiles, and such
like vermin: these worship Judas his Lantern, Francis his Cowle, Beckets
shoes, and Joseph's breeches, and a piece of stone that was in the Well where
the Virgin Mary washed the swaddling cloutes of Christ, as sorry Saints I trow:
They suit at the Catadupes of Nilus, and their heavy ears were made deaf with
his barbarous language, and (as it were) rockt asleep: there fell no dew from
Heaven upon their heads, that might wet their locks, that might soften their
rockey hearts, and make them bring forth better fruits: no marvail then, if
they worship Nilus, whose steps dropped to them fatness, whose rich inundation
filled their Valleys with Corn, and crowned their years with gladness, so
are the words of the Psalmist: no marvel if they worshiped Nilus, and that
cursed vermin, the fruitful spawne of his too fruitful womb: but these men
are brought up at the feet of Gamaliel: and if they did not prefer the seat of
the scorners, they might be preferred to the chair of Moses: they sit in the
Temple of God, and hear the silver Trumpet of the everlasting Gospel of God,
proclaiming war against such idolatry from the Lord of Hoasts: and yet they
hear no more, then their stocks and stones hear them: the dew of Heaven has
richly fallen among them, and yet like Gideons fleece, they are dry, when all
the Regions about them are wet: their stubborn hearts remain as hard as the
Adamant, to speak with Job, as hard as the neither millstone,

But I pray tell me, what is the sum of their devotions, or, if you will
hear me, I will tell you what it is, by my casting a smooth-faced smiling
picture, a Saintish stone, a rotten ragg of a nastie Relic, a B in a box, a
Crucifixe I mean, a pretty cosset Agnus Dei, these are the particulars, now
lay them altogether, and the Sum amounts to this (if my Arithmetic fail me
not) pretty maumets, pretty puppets for such wanton babies as they are to play
withal, and as we use to promise children fine gay things of nothing: this is
the sum of their devotion. Behold, these are thy gods, o thou son of the
rebellious woman, o thou daughter of Rome, thy gods in which thou trustest:
this is the precious merchandise that has drawn all the trafique of the World
into thy streets, these are the Apples after which thy soul lusts.

Pardon me, if these terms seem something light: the toys themselves are so
ridiculous, that I could not find in my heart to vouchsafe them any graver
speech: but I will make amends, and turn them all away packing: only let me
remember what your worthy Bishop Claudius Taurinensis said excellently of some
of them your Agnus Deies, Pictos adorant, vivos devorant, I will make bold to
English it rudely, they worry the living Saints, while they worship the dead:
but Christ did not say, Pinge Agnos tuos, frame thee Lambs that may represent
me, but Pasce agnos meos, Feed the Lambs that do represent me: but it seems
they do not much regard what he said: and yet he did not only say thus, but he
conjured them also with the powerful charm of love, if thou love me ( Peter)
feed my Lambs: and yet these devout adorers, like deaf Adders, stop their
ears and will not hear the charmer, charm he never so wisely. I conclude
this point: As Aristippus once answered him that asked, what his son should
be the better for learning, if he bestowed it on him: Vt nihil aliud (said he)
certe in Theatro non sedebit lapis super lapidem: so may I make answer to him
that should demand, what should any man be the better to come out of Babylon,
out of Rome, and betake himself into the bosom of the faithful Spouse of
Christ, our Church, our Religion: Vt nihil aliud certe, in Templo non orabit
lapis ad lapidem, blocks shall not prostrate themselves before blocks, nor
stones prostitute themselves to stones, living stones, to livelesse stones;
sensitive blocks, before senseless blocks, beside a thousand privileges.

And thus I pass to take the second step, which was concerning Saints in
general. Bellarmine has a very tragical and passionate preface to this
controversy: he falls foul with us Protestants, he terms us scoffing
Lucians, and Giants, that make war against the Gods, and such like flowers of
his wild Rhetoric, Canina facundia, dogged eloquence he bestows upon us: and
perhaps he was at great cost to gather them, but we conne little thanks: and
then like some desperate Fencer, that has more heart then brain, more malice
then might, he hewes, and lashes, and foynes, and strikes blindfold, he cares
not where, and hits he cares not whom: or like some mad dog, he has a
quarrel to every one he meets: he grins at Erasmus, he snarles at Melancthon,
and barks at Illyricus, and snatches at Luther, and worries Calvin, as though
he had to deal with some carrion carcass; this is the only difference, the
teeth of a mad dog are poison, but his tongue is no slander: at last, as a man
newly awaked out of a trance or sleep, he throws his envious eyes to heaven
with great devotion, (forsooth) and wonders why the stars are suffered to
stand there, belike he thinks to convince their works of darkness: he
wonders at the patience of God that suffers us heretics to discover their
Catholic abominations, in the false worship of Saints, and vindicate the glory
of God, from their impudent impostures. Me thinks, this preface is like the
Painters Table. One spoke to a Painter to draw him a Horse running in full
speed: he did, and gave it him, but gave it with the wrong side upward: the man
disliked it, and told him, he spoke for a runner, this was a tumbler, no hurt,
quoth the Painter, turn the Table and this will run: so in that Preface, all
may be true, but all is turned upside down; like the Horse with his heels
upward, sprawling toward Heaven: but change the persons, and let that be said
of the Papists, that he would feign make the world believe is true of the
Protestants, and I blame not the Picture: or as the Painter said, turn the
Table, and all may run well enough, or at least go current. But what if we
should let the Jesuit go, perhaps he had as live be some where else, and as
live be doing something else, as be brought in for a tumbler to play tricks:
if you think so, I am content to dismiss him: well then, to leave the
Cardinal, and come to the cause.

The Papists have brought in so many new Saviors, that the true Savior is
gone out: I know not how they will find Heaven, but I am sure, they have lost
Christ, they have lost the way to Heaven: for he is the way. And if there be
any spark of faith, any remnant of the faithful flock among them, they may
well complain, as Mary did to the Gardener, when she went to visit the sacred
body of the Lord, and found it not, Sir, they have taken away my Lord, and I
know not where they have laid him: if there be (I say) any faithful Mary among
them, like a Lilie among thorns, which led with an holy zeal indeed, but
misled by ignorance, should think to find him in their crowd of Saints, wrapped
up in some of their relics, as he was once in linnin clothes, I think some
Angel would tell her, as he did, He is not here; I think Christ himself
would take the pains to meet her, and instruct her thus: Mary, I see thou
meanest well, but yet thou missest much, thou art in a right mind, but thou art
in a wrong box: it is but lost labor to seek the living among the dead, the
living Savior, among the dead Saints: I would have thee know therefore, I have
retired my self from this Garden, and shall not feed any more among these
Lillies, but until the day break and the shadows flee away, I go, my
wel-beloved, I go to the mountain of spices.

But why do I presume as it were to teach Christ to speak, who is the word, in
whom God speaks to us? or why do I relate his speech, who am a child and know
not how to speak? I know the Critics tax Homers rashness, in reporting the
song of the Sirens, because it cannot be thought, how it should be done, but it
must needs fall many bows short of expectation: such things are better
suppressed, then expressed; or if expressed, better velo, then penicillo; that
veil of silence is the best attire of sobriety: and I may fear a more just
censure that have reported what Christ said to Mary, since, never man spoke as
he spoke: but you know the Lord himself vouchsafes bal butire nobiscum, and
therefore he will bear with Moses stammering tongue, if he go on his errand:
nay which is more, though it do stammer he will have it go on his errand, on
his Embassage: nay, he will admit of no excuse neither, as you see in Moses, so
that I hope, I shall need no other Apology or excuse.

The word of God, in the description of the holy Land, has four things
observable in the golden line that directs our passage thither: two for the
way, and two for the end: for the way,

1. That it is straight without crook.

2. That it is narrow without crowd.

For the end, that the gate of the Royal City, 1. Is narrow, 2. Is one: but
the Popes Itinerary, made out of the lying Legend, the cosoning Calender, the
Ephemerides of the Saints, contradicts the Kings map, the word of God in all
these: there is a lying spirit gone out, and gone into the mouths of the
Prophets of Iezebel, to send Ahab upon an unhappy voyage: and as the
Israelitish spies, (all beside Caleb and Joshua) spoke evil of the good Land,
so the Romish spies, which they have sent to view this Land, speak false of
the true way, which the Israel of God must walk in, if they mean to come to
the God of Israel.

1. They have made the way crooked: As the man in the Gospel that offered
himself to follow Christ, would feign have taken a vagarie, and fetched a
circuit by his fathers house, that he might have saluted him, and bidden him
farewell with a kiss: and another, would have visited his fathers tomb, and
seen him honorably interred, whereas they should have followed Christ
directly: so the Papists will not go the nearest way to Heaven, by Christ, but
will needs coast about, by the Sepulchers of Saints, for fear belike, that if
they should make too much haste, they, should come too soon thither: But the
Lord commands us, to make straight ways for our steps, (...).
and to make straight steps in that way: but the crooked crabs in the dead Sea
of Rome, will not learn to go straight: their crooked lives, must needs run
on in crooked lines: and their blind works, will needs find blind ways,
rather then they will keep the Kings highway to Heaven: as superstitious
travelers, that turn aside to worship (...).
every greazie stone: or as the Jews, (perhaps as they went to the Temple)
would make a stay at every green hill, and everyshadie grove (the Lord
complains thus) as ye have seen some hackney Jades at every green banck, with a
months mind to bait there, and steal a sweet bit, a mouthfull of Idolatry.

2. They have made the way wide. You know the man who said, he would not leave
his part in Paris, for his part in Paradise: And I think it not impossible to
find some dainty minion in the Whores lap, that would not exchange his
Cardinals Hat, for a Martyrs Crown. But for this time, we will think, that
they think at least, that they would come to heaven: But when they hear
Christ saying, I am the way, they think in their conscience that is too narrow;
and when they hear him say plainly, that the way is narrow, they say plainly
that is an hard saying, who can bear it? And as the young man that came to
Christ, went away grieved at a like speech: so they are grieved indeed, because
they were as covetous as he was: but they will not go away because they are
not so ingenuous as he was. But why was the young man grieved, and why are
they grieved, as the young man was? because he was rich, because they are
riotous: they are afraid that narrow way will not receive their goodly train,
their great retinue: fond men, that cannot be contented to go to heaven, except
they go in state: very fools, that will not (as the Proverb is) leave their
bables for the Tower of London, their towers of Babble for the Lord* that will
not shake hands with that folly, that they embrace this felicity. But why will
not they go away as the young man did? he was a young man they think, and
they are grown gray in mischievous devises: they mean to try conclusions ere
they go away. What do they then? they hire a rascal rout of hungry ditchers
to break up the fence, that the word has made, to make the way broader then
the merits of Christ, and then they eke it out with the forged merits of
Saints: and being so drunken with superstition, that they cannot pass the lake
that burns with fire and brimstone for evermore, upon that one planck of
Christ, as they say the barbarous Turks do, when they meet a deep river in
the way that interrupts their course, they slay their poor vassals, and make a
bridge of their dead corpse: so they enlarge that bridge with the rotten boords
of Saints mediation: but it is to be feared, that while they, in their
Pontifical fancies imagine the bridge (by their deceitful moone-shine) wider
then it is, they find themselves deeper then they would, plunged in that Lake
that burns with fire and brimstone for evermore.

3. They have made the gatewider: They are so crammed with the sins of the
people, and fed so fat with their follies, and so puffed up with the wind of
pride, that they have no hope to get into Heaven, if all that get in must do as
Christ said, Strive to enter into the strait gate: beside their great. Master
would feign have the gate so large, that he might go in with full soope, top
and top-gallant, without vailing his triple crown, or bending his stubborn
knees: for he is as stiff as though he had eaten a stake: his joints are like
the Elephants, they are no joints: and like Nebuchadnezzars Image, their legs
are of brass, they cannot bow, so much as to him that made them: they are like
some nice and cold hearers of the word, that are willing to hear and make
toward the Church (perhaps they made a short dinner for haste) but when they
come there, and see a little door beset with a great throng about it, they
shrink their heads into their shell again: they meant to hear, but they
never meant to crowd for the matter: the Cat loves fish, but will not wet her
foot: they had rather swell and putrify, and die with sin and ignorance, then
be so sweezed. But what do they in this case to help themselves* they have
set on work many skillful Carpenters (perhaps some apprentises of that jolly
Carpenter, that made a gate of a window by his learned interpretation of a
place in the Acts) they have furnished them with store of timber out of the
Popes storehouse of Saints Relics, and these have promised to give so much
scope to the gate, that the most profound bellies may step in and not complain
for want of elbow-roome.

4. They have made many gates instead of one: The Grammar of the Gospel writes
it (...) the gate, not the gates: and Christ says, Ego sum ostium, I am the
door, not the doors: I am, and no other, as the Lord speaks in another
place: But these foolish Florentines, (I think Florentines, I know foolish)
these foolish Florentines, have a strong conceit, upon a weak ground, that the
more gates go out of their City, the more gain comes in, and therefore have
made so many Saints as are gone to heaven, so many gates to go to heaven.
Excellently says the Spirit of God in the Revelation, Revelation 21. and the
21. And the twelve gates were twelve Pearls, every several gate was one
Pearl: the translation abates something of the worth, for those Pearls in
English, are Margarites in Greek, and those Margarites are the best of Pearls,
and represent Christ himself, and that most sweetly: for those Margarites are
begotten of the divine influence of the stars, and conceived of the pure dew
of Heaven, though a poor shell gives them entertainment: so was Christ the
Son of the most High, begotten by his eternal father, and conceived by the
Holy Ghost, though he did not abhor the womb of the Virgin, though the
Virgin Mary brought him forth.

But here seems to be many gates. I pray mark: there is a double number, and a
double unity: there is a number of twelve, and a number of three: of twelve,
round about for the twelve tribes of Israel: of three, on each side for the
Gentiles in all quarters of the world, three to the East, three to the West,
three to the North, three to the South: twelve, that the fullness of the Jews
may come in by those gates; three, that the fullness of the Gentiles may come
in and sit with Abraham in the Kingdom of God. Again, there is a double
unity, an unity of matter, all these gates are made of Margarites: an unity
of form, they are all made of one Margarite a piece; and that Margarite I told
you was Christ: so that in effect, there be many goers, but one gate: there be
many Jews and Gentiles to enter, (...).
this gate will receive them all, both Jews and Gentiles, that shall be
gathered from all the four winds of the earth.

This is the gate which the Angel of God has measured with his golden reed:
but the leaden meetwand of the Popes Canonization has laid us our gates made
of the rotten wood of Saints, if it did but chance to glow a little in a gloomy
night of darkness.

I will end now this point of Saints in general. We read of some that take the
Kingdom of Heaven by force: Mat. 11, 12
For the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force,
says Christ* and yet these men are commended: for it suffers them, grata est
vis illa. We read of some again, that purchase the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
13. 46
for the wise Merchant sold all that he had, to purchase the field, in which he
knew there was a rich Margarite, and that Margarite was Christ, and that field
was Heaven: and yet this Merchant is commended: but we do not read of any that
crept into the window, but thievs and robbers, and they are condemned: but such
thieves and robbers are the Papists, that think to steal in by the windows
of Saints prayers: and that when the gate stands wide open, when Christ stands
forth and invites all, Come unto me, all ye that are heavy laden, and I will
ease you: and yet these thievs had rather pray to Saints, and neglect Christ.

But me thinks, their prayers without Christ, are like the woman's Beer, when
she forgot to put in the Malt: they are prayers of their own brewing, and they
are like to drink as they brew, faint beer, faint prayers, thin beer, thin
prayers. What if they be strong of the Hop of Saints, yet when there is no
grain of faith in Christ, not so much as a grain of Mustard Seed in them, I
hope I may well term them thin beer, thin prayers, faint beer, faint
prayers. Let me then say to them, Behold, these are thy Saviors, o thou son
of the rebellious woman, o thou daughter of Rome, thy Saviors in whom thou
trustest: and let me say to you, Son of man, see thou these abominations?
then learn to say with me, O the patience and long sufferance and gentleness of
God, toward vile sinners!

Follow me but a little further with your attention, and I will show you
greater abominations then these: for now I come to the third step, concerning
their Idolatry with the Virgin Mary in particular. Revelation 9. There is
mention made of a bread of Locusts out of the smoke of the bottomless pit,
which are at large described there: among other, this is one particular, that
they have women's hair, according to the judgment of learned Interpreters:
these Locusts typifie the flocks of Eastern Saracens' and the Western swarms
of Monks: but how can shaven crowns (for so Monks are, and it went before,
that they had like crowns upon their heads, which notes, that round shaving in
form of a crown, which was indeed as precious as a crown to them, to keep
them sacred and inviolable) how can those bald-pates be said to have women's
hair? yes, not literally, but mystically; because they gloried in women's
hair: the thing is plain in story. The Saracens descended indeed of Hagar
the bondwoman, as it were of purpose to verify this type, will needs be
called Saracens, of Sarah the free woman: and so they boast of their women's
hair. And who knows not, how the Monks brag of the Virgin Mary, and so their
bare skuls have borrowed a periwig (as it were) of women's hair. But what do
they with it? As the Carthaginian Matrons once suffered themselves willingly to
be shorn, that the men might make Engines of their hair, for the defense of
their City: so the Carthusian Monks, and other of the same rabblement, have
made an engine, an (...) of the Virgins hair to take heaven withal; and let
me tell those bold climbers, in what danger they are of an irrecoverable fall,
as the Proverb is, (...).
the sword hangs over their head in a slight hair, as it did for Dionysius his
Parasites: let them look back to their original, the rock out of which they
were hewn, the pit from whence they came. If the clew of the Virgins hair
has led them to a posterne door of Heaven, the key of him that is the Angel
of the bottomless pit must open it: but let me tell them, that pit is
bottomless, there is no hope of getting out, and therefore that key is
bootlesse, there is no hope of getting in.

The Helvidians of old, called the perpetual virginity of the Virgin Mary into
question: but she might have been (...)
a perpetual Virgin, as well as she was (...)
borne of God, if she had not fallen into the Priests hands: they have shrived
her but ill favouredly: for though her spotless virgin-soule, enjoy an
innocent sleep (I do not mean, an (...).
everlasting soule-sleep) in the bosom of Abraham, yet these artificial
leachors, have made shift to find a trick, by a vertuall, I cannot say, because
it is most vicious; by a spiritual, I cannot say, because it is most carnal;
but by that which the sons of the Philosophers call, a vtrtuall or spiritual
contact, to contaminate her memory, which should be blessed, and to commit
folly with hervery name.

For what I pray you, are (...).
those flattering titles which they give her in their prayers, Queen of
Heaven, Mother of grace, Port of Paradise, etc. but such unclean and unchaste
names for a Virgin, that if she should hear them with patience, I would not be
afraid to say, she were the most impure harlot that ever was: but her blessed
spirit abhorres their cursed breath, and they, while they think to sow these
ungracious seeds of spiritual whoredom in her most gracious ears, do but
embrace a cloud, instead of a Queen; a Ione, instead of a Juno, as he did; and
so beget misshapen Centaures, I may say, centuries of misbegotten Orizons. Or,
what are their strange devices, that God has given her his Kingdom, and
reserved only that other half to himself, the half of mercy to her, and the
half of justice to himself: that he contents himself with his Bench of
Justice, and has placed her in the Mercy seat: and that this was prefigured in
Ahasuerosh, who promised Hester the half of his Kingdom? a goodly stratagem
to drive men from God to Mary. Again, that there are two Ladders up to Heaven;
a red Ladder by Christ's blood, and a white Ladder by Mary's beauty, which is
far the easier: me thinks these men mistake Jacobs Ladder, but yet something
like it was, for they are in a dream, as Jacob was. But I will not rake this
dunghill of stinking blasphemies.

Yet if a man would take the pains, to turn over their stinking Rosaries, but
as often as they do their beads in a day, he should soon perceive, that the
name of Christ is out of fashion, out of date, and the name of the Virgin in
the freshest honor: the withered Laurels of Christ, are feign to veil the
Bonnet and give place to the flourishing, prime, and green Garlands of the
Virgin: as Lucullus did once to Pompeys: and some merry Courtier might ask no
more, whether Mary were gracious with Christ, but whether Christ were with
Mary; as they did scoffingly, whether Alexander were gracious with Hephaestion:
Mary has all the suitors, Mary has all the presents, Mary does all in the
Court of Heaven. It is not here, as it was once said of Themistocles his son,
that he ruled all Greece, because his father ruled all, and his mother ruled
his father, and he ruled his mother: For the Popes Sophisti call Logic in a
Sorites, and ambitious Rhetoric in a Climax, is clean contrary: God rules the
World, his Son rules him, and Mary rules his Son; therefore Mary rules the
World. She is become, against the Lex Salica, I am sure, against the Lex
Coelica, the new Queen of Heaven, at least, as though her son were in his
minority, the Queen Regent. She complains her self in Erasmus, that she has
so many Clyents, so much custom, tantum non enecant, she has much ado to
take respite enough, to take breath enough, to keep life and soul together:
belike they mean to kill her with kindness, to press her to death with loads
of honor; as the perfidious Virgin was served that betrayed the Capitol: they
come something near already, tantum non enecant. But if there be any that
make show to kiss the Son, as the Psalmist speaks, it is to be feared, that
it is not because they are afraid-least he, but lest she be angry: or according
to our commonspeech, many kiss the child for the nurses sake: they kiss the
child, but their mouth waters at the mothers lips, they make much of the child
and dandle it in their arms, but it is but to insinuate themselves into the
sweet embraces of the mother.

And yet these filthy monsters of lust (for they are no better then monsters,
bewitched out of the shape of men, by the powerful charms of the Romish
Circe, and her golden Cup offornication) these filthy monsters do so please
themselves in their filthiness, that as the Apostle Peter speaks, they speak
evil of us, as of those that do evil, and think it strange, that we do not
run with them into the same excess of riot.

Like some fond and amorous Bridegroom newly wedded, that dotes may chance
upon an homely spouse, and wonders that all his neighbors do not meet him
with their mouths full of wonder and gratulation, that they do not worship her
whom he adores: because forsooth, she is written for a Saint in the Calender
of his heart, he thinks she should be received for a Queen in the Charter of
their Parish: because she is the Idol of his fancy, he thinks she should be
the goddess of their faith: he is so well acquainted with the zeal of his
own private devotion, that he cannot but admire, what cold blast of stupid
ignorance or envy, (for he has not the power to think it any other) has so
frozen and congeald them, that they do not melt into his mold, that they will
not be reduced to his temperature.

But to give them their answer. The Old Jews baked for the Queen of Heaven,
and the New Collyridians did the like for the Virgin Mary, whom they called the
Queen of Heaven, and so do the Papists, the sole heirs of both their follies.
But let Epiphanius answer them all: The Virgin is to be honored, she is not
to be adored; she is blessed among women, but not God blessed for ever* or,
that I may allude to those cakes, she may be honored, that is frumentum,
corn that grows in Scripture, a Christian stomach may digest it: but she must
not be adored, that is fermentum; it is so sour of the leven of the Pharisees,
that a Christian stomach (as Erasmus said, he had Animum Catholicum, stomachum
Lutheranum, a Catholic mind, and a Lutheran maw, because he loved no fish) I
say, a Christian stomach cannot brook it: in a word, their Cake (as we use to
say) is dow baked: and it were to be wished, that these blind Collyridians, if
their mouth be out of taste, at least would anoint their eyes with that
Collyrium, commended to the Angel of Laodicea, Revelation 3. some eye salve of
the Scripture, that they might see the grossness of their Idolatry.

If they could but open their eyes, I doubt not, but they might see that we
give more to the Virgin then they, that we are not Heretics, because we do
not give so much to the Virgin as they do; but they are Atheists, that give so
much as they do: and yet to say truth, we give her more then they do; they
would make her worshipful, we would have her honorable: an easy Herald
would decide the controversy, which is the better title: and so would an easy
Divine, which are the Antidicomarianites, they or we. But if they will needs
sleep still, loath to part with this pleasant dream: let us call and see if we
may awaken them: Behold thy gods, o thou son of the rebellions woman, thy
gods in whom thou trustest! Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead,
and Christ shall give thee light. But why do I spend so much breath in vain,
they are not deaf, but dead in sin: let me rather speak to you that hear
me: Son of man, see thou these abominations? then learn to say with me, O
the patience, and long sufferance, and gentleness of our God, toward vile
sinners!

I am come you see to the highest step: I have now finished my narration or
general explication of Popish Idolatry, and I stand (as it were) upon the
highest pinnacle of the Tower of Babel: I should begin to pull down: but the
time will not suffer.

1 Corinthians. 2. 2. For I determined to know nothing among you, but Christ Jesus,
and him Crucified.
BEfore I proceed any further, I must beseech you all to hear with wisdom and
love. Let no man think these foul Idolatries either less abominable, because
they are so ridiculous; or more ^amiable, because the phrase of my speech has
seemed hitherto to smile upon them. I thought I must confess the Nature of
this exercise, especially in a controversy, admitted of some liberty, and I
wish I have not taken too much, and beseech you so to interpret me.

But as the picture of a Goddess in a certain Temple was so contrived, that
she fround on men as they went in, and smiled as they came out, as though they
had wonn her good will with gifts and offerings: the Priests they did indeed,
whose devise it was: and therefore I think the men, clean contrary to their
Goddess, smiled when they came in, as knowing nothing; but fround, when they
went out so cheated: so, though yet my entrance has seemed to smile, yet I
mean to learn to frown, before I go out of this Temple of Idols: I mean to
whip out these cheaters, though I came in like a Lamb (as they say of Months)
I will endeavor to go out like a Lion: I mean to walk with a fiery tongue
among this stubble: and if this fat superstition begin as Agag did, to walk
delicately, and say with her self, surely the bitterness of death is past:
let her know, I owe a sacrifice to the God of Israel, and that must and shall
be paid with her blood, gratior nullus liquor tinxisset aras, as he said.

Now I proceed: I had brought you to the gates of this Babel: we must cast a
mount against, and plant our battery: I will tell you before hand, what you
shall see afterward, that when you see it, you may observe all things more
exactly.

1. You shall see the Army: then,

2. The success.

The Army shall be distinguished into Captain and Soldiers.

The Captain shall be the Word of God, even God the Word, Ios. 5. 15.
who is the Captain of the Lords Hosts, (so styled in Joshua) and the Lord of
Hosts: whose name is written in his thigh, Revel. 19. The King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. The Soldiers shall be valiant reasons that have sworn fealty
to him, and put their neck under his yoke, that will fight manfully under his
banner. The Success I need not tell you, you know already by the Army: yet I
will tell you, that you may know the better.

1. Victory: Not a blow shall be given, not a stroke struck, but the Priests
shall march before the Ark of God round about the City: they shall blow their
Trumpets, at the command of their great Commander, at whose shrill voice the
tender women shall tear their hair, and howl, as you have heard paltrie curs
when a bell rings: fear shall come upon the inhabitants of the land: their
hearts within them shall melt like water, and their feeble knees shall knock
together, the foundations of the City shall shake, and the whole frame tremble:
yea, their mighty champions shall fall low, and like the dust that is under
his feet: their paper walls and painted castles shall fall low, and kiss the
ground on which he treads.

2. We will erect a stately Trophee for a monument, wherein shall be engraven
in indeleble Characters for all eternity, the true story of their pride, the
just cause of their fall, the true story of their sin, the just cause of their
shame.

3. We will sack the houses, and ransack the storehouses, and see what
treasures we may carry away for our own use, to enrich our selves withal.
Briefly and plainly I will,

1. Confute this their opinion by Scripture, and reason out of Scripture.

2. Refute their weak arguments.

3. Observe the causes of this gross superstition.

4. Collect some uses: This is the sum of all that follows.

The first place of Scripture shall be against the mediation and invocation of
Saints, John 2. 4. Jesus said unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee?
etc. You may read the Story at large, I will run over my meditations. Observe
with me.

1. Out of the Story, Mary was not sent here to Christ by any, to mediate for
them; but she went of her own accord.

2. Out of the words.

1. Severally, Woman, not Queen of Heaven, not Mother of Grace, nor Mother by
nature, (though that were by grace too, for the Angel styles her (...).
as one that had received grace) not so much as Mother, but plain Woman: What
have I to do with thee? or what have thou to do with me? according to the
sense: as if he should have said, as he did, (...).
This my command from me receive,
Thine own work do, thine own web weave.
Meddle with that you have to do, you have nothing to do with me.

2. Jointly out of the connection, Woman, what have I? etc. as if he had said,
Thou art a woman, therefore thou have nothing to do with me: thou have nothing
to do with me, because thou art a woman: or, thou have nothing to do with me,
why? because thou art a woman. Thou art a woman, what then? Thou have nothing
to do with me.

But imagine a Jesuit had stood behind her when she heard this: no doubt but
he would have prompted her thus: What be thus taken up? Woman: it might have
been Mother: What have I to do with thee? then tell him, thou have something
to do with him: uncover thy breasts, Mary, (they be their phrases) and conjure
him, by the Roses of thy cheeks, and the Lilies of thy hands, by the womb
that bare him, and the paps that gave him suck, by the sacred name of a mother,
to give thee better respect: nay, (they be their own words) Imper a
redemptori, jure matris impera: thus the Jesuit would have tutored her.

But you must know, she had a better master, even the Spirit of God within her,
that taught her a better lesson: and therefore she stands not to contend or
contest with him; she makes no replys; she knows what the Psalmist said, Psa.
45 11
He is thy Lord, and thou must worship him: and she thinks with her self, I
was rightly called woman, for I have spoken once like a foolish woman, but I
will make a covenant with my lips, that I offend no more with my tongue: and
then as though she did remember her self, that she had forgotten her self,
when she attempted to prescribe to him that is above prescription, she turns
to the servants, and commands them to do whatsoever he should command them.

But O Blessed Savior, suffer the son of thine handmaid to speak a word
unto my Lord, in the behalf of thine handmaid: Thou bidst us Learn of me,
that I am humble and meek, and why art thou so cruel to thy Mother? thou wast
as a sheep that is dumb and opens not his mouth before the shearer* and why
art thou so harsh to her that bare thee? How many, Lord, how many meaner suitors
have requested greater matters at thy hand and obtained, and why must a Mother
only go away with a denial? or if she must needs have a denial, why was not
the bitterness of the thing, sugared with the sweetness of words, or why must
that denial be embittered with a check? but suppose her rashness deserved,
might not her relation deserve a mitigation? why then was that check whetted
and sharpened with a question the servant of war and wrath? Thy words, o thou
fairest among the children of men, thy words were wont to distill like the
honey, and thy lips to drop like the honey comb, and yet thou had not tasted
that potion of gall and vinegar, and whence then is this tang of tartness?

But vain man that I am? (...), why do I disease my master? why do I say, who
shall ascend into heaven to bring a resolution of this difficulty from him?
behold the meaning is near, and the word is in thy mouth, and if you will give
me leave, I will tell you. She presumed because she was his mother, and
therefore he thinks it fittest not to call her mother: she knew too well he
was her son, but she did not think that he was the son of God, and
therefore he thinks it fittest to call her Woman.

O the sweetness of the wisdom and providence of our Lord: he gives a
preservative long before hand, against that poison which he foresaw the Italian
Devil would temper long after, to the perdition of many poor Christian
souls, if it should not have been prevented with a preservative: He calls her
but woman, that was his Mother; that we might not call her Goddess, that was
but a woman: he vilifies her, that we might not deisie her: he tells her that
she had nothing to do with him, that we might have nothing to do with her:
And as Paul writes, Be angry and sin not: so he who was the pattern of
meekness was angry, that we who are the Emblem of weakness might not sin:
he was angry and denied her petition, that we might not sin and dote on her
intercession: he denied her to her rebuke, that we might not dote on her to
his dishonor: he rebuked her sharply in a question, that he might teach us
sweetly that it was out of question, that she can have no stroke, no hand, not
so much as a little finger in the divine work of mediation.

To wind up all that has been spunne out of this Context of Scripture. Mary's
access to Christ, was such, and such was her success with Ghrist, that if I
would go to her, I think she dare not go to him: or if she would go to him,
I know I dare not go to her, except I longd to speed as she did.

This is the first testimony which I trusse up thus: Mary is a woman, and
therefore she has nothing to do with Christ: she has nothing to do with
Christ, therefore we have nothing to do with her, therefore she is no Savior,
therefore no Saints are Saviors, therefore no Saints are to be invocated as
Saviors.

The second place shall be 1 Epistle of John 2. 2. If any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins: here you see, that the beloved Disciple tells us,
that Christ is the only Advocate: that lay in the bosom of Christ, tell us,
that Christ who came out of the bosom of the Father, is our only Advocate, not
Saints, nor Angels: for here be many things to enable Christ for that office,
that disable all Saints.

1. The secret opposition of Client and Patron, of sinner and righteous, if
that any sin, we have an Advocate, Jesus Christ the righteous.

2. The sweet agreement of the Patron and Judge, the Father and the Son, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus.

3. The necessary condition of him that must be an Advocate, intimated in the
conjunction of these words, with those that follow, we have an Advocate,
Christ, who is the propitiation for our sins: As if all were said thus: We
are all sinners, for he had said before, that he that says he has no sin,
is a liar, and the truth of God is not in him: and therefore we stand in need
of an Advocate: and that Advocate must needs be righteous, if he would do any
good for sinners: and we have sinned against the Father, therefore our Advocate
must be one that is near the Father: and because our sins cry loud for
vengeance, he must satisfy for our sins, that will be heard for mercy: there
is no mediation for sinners, but by him who is the propitiation for sins:
none can plead for us, but he that bled for us. All these lead us by the hand
to Christ: He is the righteous, the Lamb, the true Israelite without guile, the
Sun of righteousness, he is near the Father, he sits at the right hand of
God, he is the only begotten and beloved son of the Father, in whom he is
well pleased: he made satisfaction for us, and therefore he knows best how to
make intercession for us: therefore he is our only Advocate. Not Saints,

1. They are not the righteous, not (...) but (...).
righteous, but made righteous, or if righteous, not the righteous.

2. They are not the only sons of God, not (...) but (...).
sons, but made sons, or if sons, as they are sons indeed, yet not by
(...) but (...).
nature, but by adoption: by adoption, therefore by (...)
making of sons, not by nature; by Regeneration, not by Generation.

3. They are not our propitiation: they did not undergo the wrath of God, for
our sins: therefore they cannot undertake to procure the favor of God to our
prayers: in a word, Saints are not Advocates, they are not Mediators, and
therefore not to be invocated as Mediators.

The third place shall be Revelation 19. 10. And I fell down at his feet to
worship him, but the Angel said, take heed thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servants, and worship God: I bring this place, because as you know, the
invocation of Angels is a part of this controversy.

1. You have in this verse, the error of John: and I fell down, etc. out of
which I observe, as Solomon writ his Ecclesiastes after his Vanities, to
testify his reconciliation to the Church: so John reports his error to show
that he did repent of it. Again, as Thomas doubted of the resurrection, that
we might be assured, as Divines observe: so John was suffered to fall, that we
might be admonished to stand.

2. You have the correction of the Angel, which consists,

1. In a Prohibition.

2. In a Reason.

The Prohibition is, See thou do it not: which is much more emphaticall in the
Original, (...).
see not, there is an Ellipsis of the word (...).
do, or some such like: out of which observe,

1. The zeal of the Angel: for that word that is wanting may say as Christ
did, the zeal of thine house has eaten me up: zeal makes haste, it stands
not upon complement of words: it has no spare time to spend so idly: and
therefore the Angel says abruptly (...): as if he should say, I cannot speak
till you stand up.

2. The detestation of the fact: for you must imagine that what was defective
in speech, was supplied by action: and therefore think you see the Angel
either turning away from John, as offended; or raising up with his hand: he
thought it not enough to express his dislike in words, but he speaks more
effectual with his hands, and he will have him read his dislike in his
countenance. This I observe out of the passionate prohibition, (...).

2. Now when he has raised, he vouchsafes to confer with him, and gives him
a double reason of his refusal.

1. I am thy fellow servant, therefore worship not me: Where by the way note
the vanity of the Popish distinction between (...)
civil and religious, the glorious triumphant Angels are (...)
fellow servants to the Militant Saints, therefore they cannot challenge so
much as (...).
civill-worship from them.

2. God is only to be worshipped, as it is written in the Law of Moses, and
therefore the Angel says, worship God: and so you have this Law of Moses in
deed and literally (...)
given by an Angel, as Paul speaks to the Galatians.

And we may well say, this is a blessed Angel, he speaks the word of God in
truth, without respect of persons; as they said of Christ: yea, without respect
of his own person. And as David said of Ahimaaz, he is a worthy man, and
brings good tidings: so this is a worthy Angel, and let us believe him, and if
any man or Angel from God, teach any other Doctrine, let him be accursed: and
though he refuse his worship, yet he is no looser by the bargain: For as it
was said of Caesar, that while he restored the statutes of Pompey, he
established his own: so while he reserves to God the propriety of his honor,
he preserves to himself the perpetuity of his own: for the Lord will honor
them, that honor him. To point this Argument: Angels are not to be adored:
therefore much less invocated: Angels are not to be adored, therefore much
less Saints: to make a compound of the double Emphasis: Angels are not to be
adored, therefore much more Saints are not to be invocated.

The fourth place is, 1 Timoth. 2. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator
between God and Men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for
all. We have three things in this Text worth observation, for the truth in hand.

1. The knitting together of those words, one God, one Mediator; that is, as
there is but one God, so there is but one Mediator: and therefore it were
Atheism to set up more then one Mediator, as it is to set up more then one God.

2. The secret description of a Mediator, he must be one between God and Man,
that is, both God and Man: he must participate of both natures, that must
reconcile both natures, which agrees to Christ only, who is (...).
God-man, Immanuel, and therefore the true (...).
Mediator, the true Jesus, that can save his people from all their sins: and
though he be called Man-Christ, yet it is the Man that was the son of God,
as well as the son of Man.

3. It follows, who gave himself a ransom for all, which is like that which
I noted before in John.

I might add a fourth out of the Context: that Paul speaks of a Mediator of
intercession only, for he had before recited, that prayers should be made for
all men, and now he directs to the Mediator, in whose name these prayers must
be offered, that they may be acceptable to God, and says plainly, there is but
one Mediator, and that one is Christ.

Which may serve to stop the mouth of Papists, which think to elude all with a
distinction of Mediators of Redemption and Intercession, and say, that Christ
is the Mediator of Redemption, Saints may be of intercession: if these men did
speak so warily as they might, and think so truly as they ought, yet we might
say to them, as the Artificer did, that wrought finely, but spoke meanly, when
he contended with another, that spoke finely, and wrought meanly, (...).
as he spoke, I will do: we might say of them, they speak well with their
tongue, but they make a noise with their feet that drownes the good words:
(...).
their deeds speak more then their words: their pronunciation is good, but
their action is naught: Soloecismum manu faciunt, as he said.

But they do not speak well, and yet they mean worse: therefore I will
endeavor to answer them.

1. Populus non distinguit, is an Axiom in Politics: the peoples gowtie
fingers, cannot handle the slender threads of these dainty distinctions,
(which these subtle spinners make) so tenderly, but they will be in great
danger of breaking: and so while these supplanting Jesuits are counterfeiting
Jacobs smooth voice (that I may alter the story a little) the poor peoples
hands are rough and horrid with superstition, as Esaus were: and it were hard
to say which are in the better case: The people draw in iniquity with
cart-ropes of vanity, (as the foolish Trojans did the fatal Horse into their
City) and so go down to the pit directly: The Jesuits spin a fine thread out
of their brain (as the Spiders do, out of their belly) and upon that they
think to climb to Heaven as wisely: Or like two Buckets at a Well, the people
are like to that which goes down in a rope directly; the Jesuit as the other,
seems to be coming up (not upon that thick rope, for he sees the other go down
in it) but he thinks to winch himself up upon a silly thread.

I think the people in the better case, for though they go down in the rope,
yet they go empty, and the rope (as it were) moderates the violence of the
fall, so that they are not like to sinck so deep: but the Jesuit coming up
full upon his slender thread (suppose he should wind himself a little way, by
his Mathematical Magicks) the thread cannot choose but break, and then he
cannot choose but fall into the bottom of hell: and good reason, as he has
better known (...).
the depths of Satan, so he should better feel (...).
the depths of hell: as he has made the depths of Satan, so he should measure
the depths of hell: The Sum of this answer is, the thread of this distinction
is too slight to bear such a weight: and beside, Populus non distinguit, while
they distinguish, the people perish.

2. Principes non distinguunt, is true in Politics, though it be no Axiom. It
is but an hard bargain for a King to exchang a Crown for a crafty distinction
The poor King of the Indians, when he heard that the Pope had given away his
Kingdom to the King of Spain, asked what the Pope was, that gave away that
which was none of his own: but let him claim the right of dispossessing
Princes, when he pleases, and disposing Scepters, where he pleases: let him
publish his pictures and represent Turks Turbants, and Imperial and royal
Crowns with Dukes Coronets hanging down like labels from his lofty Miter, as
he has done: let him pronounce them Maniches, holding two Principia, that
hold any power equal to his Soveraigntie: let him enjoy all, perhaps at his
donation, who said of Kingdoms, all these are mine, which I will give thee, if
thou will fall down and worship: though it be much, yet let him take all,
because he is the Vicar of Christ: now me thinks he has so large a parish, and
so rich tithes, he might at least have remembered that he was but Christ's Vicar:
why then does he wound the honor of Christ, and (as it were) cleave his Sacred
in twain, and think to bring this (...); and think to heal it with these
figg-leaves? why does he rend the seameles coat of Christ, and then make up
the matter with a sleevelesse distinction of Intercession and Redemption?

The Whore of Rome has learned of that Harlot that was judged before Solomon,
to say Dividatur; but Christ will not part with his honor so: he likes no such
halving: he will have all or none: Divide and Regna, is a Machiavilian rule,
and true: give the Saints half, and (it is no great difference) let them take
all as well. The sum of this answer is: When they rob Christ of his honor,
he cannot take such a distinction for satisfaction; Principes non distinguunt.

3. Scriptura non distinguit. This proud distinction stands strouting, like the
Angel in the Revelation, with one foot upon the Land, and the other upon the
Sea: so this has one part that has ground in Scripture, namely, that Christ
alone is the Mediator of Redemption; but the other part, that Saints may be
Mediators of Intercession, floates upon their restless brain, as it were upon
the Sea: so that if it have any weight in it, it must needs sink with his own
weight. Again, the Scripture tells us, that the Saints have long white robes:
but these robes are given them, they are entire the gift of Christ: the wool is
Christ's, who is the Lamb slain before the beginning of the world: the dye is
Christ's, they are washed white in the blood of the Lamb: the work is Christ's,
as they showed the garments that Lydia wrought with her own hands, so these
are wrought with Christ's own hands: and they are sent to us, as David sent his
servants to Hanun, Ambassadors of peace and comfort: and therefore it is
barbarous and brutish inhumanitie, to cut these coats of Christ short, where
with our nakedness is covered: and it is divellish impiety, to take that
which remains and make broad Phylacteries, and large fringes with it for the
Saints, and so to make proud Pharisees, which were indeed penitent Publicans.
Briefly, the Scripture joins both together, Redemption and Intercession, to
make Christ a perfect Savior: Scriptura a non distinguit: and therefore what
God has joined together, let no man separate.

4. Pontificii non distinguunt: Bellarmine himself that objects this riven
shield of this distinction, as a sufficient bulwark for defense of this
impiety, rejects it elsewhere: not because he had forgotten what he wrote
here, but because he remembered what he thought here: and therefore in his book
De Indulgentiis, he casts off this mask of modesty, and puts on (as he speaks)
(...).
a viz or of impudency: or rather, (...).
with a bare head, as the Greeks speak, without all circumstances: or rather
more, for he does (...).
steel his forehead against blushing, and says plainly, that Saints are
Mediators of Redemption also; which overthrowes that forged distinction:
Pontificii non distinguunt: and now you see no more Mystery, but Blasphemy
written in the whores forehead: so that there needs no other Confutation but to
have read it.

I have been large in this, because it is the only starting hole they have:
and therefore I will name but one place more, and that briefly.

The fifth. Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom we have access and boldness, with confidence
by the faith in him: in him, that is, in Christ: we have access, that is, to
the Father: I will observe but two words here more specially: 1. Access in
Greek (...): (so that according to our translation, we have not so much as any
access to God the Father, but by Christ, who is the way and the door: I think
the word may be rendered Presentation, I am sure, the thing is said elsewhere,
and is true: Heaven is a royal Benefice, there is none that has the right of
presentation, but the Kings son. I think we may find an Emblem of it at
home: the Saints are indeed Citizens of the new Jerusalem, free Denisons of
Heaven, suppose them of the Parliament, yet they are but of the lower house,
they are Priests, but not High Priests; they have no access into this Sanctum
Sanctorum: they are incorporated into the most renowned Universitie, the
Celestial Syon, which I may well call the mountain of vision, as the lower
was called the valley of vision: for there they see no more by faith, but by
vision, as the School speaks: In the mount will the Lord be seen, as Abraham
said: nay, suppose them of the house too, it is but of the non Regent house,
Christ alone is the only King, the only Regent: he that has not h's Scio, he
that is not presented by him to his Father, shall never be admitted to any
degree in the University of glory.

The second word that I observe is (...) or (...) for there are two for
failing: suppose there be access, yet without Christ there is no boldness, no
confidence: if our heart like a wise Mercha^t would send a ship of prayer to
the coast of Heaven that should return richly laden, with the treasures of
that good land, it must first command the gracious dew to distill abundantly
from the windows of the eyes, for this ship must swim thorough a Sea of salt
tears: and then to omit all other tackling, it must provide a Card and a
Compass which must agree with the points, with the will of Heaven, and the
Needle of it must be touched with the Loadestone: and if it be touched with
the true Loadestone, it will have a fit of shaking, a palsy of fear, it will
turn and turn, and tremble and tremble, till it come to Christ; who will
rebuke the Fever, and heal the Palsy: and then it will stand still, and stand
with confidence: for Christ is a Magneticall rock whose attractive grace it is
that drives it thither: and the house of faith is builded upon that rock: let
the rain fall, and the Winds rise, and the Sea rage, it stands unmovable,
like to Mount Sion that cannot be removed: and why, because it is builded on a
Rock.

The Papists then that go without this faith in Christ, may come with a
shivering of fear, but they cannot come with boldness: or, that we may be
liberal to them, they may come with impudence, but they cannot come with
boldness: for in Christ we have access with boldness, faith the Apostle.

And thus far have I exercised my self in the Scripture: if any say, I might
have made choice of more and more pregnant places. I answer: that I think
these pregnant enough, and I know this truth impregnable, and therefore I need
not be very scrupulous.

You have heard how the Papists dishonor Christ crucified, by the honor that
they give to Saints canonized: the Saints that have gone before us, are indeed
a cloud of glorious witnesses, as the Apostle speaks to the Hebrews,
wherewith we, who are the sons of promise, are encompassed in our journey:
but they coming after them, have made them a cloud of gross idolatry,
wherewith Christ, who is the Sun of Righteousness, is eclipsed in his glory:
You have heard in particular how they commit folly with the Virgin Mary.

I touched that point but sparingly: but if a man would take the pains to
turn over their stinking Rosaries, but half so much as they do their beads in
a day, he should soon perceive that the name of Christ is out of fashion, out
of date, and the name of the Virgin in the freshest honor: the withered
laurels of Christ are feign to veil the bonnet, and give place to the
flourishing, prime, and green garlands of the Virgin, as Lucullus did once to
Pompeyes.

And if there be any that make show to kiss the Son, as the Psalmist speaks,
it is to be feared, that it is not because they are afraid least he, but least
she be angry: or, according to our common speech, Many kiss the child for the
mothers sake: they kiss the child, but their mouth waters at the mothers lips:
they make much of the child, and dandle it in their arms, but it is but to
insinuate themselves into the sweet embraces of the mother.

And yet these filthy monsters, of lust (for they are no better than monsters,
bewitched out of the shape of men by the powerful charms of the Romish Circe,
and her golden cup of fornication) these filthy monsters do so please
themselves in their filthiness, that, as S. Peter speaks, they speak evil of
us, as of those that do evil, and think it strange that we do not run with
them into the same excess of riot. Like some fond and amarous bridegroom
newly wedded, that dotes, may chance, upon an homely spouse, and wonders that
all his neighbors do not meet him with their mouths full of wonder and
gratulation: that they do not worship her whom he adores: because, forsooth,
she is written for a Saint in the Calender of his heart, he thinks she should
be received for a Queen in the Charter of their Parish: because she is the
idol of his fancy, he thinks she should be the Goddess of their faith: he is
so well acquainted with the zeal of his own private devotion, that he cannot
but admire what cold blast of stupid ignorance or envy (for he has not the
power to think it any other) has so frozen and congealed their dull spirits,
that his Sun does not melt them into his mold, that they will not be reduced to
his temperature.

But the truth is, as I said before, we give more unto the Virgin, that they
do: they would have her worshipful, we would have her honorable: an easy
Herald would decide the controversy, which were the better title: and an easy
Divine, which were the Antidicomarianitae, they or we: but it is a fit of
frenzy, not of love, that transporteth them: the untamed horses of distempered
passion, as Plato calls them, have so hurried and whirled about the crazie
chariot of their reason, that they have frighted them out of their little wits,
and set the wheels of judgment (upon which they should have run steadily)
quite beside the socket.

And therefore we have taken such a course with them, as, you know, 1. We have
called upon them by a general discourse, as faithful friends, to reclaim them
from this folly. 2. We have set the Scripture, as a grave over-seer, to frown
upon them, and chide them into their wits again: this has done little good
yet; and therefore we must now try the last remedy: if they will not learn of
the word at Jerusalem, we must send them to school to Bethlehem, (a place
appointed for men in their case) and there set Reason, like a severe master, to
disple them every day, and whip their wandering wits from place to place, (as
they do vagabonds) till they return to the place from whence they came, and
regaine the seat of their Nativity, together with the Scepter of their Regencie.

FINIS.

