A COPY OF A LETTER LATELY SENT BY a Gentleman, student in the laws of the
Realm, to a friend of his concerning. D. Story.

ACcording to your request, you shall hereby understand what you may truly say
and auowe upon such questions as it scemeth you have hard, of the late
execution of.D. Story, who suffered at Tiburne the first of June last.

It is notorious how evil and vnloyally he behaved him self here in England
before he departed the Realm, and how earnest a persecutor afterward he was
of all the good subjects of England, having cause to be in the low
countries, both before the arrest made of late by the Duke of Alua, as sense
that time a multitude of honest merchants know it, both English and others,
and a great number have felt it by imprisonment procured by him, and by seasyng
and confiscatyng of their goods, so as there is no doubt to be made, but that
he was to his power as earnest an enemy to the state of England his natural
country, and the Queens Majesty's good subjects, as any man borne in this
Realm could be. Nevertheless, because at the place of his execution before
his death, he used long and many speeches to move some of simple understanding,
or that did not know his rancor and malice against the Queens Majesty, and
the state of this Realm, and for that it was not then convenient, nor at least
could be imagined aforehande that he would have used such speeches at that
time, and so he was suffered to speak altogether without contradiction, whereby
the truth percase may be made to you obscure, you shall understand of what
detestable crimes he was gyltie, and therewith should have been particulerly
charged at the time of his arraignement in the Kings Benche, but that he
craftyly and traytorously, knowing by his examination wherewith he was to be
charged, and how much he him self had confessed in the Tower: and being
written in certain leaves of paper had subscribed with his own hand writing,
refused to have any trial made thereof, alleging that he ought not to
answer, nor would answer, because he was subject to the King of Spain, and
not subject to the Queens Majesty and the crown of England: and so although
he was charitably, earnestly, and reasonably required at his arraignment to
answer to the matters wherewith he was charged by indictment, as a borne
subject of this Realm, yet he would not, but traytorouslye refused to answer
thereto, in such sort, as if he had been indyted of felony, as he was of high
treason, he should for his not answeryng have suffered the pain of pressyng to
death, which manner of judgment is not used in cases of treason by the laws of
the Realm, but was adjudged gyltie of the treasons contained in the
indictment, as of necessity and justice he ought to be, for other judgment
could not be given: and so by justice of law he was judged to the death which
he suffered. But for that it may serve to the satisfaction of all men, to
consider how far he was gyltie of the treasons contained in his indytement,
hereafter follows a true, just, and plain report of the matters, both whereof
he was accused and examined, and which also he did confess in the Tower.

He was to be charged that he did traytorously conspire against the Queens
Majesty, with one Prestall an English man, who was a fugityue, and principal
deuisor of the first Treason intended by the young Pooles. xi. years past, and
thereof was indicted and outlawed: and afterward of late time he practiced an
other great treason with certain persons, whereof one disclosed the same to the
Duke of Norfolk, who also very duetifullye revealed the same to the Queens
Majesty, whereupon the said Prestal being sought for to be apprehended,
fled into Scotiande, where also he joined him self with the English
rebels, and there attempted sundry treasons against her Majesty, and from
thence he fled into Flaunders. With this manner of Traitor had this. D. Story
a continual intelligence to further his treasons, insomuche as he said, not
long before he came into England, to one that for duties sake disclosed it,
and is ready to prove it, that Prestall should or it were long, be the leader
of.xl. thousand men into England, against that woman which took upon her to
be Queen, and ^ the same Story, I would to God she were in the bottom of the
sea, with other vile and reproachful words not meet to be reported. With
which traytorous speeches he should have been charged, if he would have abydden
trial according to the laws of the Realm.

The said Story said also in the presence of two persons of English birth,
who were ready to have charged him therewith, if he would have stand to
trial, that he had written letters to Bruxels, that if the matters contained
therein should be revealed where he should be charged therewith, he should
be hanged, drawn, and quartered. And immediately after this speech he went to
Bruxels with Prestall, where he and Prestall were rewarded with money: and
there Prestall declared to certain persons, ready also to have auowed the same,
that he had opened his whole purposes to.D. Story, whereto.D. Story was sworn
to keep the same secret. But of the things intended by Prestal and Story at
that time, neither of them would be then known, but yet Prestall affirmed
that he had an art to poison any body a far of, being not present with them,
and that none could do it but he. And to show some taste of their mischiefs,
a gentleman belongyng to Courteuile, a secretary to the Duke of Alua, told an
English man, redye also to auowe the same, that. D. Story and Prestall were
about such matters, and such vile treason, as the said party said that no
man could devise worse, and that.D. Story was such a wicked man as could not
be found the like, and that he thought verily they were about murdring of some
great persons in England.

The said Story also received certain letters from Prestall out of Scotland,
being written in Scottyshe, which are also to be seen, and might have been
showed at the arraignement, if he would have been tried: Which letters Story
translated into latin, and carried the same to Bruxels, by which it was
required that means should be made to the Duke of Alua, to send into Scotland
certain Horsemen, and a number of dagges, to make an entry and invasion into
England with the Scotts, and by the same letter Prestall wrote, that the
thing which he told D. Story in secret would cost a thousand marks, and
that if the Regent and the foolyshe boy the young King were dispatched and
dead, the Scottyshe Queen were a marriage for the best man living. Al which
words are contained in the letter translated by. D. Story.

The said Story being at Bruxels, and receauyng a letter from elde Norton, a
very old Rebel, being arrived at Antwerpe, did solicit certain of the
counsel about the Duke, for money for the relief of the same Norton and his
company, and wrote to him to comfort him by express words, that where he and
his company were before but worshipful, now they were an honorable state, and
had won double honor and perpetual fame for their late enterprise in
England, and that he would come shortly to give them their welcome to
Antwerpe, and immediatlye he procured that one. D. Saunders, with certain
English fugityues harbored in Louain, went to Antwerpe to the Rebels, and
there Saunders made to them a solemn long oration in praise of their acts.

Story also declared in Antwerpe in presence of such as should have auowed it
at his arraignement if he would have denied it, that the Rebellion should be
renewed in England, and that at the same instant also Irelande should rebel,
whereof he said he was well assured by advertisement from an Iryshe bishop
that had escaped out of the Tower of London, and that at the same instant also
the Scotts should with an aid out of France invade England, and set up the
Scottyshe Queen.

The said Story also used commonly this manner of prayer after his meats,
whereof there are diverse persons ready to witness the same that have heard him,
and lastly even in the Roy wherein he was before he came last into England, in
the presence of diverse persons, that if the Queens Majesty, whom he would
never term but by the name of dame Elzabeth that took upon her to be
Queen, would not speedylye turn to Queen Mary's religion, he prayed that
she might be overcome with sword and fire, and all that would take her part.

And though he might have been charged with sundry other traytorous and heinous
conspiracies in the low countries, and with aydyng of the Rebels there,
whereof out of the said low countries advertisement was given by sundry of
good credit: yet of set purpose no more is above recited, but such things
only as wherewith he should have been charged openly by witnesses at his
arraignement, who if he would have denied the same, should have auowed the
whole to his face, and in the hearing of the Jury that should have tried him.
And how many of the things before recited are to be judged true and probable,
it is to see by these things following, which are word by word extracted out
of his own confessions, subscribed with his own hand, and uttered upon
interrogatories, without any manner of torture, or offer of torture, although at
the place of execution he used speech to the contrary very untruly, as the
worshipful persons that examined him can well testify, which were,

Sir Thomas Wroth knight, Master Wilbraham then Recorder of London, and
Master Peter Osborne the Tresorers remembrancer in the Exchequer, and so can
also the Lieuetenaunt of the Tower, as touching any torture.

Extracted out of. D. Stories confessions.
ix. December. 1570.
John Story the day and year above written being examined, says that John
Prestall did write a letter to the said John Story, of three sides of a sheet
of paper as he remembers, and directed to the said Story: which letter was
enclosed in a letter written to one Hamelton a Scot that lay at Bruxels, for
him to peruse and seal the same, and then to deliver it to the said Story. And
the same letter the said Hamelton read, and sealed it up, and told this
examinat the effect thereof, and he bad him open it, and read it, and so the
said Hamelton did, until he came to a word, Boy or child, meaning the King
of Scotts to be made away as the said Story took it.

xii. December. 1570.
Item, he says that Hamelton told him that Prestall had written, that the
matter which Prestall had told Story and the said Hamelton that an English
man now in Irelande could do, would not be done without a great sum of
money, which matter was to make the King of Scotts away: for Prestall had
told this examinat and Hamelton, that the Scotts would hardlye be reduced to
obedience as long as the Queen of Scotts was without an husband, and no man
of estimation would have her so long as the Boy lived, and if he were dead, he
hoped the Emperors brother would have her, and wyshed he might be an
entreater in that matter. And further Prestall said, that the said man now in
Irelande had told the Pooles and him the very month, the day, and hour, that
the Queen of England should be in hazard of her life, and that the same
English man could dispatch the King of Scotts for money: And being asked what
the same English man's name was, Story says of troth he knows not, but has
forgotten it, yet Prestal told it him: but whither he is in Irelande, or of
what estate, degree, or condition he is of, he knows not. And further that
Prestall told him he could do much with that English man in Irelande,
wherein this examinat discouraged him. And the said Story says he thinks of
his conscience that Prestall would do all the harm that he could to this
Realm of England.

And further says, that Prestall told him he would take any thing in hand to
invade England, so he might have good assistance, and not be used as an
vnderlyng. But Prestall never told him by what device England should be
invaded.

And more he says, that Ienny and Markenfelde has made suite to Courteuile
and to Northcarne, as Northcarnes secretary told him, for the relief of the
Nortons and Neuyls: and after this Courteuile called this examinat, wyllyng him
to bid Markenfeld to come to him that day at two of the clock, and then this
examinat prayed that if he should come about the money for the relief of the
Nortons, and others, that then one Parkar might be paid for their charges, and
so it might be delivered to Parkar.

He says he wrote a letter to the elder Norton from Bruxels, and showed the
said elder Norton, that he would be glad to do for him even the best that lay
in the said Stories power to do, and that he would rather stay his own
suites to the Duke, then not to do the best he could for him, and this was all
the effect of his letter to the said eldest Norton: but afterward he called
to remembrance he wrote unto him, that he was glad that he and his company were
so well come into the catholyke Realm, and safely arrived there. He says he
does not remember that he wrote to the said Nortons and the rest, that where
they were before but worshipful, they were now worthy double honor: but he
says it may be he did write so, because he thought so: and thynkes he did
write unto them that he would come shortly to Antwerpe, and give them their
welcome, because he meant so to do.

After Markenfelde and Ienny came over, and one Leedes with him, and first they
came to Parkers house, where the said Ienny declared openly at the boorde, in
the presence of this examinat and others, the order of the said late Rebellion.

And hereupon this examinat made report to Northcarnes secretary, that the
said Ienny was a friend to the Catholykes and the Earls, and is a very trusty
friend, and has ventured his life for the Catholykes. But afterward this
examinat perceauyng the contrary of Ienny by a Scotte, he gave Northcarnes
secretary warnyng to take heed of Ienny.

Shortly after this, the said Story came to Antwerpe to Parkars house, where
syttyng at dynner, the said elder Norton and some other of his company came in
from the Church, and one said, this is Norton, and thereupon this examinat
rose and gave him place, and bad him welcome: and so the elder Norton sat
down in the said Stories place.

After old Norton shyfted his lodging, and this examinat, with one Shawe
Nortons son in law, went to the said old Nortons lodging to dinner, and
there dined with him, and that day all their talk was of the suspicion that
Norton had of Iennys first coming to the Rebels in England from the Earl
of Sussex, and so he took him still but a spy, and to cover him self with to
the Duke, with labouryng for them.

He says that he heard by Markenfeldes report, that the said Nortons and
Neuyls and their company, had two hundred crowns given them from the Duke at
their first coming, and should have two hundred crowns more afterward.

More he says, that before the Dukes last coming to Antwerpe, the said Story
and Sir James Shelley being at Louain, were there sent for to come to. D.
Saunders to hear a certain book read, of the reasons that the Bull late sent
over into England should be obeyed as he suspected, and thither the said
Story promised to come: but that after noone he was driven to go to Bruxels,
and so sir James Shelley went thither, and brought word to this examinat being
with one Leedes at dinner, that if he had come, he should have heard goodly
reasons that he would have well lyked, about the book that Saunders had made.

Further the said Story does say, that he was never sworn to King Philip, nor
to the Duke of Alua, nor never by any means was made king Philippes subject
or denizen, or otherwise naturalized to be King Philippes subject, but remaynes
only still a subject to the Queen of England.

Thus subscribed, though he said otherwise at Tyborne. John Story.

xx. December. 1570.
The said John Story this.xx. day of December being examined, says that about
two years sense, he did deal by writing with Courteusle, showing unto him that
the Catholykes in England did daily decay, and the Scismatykes did there
daily increase, and therefore if the King of Spain had any meaning to write to
the Queen of England, or otherwise to help to restore religion in England,
he should do it betyme, or else it would be to late: and either he did write
further, or said by mouth to the said Courteuile, that if the King of Spain
did but come into the low country out of Spain with a number of ships, the
Catholykes of England would think as this examinat thought, that he were come
to restore religion, and would take the King of Spaynes part. And the said
Story confesses that he wrote to Courteuile, that if about the realm of
England there might go a number of ships, as men went about Ierico, then the
Catholykes of England would take courage to prepare entry for them that went
so about with the said ships. To which end of entry, by the King of Spaynes
power into England, the said Story did write to Courteuile many times by his
letters and persuasions therein, hopyng thereby that either the King of Spain
would write to the Queen of England to restore the Catholyke religion, or
else would make some entry into England, and refourme religion, according as he
was bound by his title of Catholyke King, as the said Story thought.

Further the said Story says, that John Prestall at such time as he talked
with Hamelton and this examinat about the death of the King of Scotts as is
aforesaid, when Prestall had told him as aforesaid, that the English man
that fled into Irelande had told the said Prestall, of the time and hour
the Queens Majesty should be in peril of her death as is aforesaid, then
Prestall said, that if the said English man in Irelande might be plied, he
could bring the Queens hyghnes to death in deed, and said he thought surely
he could do it, and then this examinat said that was to be done by Necromancie.

Subscribed John Story.

It is here to be considered also how lykely it is that the things which he
spoke at Tiborne for his purgation were true, when at the same time he would
have had by his earnest speeches then used, all the hearers believe that he used
never any cruelty in Queen Mary's time against any that were then burnt for
religion: but as he said, he did but only chyde them, and that he was no cause
of the death of any, but that the Bishops did procure the sentences of death.
And how untrue this speech of his was in that behalf as to excuse him self,
a number of witnesses living that manifestly saw his extreme cruelties, and
some that felt thereof are very plenteous. And what his heart was toward the
Queens Majesty, may plainly appear by his traytorous words in the
parliament house, where he said, that if his counsel had been followed, the root
should have been stryken down, and not the branches.

And how horrible, traytorous, and monstrous a meaning he had to refuse to
answer at his arraignement, by refusyng his natural allegeaunce to the
Queens Majesty and this crown, from which no law in the world could
separate him, and by auowyng that he was a subject to the King of Spain, it
may appear in that he said at his arraignement for defense of his traytorous
refusal of his obedience: That Kings were chosen at the first by the people
for their necessity, and not the people for their kings: and therefore the
people might leave their kings when they had no more need of them. And so
the conclusion in his opinion served for him that he might refuse his natural
liege lady and Queen. And so consequently by that monstrous reason, all
kings may be deprived of their subjects, or of as many as would enter into
that traytorous and monstrous error, at their pleasure. A thing of it self
worthy of some monstrous death, according to the monstruousnes of the treason.

Otherwise to remember the unworthiness of this. D. for his long lewd life in
all times past, is not convenient, because he is dead, of whom also nothing
should be now in this sort written, but that by his craftye traytorous doings
at his arraignement, and by his untruths uttered at his death, truth it
self should take harm, by mistakyng and misreportyng: and only in favor of
truth have I collected the premises, and for no other purpose, and so I pray
you use it according as you shall think meet. For all those things which are
before recited, are manyfestly to be proved, partly by the very wrytynges
extant, and in no word altered, and the rest by sufficient witnesses, whereof
I have had good regard even for truethes sake, knowing that almyghtie God is
the auenger of all untruth.

4. Iunii. 1571.
God save the Queen.

