CHRISTIAN OBSERVATIONS AND RESOLUTIONS. OR, The daily practice of the renewed
man, turning all occurrents to spiritual uses, and these uses to his union
with GOD.

I. CENTVRIE. With a Resolution for Death, etc.

Newly published by Mr WILLIAM STRVTHER, Preacher of the Gospel at EDINBVRGH.

Ecclesiastes. 2. 14. The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walks
in darkness. EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs of Andro Heart. ANNO DOM. 1628.

TO GOD ALMIGHTY, GRACIOUS, MERCIFVLL, etc.
FATHER, SON AND HOLY GHOST.
His most unworthy Servant thristing his glory in the Salvation of the Saints.
Mr. W. STRVTHER. THESE first fruits of Thine own Grace in me, I offer to
Thee, O Fountain of Grace: Thy thoughts are precious to me, and thy
Meditations sweet. All the desires of mine heart is to Thee, and to bring thy
Saiuctes to thy fellowship, that in that union, they may enjoy Thy self, and
partake true Happiness.

Bless all means used to that good end, that they may prove means of thine
own choice, and work. But above all, shed abroad Thy love in the hearts of
Thy people, then our preaching and writting will be either less needful, or
more fruitful. Thou have won^ to Thy self for ever the heart that is deeply
affected with the sense of Thy love: Thou know that it can no more bide or
rest off Thee, than a stone of it self can hing in the air.

While I think of Thee, my thoughts increase themselves, and while I preasse
to express them, I can not satisfy my self, in that expression. Thou art in
the heart that loves Thee truly, and that heavenly affection overcomes it
twice; once in unspeakable softning sweetness; nixt in an insufficiency to
utter it: But this is some remeede, that it can pour it self immediately
upon Thee: Words and writes come shorter than thoughts, and thoughts shorter
than the affection, the only just and equal expressing of the affection, is
to thrust it self on Thee, and to adhere and inhere in Thee continually. It
suffices me, that Thou know mine heart, and thine own work in it.

Let the Meditations of mine heart and the words of my mouth, be acceptable to
Thee, O GOD, my Strength, and my Redeemer, and direct Thou the works of mine
hands, that all may serve to the magnifying of Thy glorious Grace, and edifying
of thy people.

AMEN.
TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader.
THE present time (Christian Reader) both offers these observations to me,
and throws their publication from me: None walks with opened eyes, but
these and the like shall occur unto him. This time of the Gospel abounds in
the means of saving knowledge, but few partake it: The most part brutishlie
neglect it; other in their search are carried on the by: Seeking, affecting,
and resting on trifling knowledge as on happiness; and many who in some sort
find it out, do separate from it both affection and action, and so prevailing
Athesme, gives thee effront to saving Knowledge and Grace in the Gospel: But
the Sun sends a quickening heat as well as a shining ^ight; and man is borne
with heart and hands, as well as with eyes: The work of light is to discover,
but affection separateth us from the discovered evil, and joins us to the
known Good; and to walk in the direction of that Light, and the discerning of
Affection is to know sauinglie.

It is the best knowledge which is about the best things, and needs least
change at Death. To know GOD and our happiness in Him, has no change at
Death, but in the degree advancing to perfection: As other things, so other
knowledge will then vanish: This is the affectuous and actuous Knowledge
according to godliness, whereunto I labor in the Lord to stir Thee up. That
knowing GOD in Christ, thou may live in Him, and walk in Him: The sense of a
Godhead, is the marrow and kernel of Christianity: Without this all our
knowledge is but a carcass of knowledge, and we our selves the carions of
Christians:

The Lord work these good things in thee, and thee to his Image, to fill Thee
here with Grace, and hereafter with glory. Amen.

Thine in the Lord, Mr. William Struther.

CHRISTIAN OBSERVATIONS AND RESOLVTIONS OR The daily practice of the renewed
man, turning all occurrents to spiritual uses, and all these uses to his union
with GOD.
1. The Christian Furniture.
THREE things are necessar for our Christian walking, the right end, the
straight way; and a good Guide: And all these are to be found in God alone;
his glory is the right end, and the high way to this end, is his Word; and
himself the only Guide; yea, he himself is all these three: He is the
Way, and the Truth, and the Life; for we are led by his Spirit in his will to
himself. His presence in mercy gives us all this furniture, and without it
every man goes astray; some seek the right end, but choose not the straight
way: some find the straight way, but seek not the right end: in place of God
they seek and follow themselves; in all their business, they advance not one
foot from their first and natural condition, but are more drowned in misery,
than at their birth.

The truly godly come to this threefold blessing: The more sincerely they
intend his glory, the more sure are they of his direction and guiding: This is
Abraham's walking before God, and Enochs walking with him, and Paul his walking
in him. The present fruit is answerable to such grounds, a certainty to
obtain such an end, because of the way and Guide, a security in that way, and
a joy in the conscience of rhem all. The conscience of the sincerity of our
intention, of our endeavoring to find and walk in the way is a great degree of
his presence in grace, and a presage of his presence in glory: The Soul that
labors for this sort of walking in this life, shall be with him for ever
after this life.

The most part of men proclaim to the world, that they have never thought
earnestly of this Journey: Their furniture is rather for Hell (if such a
Journey needed furniture) then for Heaven: They take this world for their
home, themselves for their end, their Guide, and Guarde, loosing their hearts
to all ungodliness and unrighteousness: But the godly know they have no
byding city here: therefore, they seek for one to come, and deal with God
for this provision in so dangerous a way. He may be sure of that end, who is
guided and guarded by God in the way to it: He who is now always in God, must
be with God for ever. So he guides his own with his Counsel, and afterward
brings them to his glory.

2. Operations of Gods Spirit are powerful.
THe working of Gods Spirit is neither at our desire, nor our direction: He
blows where he lists, and GODS Kingdom comes not by observation: Our
evil deserving has more power to stay him, than our desires to set him on
work; omissions grieve him greatly, but commission of gross sins grieve
him more, they can procure both the intermission of his work, and a temporal
desertion, though he never depart simply from the Elect. We can not foresee
his coming, but we may feel his working. The work it self tells us that
he is in the work: When he lurketh, what confusions in the mind, and
disorder in the heart? In great business we make but slow speed, all is in a
manner forced, and nothing does promise the desired success.

But when he shows himself, O what a change in the Soul! Illumination is
great in the variety, and the clearness of light, and every power has the
own seal stamping the heart, all goes then so easelie, as the Soul
suffices not to take up particularly his working. In that divine work, it
finds the power of a divine Nature; no creature can either work so mightily
in us, or affect us in that kind or degree. It has more increase of light,
affection, sense, and sweetness in one hour, than in some other months. As
the Soul moves the body, so he moves his gifts and graces in us, which
are as a carcass without him: He is both the worker and teacher of his own
operations; and moves us to make due use of them, his desertions are grievous,
but his felt operations do largely recompense that grief.

It is good both to fear and eschew his desertio^, but when we find it to
comfort our self in the remembrance of his bygone, and assurance of his future
working to our former joys. His work is ever powerful, but not ever se^sible.
We know that the hand of the Horolodge has moved, when it comes to the
hour, but our sight discerns not the moving of it: His work is oft-ten
secret to us, and yet forcible; Thereby our condition is changed to the better,
though we observe not aye the progress of that bettering: When he both
works in us saving Graces and a feeling of his work, so that his work, and
our sense of it do meet together, that is our unspeakable Joy.

3. The fruitful work of our thoughts.
AS our thoughts are called light, so is our account of their work: They are
restless, and we are careless what and how they work* no man can hold them
within: both outward things draw them out, and themselves are given to
wandering, even while we are musing to hold them in order, as water they slide
away: In their going out they carry the soul with them, and at their return,
report some fruit of the matter which they considered. But many do neither
observe their going out, nor their return, they let them out on every thing,
and make use of nothing, and some are worse in a profaine liberty, they send
them out on impious and naughty matters, and take them home fraughted with
pernicious and sinful reports.

God has given us our Soul for a better use, as he has set it in the body
to quicken and move it, so also to keep a fruitful intercourse with outward
things: If it went simply out of the body, death would follow: If it remained
enclosed in it, there could be no intercourse with outward things: God has
appointed a midde way, that the substance of it shall abide in the body, but
it sends out the thoughts as fearchers and intercommers.

Our best in this kind, is to follow Gods appointment, not to let our thoughts
wander rackelessie, but to send them in order, not on every trifle, but on
good things, and at their return, to receive their work in order. A wise
Soul in this Thought-work, is as a Beehyue, all the powers are in labor, a
continual going out, and returning: no power idle, and none return empty,
and all their observations as Honey laid up for use: It gathers and
disgesteth in it self a substance, and mass of purified knowledge, and that
for affection and action, and all of them for the obedience of God and union
with him.

Fixed ends make an well ordered and fruitful course: It is good to intend
the good of our callings, and then to set our Thoughts to work about the way:
Painters draw first the lines, and the^ fill up the spaces, and complete the
portrate: And Frost turns first the face of water in hard lines, and then
equalleth all with ice: And the body of a child in the womb, has first the
noble parts framed, then all is filled up to the comely proportion of a
body: So the body of profitable knowledge has first the noble parts framed
in our fixed designs, then the enterjected spaces are filled up by the Minds
daily labor. A ball stricken in the open field goes straight out from us,
but in a Tinnice the wall makes it return to our hand: So if our thoughts go
out rackleslie, they ^uanish: But if we hem them within the compass of fixed
intentions of our calling and particular task therein, they come home with
pertinent observations: In the first case they are as the Raven fleeing about
the Ark of Noah, but not entering in it: In the next they are as the Dove,
returning weary at Evening with the fatness and peaceablnesse of the Olive.

4. Gods peace a sweet Vade-mecum.
HEalth of Body, and peace of Conscience, are two substantial blessings:
Without them other blessings are not pleasant to us; and this Peace is better
than Health, as the Soul is better than the body. The ground of it is Gods
free love; the price of it, Christ's satisfaction; the worker of it, Gods own
Spirit, the mettell upon which he stampeth it, is a good Conscience; the fruit
of it, the joye of the holy Ghost. It cannot be kept, but by great
circumspectnesse: Satan cannot endure such a Jewel in the midst of his
kingdom. It is vinegar to his teeth, and smoke to his eyes, to see Gods
children full of this peace in the midst of all his snares, we have it in the
world, but not of it, neither can the world know it, nor give it, nor take it
from us. It sweetneth the bitterness of our afflictions, and doubleth the
sweetness of prosperity: Go with it whither we will, we have a better
jewel in our heatrs, than all the treasures on earth.

O what comfort is it! when we lift up our hearts to GOD, and he meets us
with softness of heart, and joye in Spirit, when he makes the beams of his
face in Christ to strike on our Soul, to warm and quicken them, and doubleth
his grace in us, in the conscience of these things. It is Gods seal in the
godly, but the wicked neither have it, nor care for it.

A wonder it is, how men can live in the world without this Peace: Non can
well live in a Kings Court or Country, without his Peace. And how shall they
live in the world his great family, and not care for his favor? And yet men
under their Kings wrath may lurk in their Dominions, but no place can hide
them from God: There is small appearance, that they who care not for this
Peace, do know God; strangers taste not of this Joy, but Gods children, who
know the worth of it, will not value it with all the world: For worth, it
passes all understanding, and for use, it guardeth the heart and mind, in the
saving knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ.

It is sweet in our life, but shall be more sweet at our death, then we
shall see his face not frowning, but smiling on us; we shall not be amazed,
but rejoice when he comes with his messenger death, to loose our bands: Who
can conceive Simeons joye, when he song, Now lets thou thy servant depart
in peace? He could never have so spoken of death, without this Peace, and a
sure ground had he, for his eyes did see, his arms did carry, and his heart
was full of the Salvation of God, the Prince and price of this Peace. It is a
guard in our life, and a bridge at Death, to set us safe over the gulf of
misery, and enter us in Heaven.

5. We are fools about Happiness.
OUr greatest folly is where wisdom should be greatest, even in the choose
and pursuit of true Happiness: We cannot here possess all things, and yet
confusedly we covet them, and when we choose one of them, it is not the
best, but the worst of all, in so far as we make it our best. God is to be
sought above all, he may be seen and found of all, yet the most part knows
him not, and seeks him not. They profess wisdom, but they practice folly
herein, they are not spiritually dainty either in choose or their affection,
any thing contenteth them: The base lump of the earth and vanities of it, are
felicity to them: And though there be some choice blessings in the world, they
light rather on the trash, than on the good substance: As they pass by God
himself to his gifts, so among his gifts, they miss the corn, and choose the
chafe: Neither does their folly stand here, it can imagine to it self an
happiness in this miserable miscarrying.

This is indeed a fools Paradise, a conceate plat-formed by our selves: we
are delighted with these vanities, and captiued by them, which proves our
naughtiness. Raw and racklesse choosing, makes faint pursuing. True
Happiness, as all true good, has an alluring and drawing virtue, and the
godly by their inclining and yielding disposition to it, are made partakers of
it to their happiness: Their care about it, is as far above other cares, as it
self excels other things.

If this rule be applied to mankind, how few shall be found in the way of
true Happiness: Profess with men, and imagine with themselves as they will,
there is none appearance, that either they have found the alluring power of it,
or rendered themselves in their greatest desire and care, for the obtaining of
it. It deserves the flower and prime of all our labors, and their smallest
remains may serve other trifles: But when this order is inverted, such men lie
as fast in misery, as they are blind and lazy in the pursuit of true
Happiness.

If true good have drawn us forceblie to it self then we cannot but seek it
earnestly. This is true Wisdom, to pass by all things, that we may find
God: To count these deceiving imaginations about Happiness, to be tyrranous
foolries, in the midst of so many evils in the world to find out the good, and
among so many goods, to find out the true and best good, even our good God,
and rest on him.

6. Death surpriseth the most part of mankind.
Many are on their deathbed before they think rightly of life: They are
going out of the world, while they begin to know wherefore they came in it: We
come in it for this great business, to save our Souls, in the Faith and
obedience of God, but when we have time to do it, we forget that business, and
then begin to think of it when the time appointed is gone: We spend much time
in doing nothing, and more in doing evil; but little or none in that great
matter wherefore we were borne.

The life of sin is in us before the life of God, and fearing the own
ejection, preoccupyeth the other, and takes all time to it self. And
mortality seasing on us in our conception, before our perfect life, subjecteth
us to inevitable death before we live the life of God.

The Soul must be in perplexity at the hour of death, that sees the day
spent, and that assigned business not begun: A Traveler that sees the Sun
setting when he is entering on the journey; must be aghast, the Evening of the
day, and morning of the task do not well agree together. All the time that
remains is too short for lamenting the loss of bygone time, and if Gods
mercy did not infinitely exceed our evil, none could be saved after such a
neglect. Time bygone cannot return, but may be redeemed, and this redemption
is not in the extent of the work, but in the equiualence of it; God works
not by such lent proceeding as he does in them that spend their time well, but
at-once he perfecteth them: as he pardons their sin, so he perfecteth
their sanctification. Though God do this in some, yet he bids all use their
time well, while it goes. The fruitful use of it may cost us the loss of
many trifling joys, but that shall be recompensed with solid fruit.

Fearful will that encounter be, when grimme Death finds a man in sin and
carelessness, he must cry in the bitterness of his heart, Have thou found me
mine enemy: But when it finds us in our work, and at peace with God,
pleasant will be that meeting: It is Gods messenger to loose us out of the
yoke, and bring us to our promised and exspected reward. How joyfullie shall
that Soul go to God, that has so lived, as ever in the work wherefore it
came in the world: When the Conscien^e at death says to God, Lord, I bear
this man record, that he has worn himself, and spent his time in serving
and obeying thee. This testimony is sweet^ in our life, when we lie down at
night weary of our labor, rise early to it again, and are crossed for our
fidelity in it, but more sweet in our death.

That man is blessed, whose way, and journey, time, business, and breath go
altogether. The Apostle closes all sweetly, I have run my race, I have kept
the faith, henceforth is laid for me the Crown of Glory: He who lives the
life of the righteous, shall die the death of the righteous, and shall not be
surprysed of Death.

7 The great profit of prayer
SOme spiritual exercises augment light, as Reading, Hearing, conference:
other augment life and affection, as Meditation, and Praise: but Prayer is for
both: It opens the mind to see more clearelie, and softneth the heart to be
more sensible, the light of God shines then most fully, when we see our God
and our selves in his light, and the fixing of our mind on him, cannot but
draw our heart to him, the more clearelie we see him, the more we love his
goodness, flee his offense, and burn in greatest desire of his union in
Christ: It sets all the powers of the Soul on all the revealed properties
of GOD, and pouring out it self on him, by all these receives the influence
of his goodness most fully and sensibly: Faith, Hope, Love, Delight, and all
other Graces are herein busied on their sweetest work, and God in Christ,
coming down to our weakness, draws us so near to him, that we may taste
how good and gracious he is.

It is the most immediate worship of God, wherein we draw near to the Throne
of Grace, and adore an incomprehensible Godhead in Christ; we are thereby not
only for the present filled with Love, Reverence, and fear of a divine
Majesty, but at other times holden under that same disposition: We know we
are ever in his sight, and remain in some measure affected to him, as we are
in the time of prayer. Beside the great blessings that we obtain in it, this
is a great one, that by daily standing before God, we know him more and more
to our union with him: No Soul can seek his face, and see him daily, but
must affect him, and render it self absolutely to him. The disposition to it,
the work of it, and the fruit of it, are three great blessings.

Popery is mercenarie, and does no service to God, but under name of hyre: So
is it in prayer; they have proclaimed to the world, that they know neither the
delight nor fruit of it, while they call it a laborious work, and put it
among penal satisfactions. If they had the Spirit of adoption, crying, Abba
Father, they could not have such pleasure as in that exercise: no; there is no
greater torture to a devout Soul, than to be stayed from it. The heart-scald
does not so vex the stomach, as these impediments do the Soul.

The impressions of God are so strong in that heavenly conference, that
nothing can counterfit them, and our contentment so sweet by that sense of his
love, that no humane delight can equal it. When our heart is taken with a
delight to pray, we have found a compendeous way to know God sauinglie, and to
be taught of him: Next to his holy word, the impressions and affe^^ions
obtained in Prayer, are two clear Commentaries of his divine properties.

8. Fruitful labors in our callings.
OUr Soul has the own measure, which it can not well exceed; within that
compass it works easily and profitablie: Without it, and above, there is
great toil, but no fruit. In our calling and gift we may do something,
because of Gods ordinance and promise: But without them we are out of our
theets, and have neither a promise of his presence or blessing: Yet in our
calling and gift, we may exceed, if we reach us further than the measure of
our gift promises: As God has distinguished men by callings, so by gifts in
a calling, and men of that same gift by sindrie degrees of the gift.

The lack of this consideration, makes so many cross themselves, and others,
and forces God to mis-know his own ordinance, while they walk not as he
appoints. While every man will do every thing, no man almost does any
thing as he should. Our gift and measure of it, is our Talent: and the labor
of our calling, is ou^ exchange: According thereto, our place is reckoned, both
in mankind, and the Church, and so our reckoning will be at the last day.

It is wisdom to consider our Calling, Gift, and measure of the Gift: The
Calling gives authority and power: The Gift, sufficiency: The measure of the
Gift, dexterity: And all of them in this harmony promise a blessing. The
Calling presents the task to us: The Gift, the part of it: And the Measure,
the degree of the task: To labor without a Calling, is curiosity: Without a
Gift, is presumption, And without a Measure, is a foolish ouerweening and
ouer-reaching, it is an abusing of the work, our Gift and our self.

He shall not be ashamed of his reckoning, whose labors have been all
within the bounds of his Calling* and their Measure within his Gift and degree.
As God has first blessed him with the honorable employment of a Calling, and
next, with some sufficiency for to do it: And thirdly, with some answerable
success: So in end, he shall crown all these Blessings with acception, both
of himself, and his labors: Well done faithful servant, thou have been
faithful in little, I will make thee Ruler over much, enter into thy Masters
Joy.

9 The world is worse and worse.
Many do wonder wherefore the world is worse and worse, and that justly how
so bad a thing can grow in evil: It lies all in evil, even in Satan's arms,
and that is evil enough. It would appear that long instructions, Letters,
Divine and humane Laws, and Discipline, exercise of Religion, examples of Gods
judgments for sin might have some force to mend it. These would indeed
prove forcible to a curable nature, but the world is incurable.

The heart of man which is the heart of the world, is desparatelie and
incurablie wicked. Though some men be renewed, yet they beget not renewed men,
but natural: Every Age comes in with the own guise to add evil to the
former: Their corruption lets them not see the good of former or present
times, they take hold of evil, and think it a proof of their succession both
to follow that, and augment it. As a kind Burgess in a City loves the
increase of common good, so every man the increase of the common evil of the
world; how can it be good, since it has no good of it self, but resists
the goodness that God offers to it? all the sins of former Ages remain in
it, and by reason of man's great corruption, and Gods just desertion increases
wonderfully: And the Prince of it watchful at all occasions multiplieth
wickedness, that God may multiply wrath. It is kindly to every thing to
grow in its own gift, good things by reason claims that grows, but
evil, by violence obtain it.

We must seek a new world in this old one, for this will never amend: He
shall find his life for a prey, who keeps himself from the contagion of his
time. Though we be some part of it, yet let us not be like to it: The new man
with new grace, shall make good plenishing for a new Heaven: when like draws to
like in the justice of God, we shall be gathered to Heaven, while the
incurable world goes to their own place. He must be secured by saving
Grace, who would not be lossed in the worlds wickedness. This preservative
comes only of God, who has chosen us out of the world, as he can provide
us peace in the midst of it, so can he preserve us in despyte of it: he is
overtaken in the worlds sin, and shall be involued in their damnation, who
sees not this common evil, and keeps not himself from it.

We are foretold that the world will grow worse, and are commanded to forsake
it: But the latter Ages love it more than the former did: Doubtless this is
because man in his time grows worse than the world: It was never good to love
it, no, not at the best; but now in the end of it, when it is worse than ever
it was, to dote upon it, is extreme madness: Such a dotage may end in a
perpetual union with it, or rather in destruction. If we be the excellent ones
of God, and Saints on Earth, we are better than the world, because we are
hi^ choice out of it, and it is certain that he chooses the best; what ever
we be by nature, we are vnspeakablie bettered by his election, which makes us
that which he choyseth, and calls us to. It is therefore a frenzy to
prostitute the excellency of Gods Image in us unto so base an idol as the
world.

10 Discovery of man's closed heart.
O What a discovery would it be, if men's hearts were as well seen as their
body: Small moats go not thicker in the Sun beams, than man's intentions and
ends: And the thread of Spiders in a wood, do no more cross and woft through
other, than men's ways to their ends. It is a wonder how man, one in kind,
can be so contrare in their ends and ways: And it is a strong argument, that
the most part miss the right end, and run the wrong way. The chief good is
one, and the right way to it, is only one, but man missing the right, falls
in innumerable errors: And it is yet more wonderful, that every man rests
on a double persuasion, both that his end is good, and that his ways will
bring him to it. Neither is this all, but every man sets himself as a
petty god, both for worth to obtain, and for wisdom to compass them.

As it is Gods privilege to know the heart immediately, so is it his wisdom
to hide it from men: If all the thoughts of it were seen of other, there could
be nothing, but a perpetual striving in mankind, and every one abhorred of
other for their monstrous thoughts, neither the Seas, nor Afric can bring
forth such monsters as man's heart in one hour. It is best to cast off all
wrong ends, and eschew all by-ways, to set true Happiness before us as our
end, and walk toward it in Faith and Obedience: Other ends will prove no more
fixed, than fleeing moates in the air: And other ways, have no more force to
fitch these ends, tha^ Speeders threeds have to draw a great weight.

Our heart is ever open to God, let us open it to man also, the words and deeds
of a single heart, make it visible to man: Except they be possessed of Satan,
they cannot but love that heart, that is full of the love of God: The wicked
labor to hyde his thoughts, but the godly affect to have them known: He is
as the man, who craved not his house to be so built, that he might see all
me^, and none see him: But rather that all men might see him in the most
retired corners of his house: He assures himself to be acceptable to man,
if the honesty of his heart were seen.

Why may he not bide the trial of man, who has already sustained the sight,
and finds the approbation of God, to the honesty of his heart? Both the
vprightnes of the heart, and testimony of that vprightnes are known of God
alone, and the upright heart that has them. The world will not see that
uprightness, and they cannot hear the testimony of it, but God approves
that uprightness, and confirms that testimony, and the Soul that is
sensible of all these, rests in security.

11. Youth and old Age.
YOuth in many may be called a foolish seed time to a mourning Age, and old
Age, a bitter haruist to a foolish Youth: Though in Youth we escape grievous
and slandrous sins, yet none lacks his slips and infirmities, though
special providence keep us from gross Commissions, yet none is free of
sinful Omissions: None seems to be more free of the folies of Youth, tha^
they who are soon called effectually to Grace, yet have they their own
neglects: While they are kept by GODS Spirit from fleshly pollutions, they
are carried often by fleshly presumption. Satan is so crafty, that when he
cannot set our corruption to work on the own task of sin, he can abuse the
beginnings of Grace: And so many upon the conscience of Grace, soon received,
fall either to neglect of their particular Calling, or conceating of a
perfection, are careless of Grace it self; their strong and short beginnings,
are followed with slow and weak proceedings.

These are indeed two Blessings in themselves, to be soon called to Grace,
and before our calling, to be free of gross sins. Again, these are
contrare evils, to be long of calling, and monstrous in sin before our
calling: but Satan abuses the first two Blessings in making us careless
after our calling, as though we needed not to be zealous, because our former
life was not slandrous. And God turns the other two to good, in making them
more zealous, who were long of calling, and grievous sinners before it. S. Paul
did more evil before his conversion, than all the Apostles, and answerablie
more good after it. In every one there is matter eneugh for mourning to old
age.

It is great cruelty in Youth, to make ^o noisome provision for Age: That the
time wherein we look for joy and rest, should be turned in sorrow. Age at
the best has sufficient griefs: It is of it self a sickness, and a
neighbor to Death and needs not so bad provision of Youthlie folies. But
since the first cannot be avoided, it is better to mourn in old Age, than in
Hell fire for ever. If the Experience of Age cannot be found in Youth, let not
the rashness of Youth rule in old Age also.

It is better so to divide our life, that there be some mourning for evil,
than to turn it all both Youth and Age in a seed time to Hell: But it is best
of all to have a seed time of Grace in our Youth for a joyful old Age, and
to turn both Youth and Age in a seed time for Glory in Heaven. The godly in
the midst of their corruptions sow this seed, a care to please God in a
faithful discharge of their Calling, is a matter of joy for their old Age.
Foolish Youth shareth unequally with old Age: It takes liberty to it self,
and reserueth nothing but bitter penance to the other: If they fell not both
in one person, it were hard that Age should smart for Youths follies. It is
lamentable that our first and strongest time has least wit, and our wisest age
has least strength: We have wounded our selves deadly before we know our
estate, and all our after-time is to cure these wounds.

O how happy is he, whom Gods effectual Grace saluteth at the Cradle! And
with his first discerning, indueth him with the love of God, his word and
worship, and by the exercise of his mind, sows such a seed of Grace, that
old Age has not a beedrole of folies to repent. If we learn the ways of God
in our Youth, when we are old, we will not depart from them. If he fill us
with mercy in the morning of our time, we shall be glad, and rejoice all our
days. That is a commendable Youth, which is old in Grace, and sauoureth of
the wisdom and holiness of the Ancient of days: And that is a glorious old
Age, which waxes new in Grace, and in the newness of a glorious eternity: As
that gracious Youth ends in a more gracious old Age, so that old Age shall
end into, and be succeeded with an endless Glory.

12. Devotion and Obedience are pleasant twins.
Devotion and Obedience are pleasant twins: Devotion begets Obedience, and
is increased by it; when the Spirit is bent on God, all the Graces in it are at
their highest extent: It cannot contain it self, but in affecting him, and
delights it self most sweetly, both in pouring out it self tenderly on
him, and in a large receiving his influences: At that time, all impediments of
Obedience, are removed, and the greatest spurs added to set us fordward: Then
we answer him with a ready heart, Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears: Soft
wax is easily stamped, and hot iron easily forged, so the softness of a
deuotious heart, is pliable able to God: As it droppeth out tender affections,
so it will yield obsequious actions to him: Disobedience comes of hardness,
but the heavenly warming of GODS love turns that hardness in a willingness
and affectuous^nesse to him: As he powers in it the sen^e of his love, so it
powers out it self in all powers on him again.

So long as it is in this temper, God can command no unpleasant thing to us*
though otherwise it were impossible, yet it is welcome, because of his will:
This disposition in it self is a great degree of inward Obedience, in so great
a forsaking and going out of our self to be one with him: What a gladness is
it, to have the occasion to testify our love to God by Obedience? And this
daughter of Devotion does nourish her mother. The conscience of Obedience
doubleth Devotion: We cannot satisfy our self in wondering at Gods goodness,
who has blessed us with the grace of sincere Obedience; that his Grace is not
common in commanding only, but a special and returning Grace, turning us
home to him, in doing that which his commanding goodness exacted.

Devotion tyeth us to God, and that for his infinite goodness in himself, and
his saving goodness communicate to us: And being in so sweet bands, how can
we better discharge our self of them, than by honoring him in holy
Obedience? And the more we discharge our selves, the more are we bound. Every
degree of sufficiency to obey, and every act of Obedience increases Devotion:
The more Grace that God give us for Obedience, the more we love him, and cleave
to him, as the fountain from whom all good flows, and the end to which it
returns.

These twins both live and die together: A dry and a withered heart void of
Devotion, is also barren of Obedience, and lack of Obedience, lacks the
testimony of strong obeying Grace, and the matter of new and greater Devotion.
He that would have them both, let him begin at Devotion, and the other will
follow. A constant and tender Affection to God, meets not his comma^ds with
disobedience. These twins are feet to go to God, and wings to flee to
Perfection. The first is a bond of our union, and the second, a proof that we
stand firm in that union with him.

13. Holy necessities are no distractions.
ALl distractions are not of alike nature* some directly mar our proceeding,
as business without our Calling* other are seeming distractions, a ^^^^nesse
in some other part of our Cal^^^^g then we have presently in hand: These last
are not properly distractions, but rather preparations. When a Pastor is going
to the Pulpit, it is not distraction to visit a sick person, but rather a
sanctification for the public work: Our task is to bring souls to God, and
sickness is a convenient time for it: Reaping in the harvest, is as pleasant
to the labourer, as his sowing, and to deliver people in the hand of God, on
their deathbed, is a closing of our labors about them: We sow the seed of
the Word out of the Pulpit, and find the fruit of it in their affliction.

I have often found in conference with the afflicted, and in the way going and
coming from them, more points of Meditation, than possibly in more hours of
reteerdnesse. Gods ordinances do further one another, and Obedience to them,
has ever a blessing following it: It is no distraction that separateth us not
from the end, nor turns us out of the way. Gross distractions are more
dangerous, yet if true Grace be (...), we shall advance our selves more (...)
after them, and rouse up our strength and double our care for redeming our
losses.

A well set Soul is sharpened by distractions, and turns that impediment in
a spur: Some steps backward, make us advance further in our leaping: The
Soul that touches good but occasionally, is soon loosed from it, but being
tied to it, then incident distractions, cannot separate, but augment our
earnestness of that union: If we wedde our self to good, for eternal
enjoying, no temporal distraction can divorce us from it. He who is always
about his Fathers business, shall never be distracted.

14. Fruitful Experience.
EXperience finds us fools, and makes us wise, if our folly be curable,
we can neither think evil, to be so evil, as it is, neither good so good,
till Ex^^^ience teach us: The craft of Satan, the evil of sin, the strength
of our own corruption are best known by proof, to assay them, is to eat the
forbidden fruit, and a new degree of knowledge of good and evil. The
sweetness of Gods Grace, the saving power of the Gospel, the tenderness of
Gods mercy, and the work of his holy Spirit, are best known by Experience:
This is a sort of eating of the Tree of Life.

Our best is to eschew Experience of evil: I care not how often I have proof of
good, but it is madness to cast us in the Experimenting of evil; but if our
foolishnes bring us on new assayes, the next is to take in a new affection to
that evil, and new care to eschew it. In what measure we flee the proof of
evil, let us seek the Experience of good, though every hour give us a new
taste of Grace, we shall ever find a new sweetness in it; and when
perfection comes, it shall exceed all our bygone knowledge and proof: Every
Experience with a new degree of light, brings a new affection, and stampeth
the heart with a new hatred of evil, and desire of good.

Experience is an ordinar remeede of folly, but if we amend not thereby, there
is none other, than a cutting off from that experienced (but forsaken) good,
and to be compassed by that prouen (but not forsaken) evil. Experience is an
often repeating of sense, and every such repetition renews and augmenteth the
affections: Not to be moved by Experience, is either to prove we are
senseless, that feel not, or wi^^lesse, that make not use of our feeling.

15. Company is usuallie hurtful.
Scarcely can we enter in a society, and come off it, without offense: Our
humors do either break out to offend other, or takes offense of them: many
affect a quicknes of wit in breaking jests on their neighbor, but are thin
skinned when they are touched themselves: They take not the law of friendly
comporting, which they give to others.

It is Satan's policy to turn Companies (the mean of concord) in an occasion
of discord: He blows at the coal of every man's corruption a part, and
finding them in a society, preaseth to kindle them altogether, and turn our
Tables into snares: Men on the other part, turn their Christian liberty in a
fleshly license, not sparing to refresh their own minds with the grief of
others: The usual matter of speech in such meeting is detracting of the
absents and scoffing at the faults of these who are present: Or if Grace and
Wisdom make them bear off these seen blemishes, their speech runs upon
some indirect taxing.

Societies are Gods blessing to mankind to sweeten the griefs of this life,
and mutually to sharpen our wits for our Callings, but that means of mutual
good is turned in mutual hurt, and the common benefit of all, is overthrown
by the passions and indiscretion of some particular ones in a company. We
cannot eschew all societies, but we should make wise choice of the^ with whom
we converse: Some are so dangerous, that they cannot be haunted without
certain inconvenient. It is a just thing with God, to make men offend other,
who make it their merriment to offend him: When we are going or byding even in
the best societies, secret ejaculations to God, for an holy disposition is a
good means to eschew that evil.

Happy is he, who comes better from them, than when he went to them: Who
keeps him from the offense of God and his neighbor: And if their corruption
does injure him, gives them not a fleshly meeting: If we grieve not the holy
Spirit by loosing our minds and tongues to the abuse of our Christian liberty,
he will secure us from these mutual offenses: They are not as the strife
betwixt flesh and Spirit, but betwixt flesh and flesh: If the holy Spirit did
ouerrule all in these companies, they would not either contest idly, or offend
in contesting: The damage of societies made some to turn Eremites: It were
good to have the Heremites reteerdnes in the noise of societies.

16. The godly Traveler is ever at home.
EVery one seeks some delight in travel, and that according to their
disposition: The curious man seeks rare conceats: The proud man respects of
honor: The bellie-god for odd meats, and their following pleasures: The
Politician for intelligence, as the matter of his plotting and negotiating: The
Tippler and complementer for purposes of discourse. But the good Christian
seeks for heavenly delights: His choice comes neither through the hands of
Cooks nor Venteners, nor Merchants, nor from the mouths of Stats-men; he can
take all these things as he finds them, and use them by the way: But his
maine care is for God, and all his Observation run upon Gods favorable
presence with him.

What a pleasure is it to find all the places of our Travel and Rest, marked
with the tokens of his love? our bed with his secret instructions; and in the
day, when we with-drawe our selves from our Company, and powers out our
heart to him, he answers us to our heart, that his presence in an uncouth
land, is as near and sweet to us, as at home: To find him every where,
marking the places of our abode, as Bethell the house of God, and Peniel the
face of God.

This is GODS calling of us to the wilderness, to speak to our hearts: He
will tell us, that neither he nor his working is tied to one place at home:
But that all places are for the presence of God, to them who are at peace with
him: The Altar is soon erected, and the sacrifice offered on it in the heart
that has a constant Devotion: The Cou^taines of our Tabernacle are no less,
tha^ the veil of heaven: No man yet sought God truly, but he knows that
God is more easy to hec found, than his own heart: If we find it in an holy
disposition, then both he and the furniture for his worship are at hand in
every place.

Surely that man may be from his house, but he is not from God; he carries
his home abroad with him, and God, whom he serves in his house, trysteth him
in the fields. This Soul is ordained for heaven, that at home and abroad, is
ever with God: Heaven attends him on earth, and while he is abroad on earth,
he is at home in heaven, by that heavenly disposition. Other men provide
bodily necessars for their journey, and the godly above that, provide for the
favor of God: This sacred provision goes with us, it carries us, it keepeteh
us, and brings us back lodened with fruits of it self: Hereby in a short
journey, we make more true gain, than Solomon's Navy did from Ophir.

17. The combat betwixt the Earth and the Wretch.
THe Earth groaneth under all gross sinners, but has a particular combat with
the Wretch: Other sinners burden it with their vanity, but he would swallow
it up: he wearieth it in furnishing his desires, and hopes: And yet is not
content: His desires augment his hopes, and his equalled hopes increase his
desires; they are the two daughters of the Horse leach, which cry, Give, give,
and mis-contentment coming after, says never, It is enough. To rise up from a
good Table as hungry as one sits down, is of a doggish appetite, so is the
Wretch in all his riches.

Sufficiency and abundance do but inflame, and not quench his desire. He
gapeth on the Earth, to take it all in his possession; though he join Land to
Land, and house to house, yet he is poor, in his own account, so long as he
lacks his neighbors lotte. He enters in strife with the earth, an
unnatural Son with his Mother, and it is hard to know which of them is more
earthly: He desie^th all, and disgesteth nothing, no, not the crudities of his
own desire: but in end is disgested of his own adversary.

With what triumph does the Earth embrace the dust of her foolish competiture?
All her superfice and fruits, and treasures of her bowels, could not satisfy
him being alive, but seven foot length of her bosom closes in his carcass:
While he breathed, he would take Jorden in his mouth, but being dead, a
small box holds his worthless ashes.

O what odds betwixt the desires of a breathing, and the dimensions of a
breathless Wretch! So small an hole will hold his corpse, whose hopes devoured
all the Earth: It is good for them in their life, to take the just measure of
their body. Little will contain it, why should they trouble the world with
their idle and endless desires? What although he could accomplish his hopes,
and possess all the Earth, yet were he but earth on earth, and being laden
with that thick clay, when he goes to dust, shall make as small addition to
the Earth in quantity, as the possession of it adds to his worth.

Surely their spirit in this case is more lifelesse, than their carcass; and it
is a just punishment for their wormish heart, to be cast back in the dust,
which they so much affected: Let them desire as they will, in the end Death
will devour them. Mankind is as glad to want him, as the Earth is to have
him. As a pest he troubled men continually, and labored to turn their lottes
in his bosom, but now, both rejoice in his death: While his friends lament
him, both mankind and Earth rejoice that their trouble is cast out.

18. Wise expounding of Gods ways.
^Ee have no greater griefs, than these of our own procurement, and the
foolish expounding of Gods ways is a great one: We look to some particular
of his proceeding, and stick on it, and rather upon a cross, than upon a
blessing: And if we go further, we judge thereby both his purpose and end:
The work in our judgment importes both simple anger present, and destruction
to follow: This is a great error, and is shortly avenged on us: It makes us
doubt of his good purpose, and almost dispa^e of the good end. But God chooses
for the best end the hardest way, both to prove his own power, and to try our
faith.

It is better to expound his ways by his purpose and end, than these by his
ways: Though he should draw us through Hell, yet let us still be assured of
Heaven: His decree is sure, as his end certain, they are in him fixed, and the
way betwixt them lying through many occasions and actions, have difficulties
and bad appearance, but along all these thorters, his good will slideth soft
and sure. And if our heart be settled, anent his purpose of our election, and
have pledges of his end of our glorification, we shall both over come the
difficulties of the way, and resting on the decree, shall obtain the end.

What albeit the middle linkes of this chain of our Salvation do shake on the
Earth? Since both the ends of it are in Gods hand, yea, fastened in his heart?
And he has so joined the linkes of it among themselves, that they can neither
slip nor break, and it self as fast, as he is unchangeable: His heart must
be pulled out of him, before he change his purpose, he will deny himself,
ere he delate his inacted decree: All our considerations of our present and
eternal state, are but loose and slipperie, till our heart be fixed in the
heart of God.

19. The trial of our time.
A Wise Traveler considers in what part of his journey he is, and a wise
disposer of his diet, notes his age, and temper of his body; so a good
Christian marketh the time of the world, and in what periode of the time he
lives.

All times turn in the Circle, 1. of Prosperity, in abundance of Gods
blessing, 2. Profanesse in the abuse of these blessings. 3. Punishment for that
abuse. 4. Repentance under punishment, that we may enter again in prosperity
as the beginning of that Circle. It avails greatly to know in which of these
four we are; if we be in the time of Peace and Prosperity, to know the
time of our visitation, and to use aright the things that concern our peace.
If in the time of profannesse, to eschew sin, and keep us from the
wickedness of our time; If under punishment, that we repent tymouslie.

Doubtless this time of the reformed Churches, is the time of punishment, we
have had long Prosperity, the clear light of the Gospel, and offer of
Salvation, but have abused it, and now God is revenging on us the quarrel of
his Covenant. Leuit. 26. 25. Let every one mourn for his own sins, and the
sins of his time, that he may have his Soul for a prey.

He is void both of the fear of God, and the care of his own Salvation, who
now turns not to God: when his Word and Works of justice about us, and our
own conscience within us call us to tears, it is time to afflict our Souls
for our sins. If we cannot deprecate common calamities, yet we shall
receive the Murners mark on our forehead. Ezech. 9. for our own saftie: And
God, who had the Arc for Noah, and Zoar for Lot, shall bind up our Soul in
the bundell of life. 1. Sam. 25. 26.

Since we have not used our former times well, it is not good to lose the time
of Repentance also. If we do, there will be no more regresse to peace but
utter exterminion. But if we return to God with all our heart, when he has
purged his Church by his fiery trial, he will cast the rod of his anger in
the fire, and turn our mourning in a pleasant peace, O Lord, we wait for thy
Salvation. Genesis 49.

20. Short care for a short life.
THe works of the most part of men, tell that they think not of Heaven, or
that such a heaven as they mind, is on earth: They seek earthly things, and
count their happiness by their obtaining, and their misery by their want.
Riches, Honor, Fame, Pleasure, etc. are the hight of their reach, and that not
in a small measure as passengers for the way, but excessiuelie as possessors,
of their end: No care of another life, because no mind of it: Or if the
thought of Heaven be forced upon them, it is soon banished by the strength of
earth-delights.

Their desires are as base as the beasts, and worse, for the beast can do no
more, and ought no more: But men are reasonable, and called to Heaven: They may
reckon on many branches with worms, they come of the earth, live on it, creep
on it, and in end creep in it, and more wormish than they, being more affected
with the dungue of the Earth, dug out of the bowels of it, than with the
Heaven. What privilege their body has in being living earth, they loose it
in seeking lifelesse earth for their happiness.

Both do here agree, an earthly life, and an earthly spirit, spent in the
cares of the Earth: But a friend of the life of God lifts up the renewed
Spirit to heavenly things: It cannot be so basely abject, as to mind and
glutte the baggage of the Earth: But as it is from above, so it is all set on
things above, and turns even the necessar and moderate cares of this life to
an heavenly temper, by that reference, that it has in their use to life
eternal.

Occasional errors come in at a side, and wrest some part of our course, and
being discovered, are easily remeeded. But this is a fundamental error, to
place our happiness in the Earth, and to seek it therein: It peruerteth all
the course of their ways, and the greatest conviction of it, is when time of
amendment is past: when that consuming fire at the last day, destroyed all
which they have scraped together, they will then see their error.

I think it great wisdom to car^e our cares, according to the things
themselves. If Eternity were here, men's scraping and raking of the earth
might seem reasonable, but since our time in this life is but short at the
longest, and shorter possibly than I know: I will set all mine heart for
heaven, and a short life shall have as short a care.

21. Perplexities, disease, and remeede.
PErplexities in our adoes are a torture to our Soul: With great difficulty
we resolve on the end. And when that is fixed, what tossing have we to choose
the means that are most expedient for it? And scarcely are our Spirits
delivered of these two burdens of purposing the good end, and choosing the
best means, when the fear of the event tormenteth us worse.

It seems here to be better to the rash and senseless man, than to the
wise. The wise man multiplieth his griefs, and by foresight makes his way
more perplexed to him, whereas the rash man and senseless, brings out some
birth without conception and travel.

The stupide man is meerelie passive, and lets all things come as they will:
his senslesnesse disposes him for any thing, not because of resolution, but
for lack of it: He has no more of matters, but their fruit and event. He
is a witness to the Child, but neither father nor mother to it.

The hasty man is so in his actions, and every part of them at once, that he
is in none of them, his doing is as swift as his thought, and oft-times
anterior to to his thinking, as his tongue, so his hand and foot out-runne his
mind: He is out of them by temeritie before he be in them.

But true wisdom saves us from all these errors: It looks to God, in whom
are the ends of all things, and advises with his word about the means to
bring us to the end, and rests on providence about the event. Thereby we are
more in God, than in our business, and commit them to him, that he may do
them: Full dependence on him, cutteth the throat of all these perplexities.

22. Passions, Tyranny, and Remeede.
PAssions, are justly so named, though they breed in us, yet we suffer of
them, and that in such violence, as scarcely either allurement of sin, or
provocation of injury can work: It were nothing to see us by outward folly,
drawn out of our self, but to suffer that of any inward power, is more
strange; and that not so much a power, as an impotencie: It is not strength,
but weakness in us that breeds Passions, and yields to them: a weak
defender, makes a feeble assaulter prove strong: And there is yet worse in it,
we know not either how to punish or to remeed it. Both parties are in our
self, the doing and suffering of Passion, is both of us, and in us, and when
we press to mend it, new Passions arise in us, both of grief that such
Passions should be in us, and of fear of wrath for them.

I will not excuse my self, because of Passions, but rather accuse me:
Excuses of that kind, are as they who excuse their fault by drunkenness, the
purgation is fouler than the sin purged: Passion in it self is punishment
eneugh, if it lacks guiltiness: It so disturbeth man and transporteth him,
that the violence of it, is a sufficient chastisement for it.

It is a natural impotencie, and must be cured by a supernatural Grace: When
God, in whom is no Passion, renews us to his Image, and we in all our
actions, set him as a Pattern before us, we shall find a restraint of them. I
doubt, if any Passion can arise in that Soul, so long as it sees an
unpassionate God in the face of his meek Son, Jesus Christ: We are as far
separated from the meekness of Christ, as we are transported by Passion.

23. Three faults with the world, but not with God.
THese three things are counted faults in the world, and yet no man needs to
repent him of them: The modest Shifting of occasioned honor and riches, the
patient Disgesting of great wrongs; And the not following of the fashions of
the world: Who so art disposed, are counted Dolts, but that sentence falls on
the Judge. The first is counted Basnesse of Spirit: The second, an evil
Conscience: He swalloweth Injuries so patiently, that he incurreth the
suspicion of senslesnesse and stupour: And the third, a saucie singularity.

But such a Spirit bears out that censure upon better grounds: The first
comes of true Contentment in God: The second, of a care to keep himself in
peace with God: And the third, of a just contemning of the world. True Honor
follows the modest Shifter of it, and the riches of true Contentment, are
treasured in the heart that hungreth for no more. He is truly content, who
has fixed a period to his desires, and does not so much as loose them to a
racklesse wishing of further: And the best way to keep peace in our Soul is
not to frette at injuries: and it is a token that he who dwells in us, is
greater than the world, when we count the worlds fashions a witless folly.

He who is so possessed in his choice, securely indureth that ignorant
censure, and has indeed attained the truth of that which they are seeking
imaginarlie: He sees that by Time, they will either applaude him in his
course, or else fall short by the way to their greater loss.

If the world can show me where I shall find it, or what fixed Pattern and
exampler of good, it follows, with some reason it might exact of me an
imitation: But since it can neither tell, where to find it self, neither has
any Pattern, but its own new fangle vanity, it is shamelessness for it to
suit, and madness in me to give it obedience. It must be a bad stuff that
keeps not the color: And a bad color that changes every day: Stuff and
color of so changeable a stamp agree well together: But the renewed man dyed
with the unchangeable color of Grace, contemns them both.

I will not render my self to that School, where posed sodilitie is counted a
vice, and new fangled folies are counted perfection.

24. Salvation is of Grace alone.
THe Grace of God in man, has no greater enemy, than man himself: Satan
has his name from Inimitie to God and good, and the world comes in under his
Standard in that war: But they cannot all hurt us so, as we our self. Their
business is without, and cannot prevail, except our corruption bring it
within, and party it against us. All these enemies may will our hurt, but
cannot work it: Our yielding to them, gives both life and way to their evil
will. Of our selves we mere Grace offered with neglect, contempt and
opposition, and when we have received it with abuse and unthankfulness.

Grace justly bears the name, for it is a free gift, God is good to us, for
no foreseen good in us, but of his free favor: He finds us evil, and
makes us good: The beginning, growth and and perfection of Salvation, is all
of Grace: It is good to find this our native graceless disposition: When we
find nothing but evil in us, and all good to come freely of God, then we
know the praise of the glory of his Grace.

Who so seeks any ground of his Salvation, or Election in his foreseen
faith, or Works, or Humility, is not humble, but proud against God: he
makes himself a step-bairne, and not a native Son of God: He is not
begotten of a special love, but respected with a posteriot and following
favor, which depends on some worthiness foreseen in himself, and the
work of it upon the willingness of his own will.

He who builds upon his own will, and not on the good will of God, can
neither have stabilitie nor peace on so tottering a fou^datio^: As foolish
babes presuming of there own strength, will not receive the prepared meat by
the hand of their mother, but with their own hand, they loss that food,
defile their garments, and starve in the mean time. So proud,
selfe-sufficient men will not receive Salvation by Gods powerful application.

They must be partial workers themselves, and Gods work must depend on their
will, and so they loose the offered Salvation: They who with a childish pride
will not be freely saved, most justly are not saved at all: God wrought the
work in it self without us; and in the application he sweetly and
powerfullie bows our will to receive it. This gives glory to him, and peace
to us. The Angel ranked these things aright. Glory to God in heaven, Peace on
earth, and toward men good will. Luke 2. Gods good will gives peace to men,
and the glory of all is due to God alone.

25. Proud sinners to Hell.
Proud Sinners have strongest conceat, that they go right, at least in the
way of their choice: Satan blinds them so, that they mistake both the end
and the way. In their count they are running to heaven, when they are posting
to hell: He serves them kyndlie with fresh Posthorses: Sometimes he mounteth
them on drunkenness; and when they have run a stage on that beastliness,
he can mount them on Lechery: Again, he can refresh them with Avarice; and
if they weary of that slow jadde, he sets them on lofty Ambition, and to
make them more spritie, he can horse them on restless Contention.

Every on sees not Satan's Equirie: There is no complexion or disposition, but
he has a fit horse for it, and that of it self: Every man's predominant, is
a beast of Satan's sadling, and prouyding to carry men to Hell. The way is one,
the Postmaster is one, he is to be found at every stage, mounting his
Gallants, their horses are all of one kind though not one spece.

Happy is the man, whom God dismounteth in that evil way, and more happy is
he, who takes with that stay, and turns his course to heaven: Many are
stayed who turn not: God checketh them by his word, by their own conscience,
by crosses, by censure of Church and Policy, by admonition of friends and
Pastors: but they go on, and count the helpers of their sin their only
friends, and their admonishers to be their enemies: But the godly take with
reproves, as Gods own dismounting them off their beastly passions: And with
David, bless God, who sent Abigal in their way to stay them from evil: When
hard hearted sinners sold to sin, post on to destruction, the godly that take
admonition, shall be saved. Gods saving Grace is powerful in that Soul, in
whom wholesome admonitions without, and yielding to them within, do meet
together.

26. Gods calling is a sufficient warrant.
IT is some token of the life of God, to stir at a weighty calling: A blind
horse is in the mire before he see it, but the seeing horse goes about: They
are ever most ambitious who have least worth, and most deserted of God, when
they come to their desire: Gods calling is both the only right to enter in a
charge, and a surtie of sufficiency for it: He suffers no man to serve him
on his own expenses, but what ever he send us to do, he furnishes us for
it: and it imports as much the glory of his mercy, truth and wisdom to
furnish, strength, as it is needful for us to have it. When he calls, he
obliges himself to be with us: As it is a laying of a burden on us, so it
is a surtie of his assistance: As the task is imposed, so is his presence
promised.

If men call themselves they run away from God, who justly deserteth them in
that aspyring course, and will more forsake them in their fruitless labor:
But when his calling is waited on, and undertaken, not for any conceate of
strength, but for conscience of his outthrusting providence, and confidence, of
his assistance, there is a sweet concourse: The patient on-waiting and modest
shifting, till conscience observing his will, command us to yield, is a
special sort of Gods directing Grace, and will be followed with as
comfortable a virtue in the discharge of our duty.

This makes men called of God, bold as Lions: their faithful service to him,
breeds them indeed bitter opposition: But their conscience shows them
their warrant, and their Master who will not desert them. Be not affrayed Paul,
for I am with thee, and no man shall hurt thee. Acts 18. 9. And as I was with
Moses, so will I be with thee Joshua, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee,
be strong, and of a good courage. Joshua 1. 6. 7. and 9. But they who call
themselves, dare not be faithful: They see man and not God, and so dare not
offend man: They find not opposition of him, or if they find any, they have no
further warrant, than their own aspyring humor, and none other assistance,
than their own conceated strength, which is weakness indeed.

He who is conscious of an holy Calling, is guarded from all difficulties that
may occure: He knows of a sure retreat, when he is troubled for his honest
labor: Though he be weak in the sight of man, he is sufficient to bear out
his Masters quarrel against all the world. Yet none who knows God, dare
gloss with him in this business, he is a fool who lies in his own purse.
The conscience of our sincerity in all this work, is a seal of Gods
continual and comforting presence. The world loses their labor and
endangereth themselves in damnation, who oppose them who are called of God.

27. Atheism poison.
Atheism is both the most universal and most incurable disease of the world:
It is a cou^tersconce erected by Satan against the Gospel, to elude the force
of it, and to hold men still in the bands of sin: It goes under one name,
but has many branches, some more open, and some more secret, and in their
work some more dangerous than other: A dissolute man is not so powerful to
perswad his opinions, as he who colloureth his profannesse: Open Atheism
almost refuteth it self, but covert Atheism may deceive the wise. There is
neither such a ground nor couerture for Atheism, as to maintain that men of
all Religions may be safe: To make so many doors to Heaven, is to cast wide
open the gates of Hell; Christ has told us, that the way to heaven is narrow,
and few find it, and he calls himself the Way, but not the ways: As
there is but one God, so there is but one way to him by Faith and Obedience in
Christ.

The signs of it, are an humane and officious carriage to man, but licentious
and irreligious, before God: a praise of all other religious, and a carping of
the Religion professed in the place of their dwelling: And if necessity draw
them to the public worship, their behavior bewrays an absence of their
soul from that exercise: They jest at Sermons, and make none other use of holy
Scripture, than profanlie to apply it to every profane purpose and trifling
occasion: and at their meals, their unhallowed morsels must be set over with
the sauce of some abused sentence of Scripture: they care not to offend God,
for pleasing their company, who partak of their profannes, if they be not
offended at y^ offense of God.

As metals are known by their sound, so their gross Atheism is discovered by
their profane noise. They who fear God, dare not carry themselves so before
him: And they who have found sacred Scripture the seed of their regeneration,
the food of their soul, and their comfort in trouble, will never turn so
heavenly Oracles to the matter of their sporting. But they are not long
unpunished, and their damnation sleeps not.

Nature in Athiests finds it self vexed with the dumb choppe of conscience
crying unto them, that there is a God, But this surmyse is out-cryed, and
Conscience out-faced, by this, when they think any course is a way to heaven.
Such men are not so much justifying their course before men, as prouyding
liberty of sinning against the cheek of their own conscience: There is no
such compendious way to liberty, as the lack of Gods fear: And that heart is
void of his fear, who says, That there is no God: Though he be most
glorious in himself, and gracious to them that know him, yet he is nothing to
the heart that denies him.

But Athiests will find a fearful wakning: God whom they deny, has his
witness in them, and in end will testify his truth to their destruction,
except they amend: It turns men in beasts, yea, in Devils: While their heart
is saying, There is not a God, their Conscience gives them the lie, and by
secret checks, both arreasteth them before, and tormenteth them in the Name of
that God, whom they deny. They can neither destroy GOD in himself, though
they desire it, neither in the hearts of the godly. All the fruits of their
godless spurring, is to move him to destroy themself: It is good to soften
our hearts in the fear of God, and to seek out and follow that strait way
of life: Blessed is he, who fears always, but he that hardens his heart,
shall fall in mischief. Prove. 28. 14.

28. Sin is an evil guest.
Sin is the worst Guest that comes in any place: It brings double
destruction: One in the being of it, the other in the fruit: It is plain
that the wages of it is death, but even the being of it (such as it has) is
destruction of the thing wherein it is: Men, Angels, Thoughts, Words and
deeds, are good in themselves, but sin in them, makes them evil: It has
no being of it self, and is nothing, but the break of Gods Law, a discord and
deformity, a privation of good, and deprauation of its own dwelling, the
being it has, is in these things, and so soon as it comes in them, it
spoileth them, they become evil Men, Angels, Thoughts, Words and deeds by it:
He is an evil Guest, who for his reckoning puts the Pest, or a fire in his
lodging.

I wonder not so much at the evil recompense, it gives as at our selves who
welcome it again: No receiver will welcome him, who put his house on fire: Yet
we receive sin, and welcome it, though we were even now smerting for the
work of it: Some do mark the second work of sin, the punishment of it,
but few mark the first destruction by the being of it, so as to abhor it, be
like, it so destroys us, that we have not a sound mind to make its
destroying Nature.

O! what ods in Grace? It both changes us by renovation, and brings us to
glory, the very being of it, is the health of Soul and body: next to God
himself, there came never a better Guest in man, than saving Grace: Of Adams
Sons, it makes us the Sons of God: Of Natural men, spiritual: And of
vile Sinners, it turns us in Saints.

It is extreme misery to be desirous and patient of sin: But a token of a
renewed Nature, to abhor sin, and thirst for Grace.

29. Fittes of Insolency.
THeir is no Spirit so modest, which has not some fittes of Insolency: If any
odd thing appear in them, they are puffed up in a conceat of wrath, and as
far transported from their wonted modesty, as they conceate of that supposed
worthiness: These fits are more marked of other than themselves: their humor
blinds them, so that they cannot observe that change, others remembereth
their former dejection, and foresee it to come again, and so marketh that
startling as insolent indeed.

An Equable carriage proves an well fraughted Soul: Our true worthiness is in
Gods favor; our dignity is his dignation, and the exalting or downecast of
our heart, is from the sense of his favor, or lack of it: If we be sure of
his favor, we shall then alike euenlie carry our selves in all other things.

But fits of insolency bewray a double weakness, one, of little true worth,
that seems so great to us: another, of a racked judgment, making us to pass
bounds upon so small occasion: The wise man is ever like himself: And at any
odky thing, he is rather dejected, tha^ puffed up. If the speeches of other
make him ouerweene himself, he chasteneth himself in secret for it seuerly:
When he returns to his wonted thoughts, he abhors that insolency, and
guardeth himself, that they surprysse him not thereafter.

30. Constant Inconstancy.
THe upright heart must encounter with many thorters: When it meets with
uprightness, there is no difficulty, but such are as rare, as a white Raven
in the world: When it meets with crookedness, there is the strife, yet this
is not the greatest: Doubleness is worse for conuersing, than open and
constant perverseness, he cannot rectify the other, and they cannot pervert
him, and while all of them keep their stand, there is neither application to
other, nor peace among them: Yet it is easier to escape the evil of the brush,
and rudely backward, than of the fickle Chameleon.

Flat oppositio^ is less dangerous, than covered agreement: A wind blowing
constantly from one point, does not so endanger a ship, as when in an instant
it turns to a contrare point: To say and gainsay in two moments of time,
and to blow both from the East and West, is a greater cross to them, who deal
with such men, than to themself.

A man who is always the same in good, is both easy courted and kept but
none can either know or keep the double hearted* He changes thoughts,
resolution, and practice as often as breathing: When we grip him in one, he
breaks out in another, and his turninges are oftener in contraritie than
diversity; to deal with him craves a necessity of turning with him,, or
else of discord: but a free Spirit can neither be active in such turnings,
neither so basely passive as to endure them: The best dealing with such, is no
dealing at all.

31. Wrong Judging.
OUr estimation of things, is a valuing of our self, and a balance is tried by
trying of weightes: Many count highly of base things, and basely of great
things: Heavenly things are naught to them, but they admire earthly trifles:
This error of their count proves weakness in their judgment, little is much
to little, and few shillings are great riches to a beggar, and course food is
delicate to the hungry.

It were tolerable if they kept their error within them, but they obtrude it
upon the things themselves, they must be so named, as they misconceiue them.
The nature of these must be changed, because (for sooth) such Dictators have
so spoken of them: Common gifts must be excellent, and most excellent Graces
must be but common gifts; because it pleases them so to think of them. It
is a violent forcing of things, to rank them so as we conceate, and a
tyranny over the minds of others, to obtrude our error on them as truth: It
is too much that our own affections and carriage to things, flow from that
false ground.

The gift of true judging is as rare, as true good it self: He who has it,
ought to thank God for his gift, in securing him from the whirling giddiness
of the world: But withal let him resolve that he and his gift will fall under
the same erroneous censuring of other: But he has enough, who has God
approving his judgment, and courses that flow from it.

32. Injuries inflame Corruption.
GReat corruption lurketh in the best, and is as secret to them as to others:
But Injuries are Satan's bellows to blow it up: He is somewhat more than
ordinary sanctified, who at great wrongs utters not more corruption, than
either himself or others could think were in him: But Satan stirs not for
the injury alone; he intends thereby to draw more sin out of us, by
loosing our corruption: He knows that if all our thoghts be set on our
injurer, Grace will be disbanded, and Corruption break out in grievous sins.

We have more to do, than to busy our selves with our injurer: Satan's ambush
in our own heart, is more dangerous, tha^ al our outward injuriers. Many have
kept their strong hold, so long as they abode in it, but being wyled out of
it by the crafty enemy, they have both lost it and themself. So soon as we
are injured, it is good to turn from our injurer, to our own heart, except
our corruption be ordered, it will break loose, and harm us worse than our
enemy; if our passions can be curbed, the injury is soon disgested.

33. How to please God. and man.
WE ought a duty both to God and man, but man's importunity and our weakness,
makes difficulty in caruing their duties: we know by his word, how to please
him, Love the Lord thy God with all thine heart. Matt. 22. But how to please
man, is as hard to know, as to do it: If reason can content him, it may be
known, but the rule of humor and opinion is uncertain. How shall I know man's
rule, since he knows it not himself? Neither are all me^ of one mind,
neither is one man for few hours in that same mind: God in a sort craves
less, than we owe him, but man is mislearned, and craves more than his due;
God is most high, and higher than the highest. Ecclesi. 5. 7. But man's due is
as far inferior to Gods due, as man himself, is under him.

It may serve man then to be respected, when God is first pleased: If he be
not content with this place, he makes himself a competitour with God, and
from that may be a corrivall, and bring judgment on himself, and his
obsequious obeyers. He is worthy of none other regard, than misregard: And
declares himself an enemy to God and his honor, who is not pleased with
this just caruing of duties.

The difficulty is in this, that we stand betwixt two parties, God and man:
There is no question in the matter it self: For Gods will is just, and man's
foolish: And if either man were conform to God, or if we were only flesh,
or only Spirit, there would be as little question: But man is contrare to God
in many things, and flesh in us inclines most to man's will, as more greeable
with our own corruption.

He must be more Spirit, than flesh, who can both expede himself of these
difficulties, obeying GOD, and patiently endure trouble for his obedience.

To ouer^come this difficulty, three blessings are necessar: Wisdom to
direct us in the right: Love in doing the right: And Peace, that though we find
wrongs for our right, and hatred for our love, yet so far as we may to keep
peace with them: Wisdom craves the duty, Love seasoneth it to them; and
Peace burieth their injuries, and will neither revenge them, nor be at discord
from them: God shall be his portion for ever, who thus prefers God to man.

34. Resolutions performed.
REsolution is a good Precedent to our actions, but is not the actions
themselves: If we dwell on it, we shall do nothing commendable: That
Resolution is as a false conception, that is buried in the birth, and comes
not to execution: If the husbandman shall be ever preparing his plough, and
never teill, he can neither sow nor reap: A weak and staggering Resolution,
is broodie of scruples, and finds matter of stay in it self, but so soon as
the work is well begun, then Resolution ends.

There is oft-times more difficulty in Resolution, than in doing: For in
Resolution, the mind is on many things atonce, but in the Action, it is upon
the work alone. It is rent in diversities, and contrarieties in resolving, but
trussed up in doing: Many times we are in torture resolving, but in the Action
we find peace. A solid and masculus Resolution gives us no rest, till it
put us over in the hand of Practice, yea, it resolves for doing, and turns
all the resolving powers to execution.

These are twins of a ripe Spirit: both to resolve and do; to do without
Resolution, is rashness, and to resolve without doing, is faintness: He who
does without Resolution, dreameth of none impediment; but he who resolves
and delayeth execution, waits upon impediments, and rather than he lack
them, he will feign a thousand in his own fancy. Even fansied difficulties
do terrify the lazy, as much as real difficulties do the wise and
diligent. The Sluggard says, There is a Lion in the way, I dare not go
forth, least I be killed. Prove. 26. 13.

35. Callings are our trials.
AS Callings are Gods task appointed for us, so are they his Trials to prove
what is in us: He has ordained many callings for man's good, but many turn
these means of good in a snare: There is no lawful Calling without the own
good end, and right way to come by that end. But the most part passes that
good, and chooses the wrong. Equity, Honesty, Humanity, Vprightnes, are
Gods ordinance for Callinges: Deceat, Circumvention, Doubleness, and such
like, are Satan's invention, and yet many shift the first as a vice, and follow
the second as the virtue of their Calling: God sets before them the good of
mankind, but they set nothing, but their own private good, and care not for
obtaining of it, to hurt their neighbor.

How can God bless the breach of his own ordinance? They may scrap together a
state to themselves, but God will blow upon it: They think that Callings are
not Gods ordinance, nor themselves liable to reckoning. And exerce them, as
though they were of their own vptaking, and had none other end, than to make
them great in the Earth. But O miserable greatness, that diminishes Grace, and
destroys them that have it! The loss is here incomparably greater, than
the conceated gain. What profit is it, to gain the world, and loose their
soul? To conquesh Hell to themselus, for enriching their posterity.

It is a pity to see men forsake honey, and suck Venom greedily, but
greater pity to see men of an evil carriage in their Calling counted the
only men, and these who are conscientious to be counted no men: I wonder not
to see that same error, which misleadeth men, to approve them in their wrong,
but I wonder that mankind injured by them, does honor them for their evil:
It is a just thing with God, to make them hurt man more, who so foolishlie
allows them, whom he disdaineth: They cannot complain to him of their
wrong, since they approve it.

This is a saifer course to honor God by following his will in an honest and
faithful discharge of our Calling: It is good for mankind, and for our self,
and acceptable to GOD. Hereby he proves to other, and seals it in our own
conscience, that he has placed us in our Calling in me^cie, both to mankind
and to our self.

36. Food of our Soul.
OUr care for the body condemns our brutishness about our Soul: both are
substances, and have need of entertainment, but we are more sensible of the
bodies necessities, and careful to supply them: The Souls necessities, are
both greater and more urging, than the bodies: Our bodies lie under cold and
heat, and the decay of our natural moystnesse, which must be duly supplied
by nurishment: But the necessity of entertaining the life of God, and the
spark of Grace in the midst of our corruption, is daily and hourly: It is
senslesnes, and death when these greater necessities are not felt and supplied.

No man is so foolish as to feed his body with imaginations, or if he would
do so, it will not be so deceived, it is a substance, and must have substance
to maintain it.

How many know not what their soul is, and what necessity it has, and how to
supply it? And other who think they know all those, do content themselves
with imaginations: They do worse to their soul, than to their body, and
their Soul is more blokish, than their body, in standing content with these
conceats: Ask them what certainty they have of happiness, and security from
misery, they have no more reason of both, than their apprehension, and yet
that supposed absent evil, is as near to them, as that conceated good is
far from them.

What man can be seized in a worldly inheritance by imagination? and yet the
most part have no more warrant for their Salvation. The estate of our Soul
here, and eternal Salvation hereafter, is too great a point to hazard upon
a fancy: It is a wholesome body that finds the own necessity, craves good
food, and turns it in it own substance: It is a wholesome Soul, that
always desires God, finds sensibly his union, and by a continual
communion pa^taketh of the divine Nature.

When I find my Soul burnt up with the desire of him, paunting like the Heart
for water, and gaping like the thirsty ground for rain. I am sure that is of
the life of God: It is not fed with fancies, that is filled with God
himself, it is filled with him, that cannot rest on any thing beside him, and
finding him in it self, does sweetly rest on him who only fills it, and
rests in it. Nothing can fill the Soul, but that which is greater than it:
Though in substance it be finite, yet it is infinite in the desires.

And God alone does infinitely exceed it, both in substance and desires: It
would be counted frenzy in a man, who would prease to drive himself in a
Nut shell: So is he, who seeks contentment in the world alone.

37. A constant diet of Gods Worship.
APpetite is a good preparation for meat, so is a zealous affection for the
worship of God: It is good to have our appointed times for Spiritual
exercises, and to keep them: But withal, to strive for the spiritual
Appetite.

How sweet is that Exercise to the Soul? wherein our necessity wakeneth our
desire: Our desire sharpneth our Appetite: and our Appetite thrusts our heart
to God, and GOD pulls both our heart and our self to him: In one instant, it
is both pressed with sense of misery, and burnt with a desire of God: And
sweetly allured and drawn by him to himself: These are wonderful actions
between God and us, and all wrought in us by his Spirit, to carry us up to him.

Though I tie me not superstitioussie to hours of holy Exercise, yet
religiously I will keep them: These hours are sweet to me, when God
draws my Soul by strong desires and faith to him: It is pleasant, when
either these Exercises do tryst with our desires, or God in them, brings us
to an holy disposition; and great is the fruit of these Exercises: Thereby our
Souls even at other times are kept, if not under the sense, yet under the
Conscience, or at least under a fresh remembrance of God.

Such a disposition is both a virtuall supply of feeling bygone, and a seal
of our eternal fruition of him to come: GOD has promised a blessing to his
worship, and the neglect of it is punished with profannesse and hardness of
heart.

It is good to keep acquaintance with God: And there is none hour wherein we
have not an business to him, and he never sent away an holy heart from him
without some comfort, he needs none exhortation to the wo^ke, who finds
the daily fruit of it. Seven times a day do I praise thee Lord, because of
thy righteous judgments. Psalm. 119. 164.

38. Man's security in GOD.
TWo things greatly trouble us in this life, sudden Accidents, and uncertain
Events: The first shakes us, because they are uncertain: When we look to the
present dint of trouble, we cannot gather our Spirits, and when we wander,
or stick on second causes, we cannot light upon the certain end.

There is but one remeed for both, to make the Lord our Habitation, Ps. 91. 1.
So long as our Souls remain beneath among the creatures, we are tossed with
every thing; but when we rest on God, we find Peace. The conscience of his
Working, the assurance of his Wisdom, and sense of his Love, lifts us above
these troubles, and makes us partake that rest which is in him, and is
himself: Though he move all, yet he is not moved, and impartes this rest in
some measure to them who rest in him.

What wonder is it, that his providence shake us, finding us down among the
creatures, but if we abide in him, we shall be free of storms: He shall
give us rest, while these calamities pass over: Psalm. 57. 1. Who so dwells
in his secret, looks down securely on all the toils of the world. The
Dove abiding in the cliftes of the Rock: Cant. 2. 14. And the Chicken under
the wings of the Hen that hatcheth it, do neither fear the storms nor the
Eagle. So the Soul that by the wounds of Christ creeps to his bowels, and
is warmed with Gods electing love, is sure of his protecting power.

His absolute power is able to do more, than he will: And his limited power
is set to work to do his will: And that both in producing of things and
sustaineing them. This is a maine decreete of his will, committed to the
executing of his power, to bring his Elect through all difficulties, to their
appointed happiness.

39. Holy Meditations, Difficulty and Profit.
Holy Meditation, is pleasant to God, and profitable to us, and that Satan
knows, and preasseth to stay: we may close our self in secret from men, but
no door nor lock can hold him out: We can shift our dearest Friends, but
not him; and the more we thrust him out, the more he throngeth in: It is a
well fenced mind wherein he will not break by fancies and suggestions, and
while we are thinking of his debarring, by that same thought he either enters
in (turning our bar in his key) or makes us to evan^sh: and what difference
is there between his inbreaking, or our evanishing, and outrunning? None can
for a few moments urge a deep and a sensible Meditation of God; but either the
mind is to call home, or the heart to seek.

It is good when we go to Meditation, to pull in all our Spirits to God, and
thrust out all distractions, to fix our mind on him, and hold it at that
stay without diuerting, to set our conscience on work, to check that watch,
and advertise us both of Satan's suggestions, and the wandering of our mind:
And most of all, to pray in the entry, for such a divine virtue, as may draw
our mind to God, and unite it to him, till he communicate himself to us, in
that measure he thinks meet for the time.

It is a fruitful Meditation, when the heart receives such stamp of God, as
makes it to taste how good he is, and so thirst for more Grace, that we
earnestly seek up these sweet streams to the fountain, even God himself,
where that perfection dwells. Such Meditation brings out some point of
lively and affectuous knowledge, and with these holy conceptions works a
greater purity and holiness of the mind that conceiueth it: The soul in that
case it is not simple active, but passive also: and is changed to the nature of
these heavenly things that it conceiueth.

40. Spiritualitie of the body.
OUr bodies are earthly, and yet have a promise of Spiritualitie: It is as
easy to God, to make them so, as is to cleanse them from sin: this is
already practiced in our kind, in Christ Jesus: Our nature in his Body, is
spiritualized, to tell us, that for possibility, it may be, and for certainty
it shall be so in us: He is our Brother, therefore we may be like him, and he
is our Head, therefore we must be like him in a conformity with his glorious
Body. Philip. 3.

So soon as the Soul lives by the faith of these promises, it begins to
feel this spritualitie: We love our body by Nature, and oft-ten idol it: But
Grace makes us love it less, as it is natural, and more as it shall be
fully spiritual in Heaven. This is a seal and token of that spiritualitie,
that the body is disabled for sinful actions: The work of the Soul, and the
satietie of spiritual influence, brings for the time a deadness to sin on
it, Scarcely can the mind strengthen it self in any spiritual delight, but
the body is thereby weakened: The Soul marking that disposition, is confirmed
by it, and the body it self, though the first and only loser, is content of
that weakening, because it is assured of the own spiritualitie: When our Soul
shall be full of glory in Heaven, it shall turn the body to the like estate.

I care not how weak my body be for the works of sin: I have then most
delight in it, when it is beaten down and brought in subjection, 1. Cor. 9.
27. not to hinder, but to help the works of the Spirit.

41. Credulity and Confidence, are weak attendants of a weak Spirit.
Credulity, and Confidence are usuallie found together, the one for taking in
of reports is an evil porter, the other, a lavish out-giuer: The first
admits both others reports and the own imbrede suspicions: The second
gives them out boldly as undoubted truths: In one instant, their heart is
both at the root of the ear, hearing greedily, and in the top of the
tongue, talking looslie: the one tries nothing, and the other spares nothing.

Credulity puts no difference between man's report and Gods word, their
own apprehension and divine revelation: Confidence rests on them all alike,
and venteth all with the like assurance: It knows no degrees of persuasion,
but lays the same degree of trust upon humane rumors, as upon the Articles
of the Creed.

They are the two wings of Calumny, without which it cannot flee abroad: When
Satan has laid in the uncharitable heart, the eggs or seeds of Ignorance,
Malice, Prejudice, Suspicion, preposterous Zeal, and such like, Then he
works mightily on them, and hatcheth the monstrous bird of Calumny: But it
is winglesse, till it be vented: For this end, he puts Confidence and
Credulity to it, that it may flee abroad, which was brought forth in secret.
This is a match of Satan's joining: A babbling tongue to speak, and a bibulous
ear to drink in greedily bad reports.

It is a weak Soul, that has two such assistants, who so would perswad them
of any thing, have less to do, than he who must hear their raw and
inconsiderate reports. He needs no more, but vent his tales, he is trusted
at once by them, but their hearers must either believe them, and that in their
own degree of persuasion, or else suffer for it: It is easier to be their
informers, than their hearers or reformers, and that rather in lies and
trifles, than in truth. They are as hard to take contrare information to their
former errors, as they were ready at the first to drink them in.

It is our best, to try reports, and then give every thing its own due of
trust, and every trust the own degree of asseveration. It is folly to embrace
humane reports with that same degree of persuasion, as we do divine truth,
or to speak them with the same confidence.

A special work of Gods Spirit, is to direct us in the truth, and that not
only in the matters of Salvation, but also in our common conversation, where
he reigns, he places holy Discretion at the root of our ears, to keep
us from racklesse Credulity: And he guydeth the heart with wise Charity, to
stay indiscreet Confidence, inventing of our own apprehension, or other men's
reports. The foolish man will believe every thing: but the prudent will
consider his steps. Prove. 14. 15.

42. The sight of a present Godhead.
IT is a great work to direct our life a^ight, and many have given good
precepts for it, but the Scripture is a most full and pertinent rule. And God
who knows best our duty, has summed all up in one word, Walk before me,
and be thou upright. Gen^s. 17. 1. The sight and sense of a revealed,
reconcealed, and present Godhead, is the marrow and substance of all wholesome
directions.

Who can see him, but he must love and seek an union with him? and keep that
union by a constant walking with him: He cannot be seen but by his own
light, nor felt, but by his own life, and the raritie of these blessings make
the Christian conversation so rare.

This is a complete Furniture for our duty, first, to know it, next to will
it, and thirdly, to have a power to do it: All these are obtained by setting
God before us.

Neither is he a beholder of his gifts, but an effectual mouer of them,
setting us and his Grace in us to work, by a powerful working. If his pure
light fill the mind, his effectual power will fill the heart, and that light
and power can lead us no wher-else, but to himself: They put us to a
restlesnesse, but when we are pleasing him, and that restlesnes is a most
sweet rest. The goodness of promised blessings, the weight of threatened curses,
and the equity of duties commanded, are all in their vigor when we see God,
so that faith and obedience do follow: Other considerations have their own
force, but this is so immediate and strong, that there is neither place for
delay, nor hypocrisy. He who sees God always, dare neither neglect his duty,
nor do it deceitfully.

Where this care is, Sin finds a bridle, and Grace a spur. There can no
tentation overcome us, so long as we see God clearly before us: Satan's
suggestions evanish as mist before that face: And our corruption dare not show
it self before the clearenes of that light.

Our walking in Christianity, is but a roving,, till we come to this sight of
God in some measure. This maintains light in the mind, sensiblenesse in the
heart, and sets to work our Conscience, to direct and hold us in a
conversation worthy of him, whom we see always looking on us. Men are
diversely affected with this sight: Some know not the nature of it; other
condemn it as a phanaticke imagination, because they comprise all the work of
Grace within their own personal experience: But Wisdom is justified of her
children.

They who are conscious and sensible, of it, enjoye the unspeakable fruits
thereof: While other are as void of them, as they are void of the sight it
self.

43. Patrons of Grace and Nature, are condignelie paid for their pleading.
OPinions in Religion, are discoueries of our condition; he who counts
highly of the Grace of God, has his part thereof: It comes freely of God:
and leads to him in thankfulness: It is his gift, and the proper work of
it, is to bring us to him again: It is his stryne in us, and pulls our
Souls to him. The holy Spirit is not, as a reporting messe^ger, but one
inbiding seal; he works at once, both the sense of Gods love in our heart,
and the meeting we give to it: No child of Grace can satisfy himself in
magnifying of Grace, the work of it, is to power out it self on God, the
Fountain, as it fills the heart with joy, so does it the mouth with: What
shall I render to the Lord? Ps. 116. 12.

The Patrons of Nature seem yet to abide in Nature, at the least that
patrocinie is a work of Nature, and flesh in them: If a Captive commend his
Prison, is a token he is not weary of it, and (which is worse) desires not
to be delivered of it: Saving Grace in Christ is the Arc of Gods building, to
save those that go in it: But Pelagius brittle, and rent shalloppe of natural
power, and selfe-sufficiencie, drowneth men in damnation. In things natural,
and for this life, Nature can do something; but in matters supernatural, and
for Salvation, it is blind as the mould-warp, dead as a carcass, and vyld as a
carrion. If we ascryue to it, either deserving or disposition for Grace, we
deny both the Nature and necessity of Grace.

Errors in other points of Religion, discover indeed weakness in the mind,
but in these practick points, concerning Gods work in our Calling and
conversation, they discover the state of our persons: They who are translated
from Nature to Grace, cannot but abhor Nature, and praise Grace.

O! how dangerous a thing is it, to count Nature Grace, or to magnify it
against Grace?

If their opinion be well examined, they will be found to lay two strange
grounds to themselves: One, that they are sprung of another beginning, than
fallen Adam: The other, that they court another God, than the Redeemer of
mankind: As for us, who are come of lost Adam, and depend on Christ our
Redeemer, we dare neither speak so proudly of Nature, nor so basely of Grace.
The poor speaks with prayers, but the rich answers roughly. Prove. 18 23.
We count it our happiness, that our dead and graceless Nature, is quickened
and renewed, by the free and powerful Grace of Christ.

All their pleading is for a privilege to Nature, and when all is deeply
pressed, that privilege is nothing, but hardness of heart, than which, there
is no greater plague in man, a liberty to fall from Grace, and to resist it.
They shall never crave blessings to me, who take that for a privilege, and
blessing to man, which is the heauiest (but the just) plague of God on man.

But both these pleaders are condignelie rewarded by their Clients: Defenders
of Grace have not their gages to to seek, and Natures proctors have such
gain, as she can give. The matter abides not in questioning, the persons, are
discerned before the question be debated. Magnifiers of Grace prove children
o^ Grace: and praisers of Nature stick still in Nature.

It is kyndlie to every thing to respect the own original and Benefactor* as
it is respected of them. I content my self with Scripture, to call Christ both
the Author, and the Finisher of Faith. Heb. 12. 2. And to profess before men
and Angels, that I am saved by the Grace of Christ. Ephesians. 2. 5. And with holy
Antiquity, to be then most sure, when I ascriue all the work of Salvation to
the mercy of God, and the merit of Christ Jesus.

44. Conceat of Wisdom is great folly.
COnceat of Wisdom is a dangerous Counselor; while we intend our business,
we think all is rypelie advised, but in the proceeding, and at the end, we
find weakness: we think then both of our Wit and work, that we might have
advised and done better; and that with some close Resolution, to see better to
business following: But the next affairs find us in that same folly, and are
a new matter of after-thinking, and Repentance, and our first Conceate
misleadeth us, as of before.

Corrupt Counselors have need of reformation, and there is no more corrupt
Cou^seller in our Soul, than this conceat: So long as it is Father to beget,
or Mother to bring foort^, and the Nurse to foster our business* there can
neither be hope of good success in our adoes, or of amendment of our error:
Conscience of our weakness: imploring of Gods assistance, and wariness in our
proceedings, are better Directors.

When we distrust our self, and rely, and in call on God for a blessing, we
shall either find that blessing which we ask, or contentment in the lack of
it: But Conceat debarreth the blessing, and doubleth our miscontentment in the
lack. He cutteth himself off both, from Gods direction, and blessing in his
adoes, who conceateth strongely of his own wisdom: But he is compassed of
both, who rests on God.

As his mercy offers, so his justice decerneth the saue-guyding of him who
distrusteth himself and trusts in God* But it is the work of his justice to
desert the selfe-conceated wise man: He gains much who depends on God: His
business are begun, sweyeth, and accomplished by GODS wisdom, whereas the
other left to himself, must wrestle with difficulties of affairs, and of
crossing Providence. The best way to be wise indeed, is to be
conscienciouslie humble under sense of folly, but the strong conceate of
Wisdom is extreme madness.

45 Dead to the world.
THe world is wise in the own generation, but God turns their wisdom to
folly; it affects men as they are set toward it, the Worldlings with love,
and the godly with hatred: These affections it testifies by answereable
actions, honoring the beloved worldlings, and troubling the hated godly: But
it is foolish in both, and most in this second: If it did not so vex the
godly, it might possibly ensnare them to bide in it. The Worlds fowning and
flattery is more dangerous, than her frowning; and her open hostility, is the
security of the Saints.

It is Gods great mercy to us, who turns their injuries to our mortification
We are called to renounce the World, and it rages thereat, and preassing
either to retain, or recall, or destroy us, it chaseth us out of it self. All
their contesting with us, puts us further from them, than we were before,
their hatred and injuries work a contempt of the world in us: This makes a
divorce, and in end, a Death to the world.

I take this as a dying and crucifying to it, when by the Grace of God, my
Soul does neither conceive their folies, nor account or receive them, being
suggested: When the heart neither wills nor affects them, the memory
remembers them not, the mouth cannot utter them according to the worlds
formalities, and the whole man has a unfitness to walk in their fashions:
He is living to God, and God lives in him, who is so dead to the World.

46. The right placing of our affections.
HOw foolishlie are our affections and actions placed? Christ appointed the
matter, and order for them both, Seek first the Kingdom of God, and all these
earthly things shall be casten to you, Matt. 6. 33. And the Apostle, Set
your affections on things above, and not on things on earth: Colos. 3. 2.
Heaven is first, and most to be sought: The Earth both least and last; but man
inverteth that order; he is not far traveled, nor high minded: The earth is
at hand, and he goes no further; as an home borne child, he bydeth in the
house, and as a shell-snaile he sticks to the wall.

The Heaven, the great and first thing, scarcely enters in his heart, the
renting cares of the world, do so pester it, that the thoughts of heaven
cannot go through that throng: Earthly thoughts salute him first in the
morning, busy him all the day, lay him down in his bed, and play in his
fancy all night: The thoughts of God and his Kingdom find none access: He
is all, where he should be least, or rather nothing: He is little or nothing,
where he should be most, he makes that his task which he should but touch
by the way, and he blenketh but a squint on that which he should continually
meditate. Many are busied about impertinent things with Martha, and far more
about impious things, but few with Marie choose the part that shall never be
taken from them. Luke 10. 42.

By this I know, the right situation of my Soul, when God and his thoughts
take up all the roumes of it, It is best to set the earth and her trash, at as
base an account, as in situation, it is under our feet.

47. Contemplation and practice ought to be joined.
COntemplation and Practice, make up compleete Christianity: God has joined
them as the Soul and body, and requires them joyntlie: and he who separateth
them, offers a lame sacrifice to God, and is scarce half a Christian: The
first, as the eyes directs us, the second, as the hands and feet performs
that direction. Theorie alone, is as the eyes without feet and hands, and
practice without a solid knowledge, is as strong legs and nimble hands in a
blind man.

Light and life are best together: The first, is the sweet eating of the
Book: Ezech. 3. 3. The second, is the bitter disgesting of it: The one gives
Grace and contentment in secret; the other proves the sincerity of that Grace
to man. For our own joye, the first has a sufficiency, but for the
edification of others, and our confirmation in our calling and election: The
second is necessar.

If naked knowing be sufficient, Satan is a most perfect creature: He
excels all men in the knowledge of good and evil, but is behind all men in
affecting them: He knows not good, to love and seek it, nor evil, to hate
and flee from it, but his affections and actions are set cross to his
knowledge: He is in that same degree of wickedness, that he is in
excellency of understanding: His searching and pearcing wit, has purchased
him the name of an understanding Spirit, but his wickedness calls him,
Satan, an enemy to God

The union and work of both, craves some solid and inward ground: Outward
means may occasion them, and inward motions set them on work, but they cannot
have a constant byding in us, without a byding ground and principle. The life
of God is this ground: What supernatural thing we do without it, is but
hypocritical, or occasional, and easily intermitted.

The Fountain of this life, is God himself, and where this Fountain is,
there is sufficiency for Theorie and practice: Without him, our professing is
hypocrisy, our minting vanity, and our actions will die, and end, in their
beginning: We can do nothing that is good without him; and with him, we
shall be able to approve our self, in a lively Theorie, and a well grounded
practice. As without Christ we can do nothing. Ioh. 15. 5. So I am able to
do all things through the help of Christ, who strengthens me. Philip. 4* 13
Yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me. 2. Cor. 15. 10.

48. The ambitious man dies of his disease.
Doubtless Ambition is foolish, and God in Justice, does cross it in the
greatest designs: But the humble man is truly wise, and God casts more
humane respect on him, than he desires: The Ambitious man hunteth after
honor, but it flies from him: What ever be his worth, in this he is
unworthy, that he thirsts honor. It is not guided by blind Fortune, but by
a seeing providence, and flies from them who proudly affect it, and waits
on them, who modestly decline it.

He fetches and sucketh wind out of every Airth, but when he seekth it most,
there is greatest calm, both in respect of his desire and indeed; What is
lacking that way, he supplyeth it by his own breath of vntymous self praise,
but that avails not; all men's breathing in a ship will not fill the sails,
he is the more vile in the eyes of the wise, the louder he proclaim his own
supposed virtues: The humble man neither intends nor affects honor, yet it
follows him: As the shadow follows the body, so does true honor to true
worth: He has more of that gale of wind, than he craves, and the more it
blow, he is the more dejected: his care is to keep him from schelues and
rocks before so fair a wind.

God is witness to his Soul, that herein he has a secret dejection, and
still compting himself the vilest sinner in the earth: He wonders at that
mercy, that has so undeservedly blessed him, and knows not how to begin
to be thankful: He is more pensive how to pay the debt of gratitude to God,
than puffed up in taking it on.

And says with David Who am I, Lord God, and who is my Fathers house, that
thou have brought me hitherto? And finding himself unable to thank God, as
he ought and would, he calls God to witness his earnestness to honor
God. What can David say more to thee? For thou Lord know the heart of thy
servant.

And the more he is swallowed up in that sweet drowning sense of Gods love,
he is the nearer to true exaltation: He feels then the truth of that
Martyrs, word, who said, HE THAT PRAISES ME, SCOVRGETH ME, and of the word
of God, That he resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

49. Good Spirits are most free of passions.
GReat Spirits have least passions, but base Spirits are most passionate: The
first is above their business, and not soon moved; the other is under all
accidents, and perplexed in every thing: The one as a large vessel, contains
easily water cast in it, and the other, as a small vessel runs over.

If the power of Princes were in the hands of private men, or the passions of
private men in the hands of Princes, the world could not stand. But God has
wisely separate them, that power without passion may be profitable, and
passions without power, may be harmless: The highest Mountains have least
storm, and wind on their tops, but the raines and tempest ouer-run the low
hills and valleys.

There are few worldly Princes, but in Grace we are called to this heavenly
principality, to command our passions.

The holy Spirit makes the Souls of the truly sanctified, as the fleece of
Gideon: They are free of passions and perturbations, while others are drowned
in them. Broken water is in the shallow Seas: But the deep Seas have a soft
swelling, and not these violent breakings.

If we be translated from Nature to Grace, we are above the surprysing of
accidents, and bitterness of injuries, and so are secured from the violence of
our own passions: Our heart is in the secret of God, and our head above the
Heavens; while our state or body is buffeted on earth, our Souls enjoye a
pleasant serenitie in the face of GOD.

50. God alone better than all.
He shifteth much needless labor, and provides great contentment, who
closes himself with God alone: To deal with man alone, beside God, is both
an endless and fruitless labor: If we have counsel to ask, help or
benefit to obtain, or approbation to seek, there is none end with man,: For
every man we must have su^drie reasons, and motives, and what pleases one,
will offend twenty, as many heads, as many wits, and fancies: No man can give
contentment to all, or change himself in so many fashions, as he shall
encounter humors: And yet it is more easy, to take sundry fashions than to
be active in them.

He preasseth to lift water in a sife, and sand in open fingers, who thinks
so, to carry himself, as to please all: He is prodigal of the peace of his
soul, and careless of good success, who makes man either his rule, or his
rewarder: That Spirit must be rent asunder, that applies it self to the
contrariety of men's opinions.

Man's bodily senses, both rules and ouerruleth his reason, therefore, as he
sees men and not God, so he prefers seen man, to an unseene GOD: But when
he shall see God in the clouds, at the last day, and all mankind present they
shall all be nothing, in respect of God. The godly now see him, more than man,
and therefore, prefer him to all men, and run that course to offend and
lose all men, rather than him. This is a course whereof he shall never need
to repent.

It is grievous indeed to loose our friends or familiars: And he is foolish,
who loses any, that he may brook with God: But it is a great triumph of
Grace, when for conscientious and faithful service to GOD, we lose them: They
are not worth the keeping, who cannot be brooked with him: And he is not
worthy of God, who will not forsake Father and Mother for him: All the hurt
that these selfe-pleasing men bring to the God-pleasing Saints is the greater
increase of the fruits, the scales, and sense of Gods love in them.

Since I cannot please all, I will take me to please One, and that one who is
better, than all, for Counsel, Approbation, and Reward: So long as God
draws, all my thoughts to him, and calmeth them in him, by sweet
contentment, I will not buy a torture from foolish man: While he answers my
desires, and communicates himself more to me, than I can conceive, I will not
vex my self in courting of man. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is
none on the Earth that I desire, beside thee. Psalm. 73. 25.

51. Rare accidents make many Prophets.
STrange Accidents breed us many Prophets: Before they fall forth, all men are
silent, but when they are seen, many clame a prophetical foresight of them:
It is sure speaking of them, when they are come to pass; but to boast then of
their foresight, argues lack of judgment: how shall he be a good fore-seer,
who sees not his own present folly in boasting idly of that which he has
not, and makes none use of that which is done, or does not see, that that his
vain boasting, makes him ridiculous: He is as loud a proclamer of his own
folly, as he clameth commendation from that foresight.

This is a sure note of such Spirits, to make none other use of Accidents,
than astonishment and broad talking: Every one they meet with, and every
dinner and supper must patiently hear the arguments, of their foresight; at
every occasion they have a new edition, and a new discourse of it; and by long
and often prattling, they give some life to that which has none other being,
than of their own humor and breath.

When such things fall out, as cannot be particularly foreseen of man, it is
better to ponder them seriously, and to see the work of God in them: And for
our self, to draw near to him in Faith and Repentance, and to draw other to
him also, in a religious reverence of him who rules all, to the good of the
Saints: To spend our own Spirit, and weary the ears of others in idle
babbling, is the work of an empty brain.

52. Damnable selvishnesse.
Self is both a near and a dear word to man: It draws all our thoughts to
it, and setting all to work that is in us, turns them home again, to it
self: It is both the Idol and idolater, the exacter, caruer, and receiver,
the doer and sufferer in all duties: A fountain sending out all, and a
Center, sucking back all that it sent out: And so selvish in this Self, that
it accompteth even God to be a stranger. And is yet more foolish, parteing it
self against it self, and is the own greatest enemy: So a man's greatest
enemy is not only they of his own house, but of his own heart.

Blind love in the Ape, makes it thrust o^t the enterals of the own brood
while it embraces them too straightly: The blindness of Self-love makes it in
preposterous safety to destroy it self: What more friend-like masters in us,
than Self-love, Self wit, and Self-will, and yet what greater foes? The
hatred craft, and power of our open enemies, do not so hurt us as these: I
fear and suspect no Creature more than my self, and that even when I most
respect my self.

I will profess and practice hostility against Seluishnesse, and render my
self to be guyded by a foreign Witte-and Will, even the New-man created and
directed of God: This is a better Self, than that natural Seluish One, there
is no saftie for me, but in hateing and destroying that evil One: By that
saving overthrow of my self, I shall save my self.

This is the fruit of mine ingraffing in the native Olive. The juice of that
stock, changes me to that Selfe-destroying, and Selfe-sauing work, the more
I seek mine own Salvation, the more I abhore my seluish corruption. I abhor
my self, as I am of the first Adam, but love and seek my well, as I am in the
second Adam Jesus Christ.

The holy Apostle makes this perfect Anatomy of himself, Not I, but sin
that dwells in me. Romans 7. 17. There is the old and corrupt Self, like the
first Adam in him: By the grace of God I am that I am, ye^ not I, but the grace
of God which is with me, 1. Cor. 15. 10. There is the new Self of Grace, by
the second Adam in him; in both places himself as he is Gods creature, is the
common Subject of both these Selfs.

He is a stranger in himself, who does not mark this distinction of
himself: And he is his own greatest foe, who destroys not the old Self
in Adam, that he may save himself in the new Adam, Jesus Christ.

53. The wise and foolish Merchant.
Every man plays the Merchant in his greatest business: We change and lose
something, for gaining another: The godly with God have most care to save their
Soul, They care not to loss their goods, their name, their body for that
end. If labors waste their body, and afflictions bruife their Spirit, all is
well bestowed in their count, if so be their Soul be safe.

The wicked make their own conquesh with wit, like themselves, they care not
to loss their Soul for keeping of their body and estate; their course is
justifiable in their own judgment, no man can build better upon their
grounds, or see better with their eyes: They see not their Soul, and as little
care they for it, as they know it: They see their body and state, and do
think that their soul is given for their body.

True godliness ouerthoweth these grounds, and gives better light: It
teaches, that all is for man, and the body for the soul, and himself for
God: This makes us to secke our safety more than our state, our Conscience
more than our fame, our Soul more than our body: And GOD, more than all.

Nature in worldly things, condemns our brutishness in spiritual: It
teaches men to buy the best things, of best use, of most gain, and at the
lowest price: But in spiritual Mercha^dice, we buy the worst things, that
are of no use, of less gain, and at the dearest rate: We spend our money on
that, that is no bread, and our labor on that, which satisfies not, Isa. 55.
2. Such is all our business on worldly things.

But Gods Spirit, teaches the godly a better form of barganning. The kingdom
of Heaven is a precious Jewel: It endures, when all these worldly trifles
will evanish, and we find it without a price. The Market of it is cried free
without money: Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he
that has no money, come, buy, and eat: yea, come without price. Isa. 55. 1.

These wise Merchants shall rejoice for ever before God, who under terms of
buying and selling, has freely given them eternal Life, where the foolish
seekers of the world, shall ever lament their neglect of this free Market and
the loss of their labor, their fruit, and of themselves.

It is good to leave the worlds folly to it self, since we cannot cure it, let
it not spoil Grace in us: The wicked losing their soul for their body, lose
body and all together: The godly losing all for God, and their Souls save
themselves fully: He is no loser, who has God for his portion and him self
in Soul and body unite to God in Christ.

Things worldly come not in this count, before we were, we had them not,
and in the Heaven we shall not have them: Their vanity, and not use, are as a
not being to us. Where God fills the heart, there is no room to desire, or
receive them on so miserable conditions. Let them fall to these who are like to
them; dust and dust do well agree, when we shall enjoy God for ever.

54. The love of good and hatred of evil.
SOme things there be which I cannot love, and some things which I cannot
hate: I cannot love Satan, for he is Gods enemy: Nor Hell, for it is his
House: Nor Sin, for it is his work: And the more near that Sin is to me,
the more I hate it: In the godly more than in the wicked: And in my self more
than in any.

These again I cannot hate; God, because he is Goodness it self: Nor the
Heaven, because it is his dwelling and reward: Nor his Grace, because it is his
Image, both the causes of that love, and the work of it is from himself: I
love them, because I love him, and it is his will and work in me, to love
them.

I thank God, I cannot hate them, who have true Grace: I mislike their faults
and shall digest their injuries, but my Soul cannot hate them, who love God,
and are beloved of him: His Image and Grace, where ever I see it (though in my
professed enemy) commands my dearest affection; all their injuries cannot so
grieve me, as the conscience of my sincere love to them comfort me: By
this I know, that I am translated from death to life, because I love the
Brethren. 1. John. 3. 14.

But there can be none assurance of his Love and Grace, where the Saints are
hated. His love is shed abroad in our heart, not to remain there, but to run
out to embrace them whom he loves, neither am I beloved of him, nor have
part of that in shed love, if I hate them: who so are beloved of him, and are
enclosed in his heart, and agree in Jesus Christ, as they are such, cannot hate
one another. This is our victory, over their corruption and our own, that
notwithstanding of their injuries, we love them dearly.

God loved and choosed us, when he saw us his enemies in the mass of lost
mankind: And now loves us, when we offend him daily: How then can the
heart, sensible of this love, hate any that is so loved of God: If we do so,
we hate Gods Image, and love in the Saints, in our self, and in God and may
justly doubt, if we be the Lords beloved.

55. The best Lotte has some want.
Every man's Lot is mixed with some want: And GOD has so wisely temperated
all estates, that no man has all blessings, and no man lacks all crosses: If
we have some blessings, we lack other: Yea, our miscontentment can make wants,
where none is, and augmenteth these which possibly are: We take on us a
creating power, and that in evil: How often do we compleane of that Lotte,
which is good in it self, and better than we are, either worthy to receive,
or wise to use aright.

Many have so large a Lotte, that if it were divided in an hundredth parts, it
would content some hundredth persons, and every one of them possibly, is more
worthy, and would be more thankful, than he who has it all alone, with
miscontentment. The smallest Lot with God (if there can be any small with him)
is a large Lotte: And the greatest Lot without him (if there can be any great
without him) is extreme lack. He lacks nothing, who has God for his
portion, and he has nothing, who lacks him: God carueth not sparingly to
that Soul, to whom he gives himself, and in that case, it lacks nothing,
but to know that Lotte, and enjoye it.

God has indeed wisely tempered our Lottes, but the error of our desires, and
miscontentment is our own, and yet he brings good out of that error. His
care is to keep us ever loose from the earth: If we found all our desires
contented here, we would forget to seek a better Lotte in heaven.

Let every lack chase us, to seek a supply: It is a daily and hourly
earand to God by prayer: We cannot find it in this life, let us seek it
where it is: Our Lot on earth satisfies us not, but our Lot in heaven, shall
fill us with contentment: It is perfect in it self, and craves that we be
perfect for it. If in the midst of so many lackes, we seek perfection in the
earth, we prove the lack of wit, more than of a sufficient Lot, all lackes
tell us, and command us to seek supply in God, who only is All-sufficient.

56. Danger of corruption daily.
THere is none hour, wherein we can say that we are free of danger, and yet
not so much of outward accidents, as of inward surprysing of our Corruption:
The more advanced in Grace, the more is that danger, both in it self, and to
our feeling: Other see our infirmities, and they are more grievous to our
self, than of before.

This is a bitter Experience, that when we have lamented our slippes, renewed
our vows, and chastened our self in an holy grief for them, they break out
under our hand: Scarcely is our heart calmed from a former grief, when it is
conceiving either the same, or a greater infirmity. These Canaanites live
still in us, they are left as a matter of our Exercise, the whetstone of grace,
and a Spur of Prayer: We cannot cast the^ out, but we should put them under
tribute. It is best to hold our eye continually on our corruption, that it
break not out: or be grieved for that out-breaking.

Daily danger, is a lesson of the necessity of a daily guarde: And since
that danger is most from within, our best Guarde must be from without: Nature
in us, that works our woe, cannot prouid our safety: God by his Spirit is
our best Guarde: When he keeps our hearts in his hand, then we are secured
from all dangers.

It is not good to sleep securely, when a Serpent is in the house, or to be
careless, when a mad dog is tied with a loose roppe: Such carelessness is an
infalible precedent of some gross fall: David at rest in his own place, fell
worse, than when he was chased as a Patridge in the Wilderness.

If we cannot escape Satan's supprysings, we should turn them against
himself: God makes these out-breakings in his Saints, as a staff to break
the head of Satan in their corruption. They are as the borrowing of a Baire,
he houndeth out our corruption, to foil us, but God sends it home, as a
carcass to him again. Beside the former exercises, it entertaineth Humility,
and the sense of Gods mercy, who bears with our faults. Pride as a Page,
attends excellent Spirit: But the slippes and buffets of our corruption,
lays these feathers. Pride goes before a fall, and an hautie heart before
destruction.

57. Gods best Gifts.
THere is no man, who receives not of Gods Liberality, but not all of that
same kind, and that measure. Some as Keturahs sons, get common gifts, and
go away from him: Other as his Isaac, get the Inheritance, and abide with him:
Some have the gifts of body and mind, and Fortune (as they call them) gifts
in themselves, but no sure pledge of his saving love: But to the godly, with
his gifts he gives himself, a spiritual being by Renouation, a spiritual
life by his Son, a spiritual moving by his Spirit.

Our disposition will tell us his affection: If we take his gifts, run away
with them, and use them without and against him, then we have gotten his gift,
but not himself: But if they lead us to him, and make us seek him above them
all, then we have himself with his gifts.

These are best gifts, which are most excellent in their kind: Greatest in
measure, and most profitable for use: What is better, than GOD Himself? And
amongst his gifts, none is better, tha^ saving Graces. They bring with the^ the
Image and warming power of a special love, and stamppe the heart of the
receiver, with a re-louing of him. For measure, they are sufficient to our
greatest necessity of Salvation. For use, they lead us through the Valley of
this life; through the foorde of Death: And exalt us above all use, even to the
fruitio^ of God: And so in this life are the immediate matter of our
contentment.

Common gifts come out naked, but saving Graces are guarded? that same choosing
love of God, where from they flow, sends out a secret virtue with them, to
pull that heart to God, that receives them. Though they come out from him, yet
they are not separate from him, neither suffer they us to stand abacke from
him: That his love in Christ, that gives them, quickneth us with the sense of
it self, that as by him we live, so we cannot live, but in him.

This is a sweet intercourse botweene God and us, in his saving blessings in
Christ, I count more of his smallest grace with himself, than of all the world
without him.

58. Discerning of Flesh and Spirit.
HOw profitable were it for us, to discern between the flesh and Spirit. But
this discerning has a great difficulty; and that because both parties are
within us: And both of them in every part and power of us: Their likeness also
one to another, and the readiness of our mistaking, and most of all, because
we incline more to the flesh, which is native to us, than to Grace, which is a
stranger.

Flesh is first in us by Nature, and soonest at work: And so forestalling our
minds, purchases our allowence to it self. Confusion of our mind makes
them as Rebekahs twins, we find them stirring within us, but cannot
discern them: Passions and Self-love make us judge wrong, we take that for
Spirit which is Flesh, and cherish it: And that for Flesh, which is Spirit, and
neglect it: That coveting one against another, is sensible, but we know them
not particularly: And more easily can we discern them in another, than in
our self: The work is then manifest, and we are not prejudged by our
self-love.

It is a great part of the work of conscience, to mark this difference: The
Apostle excels in this, who said, I find another Law in my members. The
best way to try them, is not to leave them to the event, but to bring them to
the rule. The true knowledge of Gods Law will tell us, That is Spirit, which
agrees with it, and that is Flesh, which agrees not with it: At diverse times
we have contrary thoughts of one thing, the one must be flesh, and the other
Spirit, what sauoureth of pride and vanity, is flesh: What sauoureth of
Humility and fear, is Spirit.

As the descerning of them argues a great degree of Grace, so to do according
to that discerning, proves a greater degree of it: When the motions of the
flesh are broken as a Cockatrice eggs before they be hatched, and the motions
of that Spirit are entertained: Both these works are noisome to the flesh, but
they are more profitable in that they grieve it. He has a painful task, who
pondereth all his thoughts in the balance of the Sanctuary, but the fruit
of that labor in purity, and holiness is greater than all the pains.

Justice is painted with a balance in her hand, and the practice of a good
Conscience in this discerning, is a continual pondering. Where this discerning
is exact and particular, it is a singular preservative, to keep us from
yielding to temptation, and a spur to Repentance, when we are fallen: He who
is so exercised, shall either not fall in sin, or come soon out of it.

59. Gods merciful presence.
GODS Presence in mercy, is above all things in this life, to be sought and
kept. But every one knows not what it is, or how to keep it: As Creator,
he is with every one, sustaining, maintaining, and directing them in their
ways. The greatest A thiest cannot shift himself of that sort of presence.
But we seek his presence as Redeemer in Christ.

In this he sees us, and makes us see him: He sheddeth abroad his love in
our heart, and makes us to love him, and by his working in love, makes us
both sensible and conscious of him, and careful to walk worthy of that his
presence: His countenance both humbles us in our peace, and comfort us in
adversity: Our well and woe are judged by his smyling and frowning: If he
lift up the light of it above us, nothing can g^ieue us: If he hide it from
us, we are swallowed up.

It has both a changing and augmenting power: Thereby adversity is changed in
prosperity, and prosperity is doubled by that Blessing of blessings, even as
the lack of it changes prosperity in adversity, and doubleth adversity by
that cross of crosses.

His eye is more to us, than all the world, to see us, direct us, witness to
us, in approving or reproving. In the darkness of the night, it shines in our
Soul, in our reteardnesse from men, it is powerful to keep us in order, yea,
all mankind gathered in one, are but a solitude compared to his on-looking.
This is both a trial of true Grace, and our proficience in it.

I see not how we can count our selves Christians, except in some measure, we
know and walk under the reverence of a present God: Without this, all we do,
is but by guess and custom. Hereby we know whom we worship, and are
sensible of our spiritual estate, we measure his assistance and desertion,
our strength and weakness, and by these, our joy and grief of them all. It is
the earnest of our Inheritance, the first Fruits of the Spirit, our
acquaintance with his Face in this life, and our Heaven on Earth. To be
conscious of it, and careful to keep it, assures us, that we have it now,
and shall enjoye it for ever hereafter.

60. GOD and Satan contrare to their ends and ways.
GOD and Satan draw us to contrare ends by contrare ways: GOD, his end is
true happiness in Grace in this life, and glory in Heaven: Satan's end is
misery in sin in this life, and damnation in Hell: The proceeding is as
contrare: God begins his work at light in the mind: He reuealeth the
goodness of grace and glo^ie, and the vileness of our sin and misery: by
the mind enlightened, and his holy Spirit, he boweth the will sweetly to
incline to the known Good, and decline the known evil: By these, he moves
the affections to seek the desired Good, and flee the refused evil.

But Satan takes a contrare course; he first moves the Humors, by them,
the Affections, and by these, the Will, and by it, he carries the Mind
headlong: As his on-sets are on our weaker parts, so are they preposterous:
GOD leads us up ward, and fordward, as he made us: Satan draws us
backward, and downward, blinds the mind, that he may surpryse it by our
corruption.

The form of these proceedings tell us both the Nature of the Authors, and
their ends: When the Mind is solidlie enlightened, and moves the other powers,
that is an orderly proceeding: But where Humors lead the ringe, and the Mind
is both last moved, and violently carried, there can be no good. If there
were that much light in it, as to discern their proceeding, we might eschew
the many temptations, which surprysse us, and obtain many blessings, which we
neglect.

Humorous courses are both violent and dangerous; they begin with violence,
and end in darkness, the more stirring of humor the less life of Grace: But
the work that begins, and goes on with^light, ends in life and
happiness. In all our business, we are guided by one of these two.

It is good to dispose of our affairs, with due consideration, that we may
know who is our Guide, what is the Nature of our proceeding, and what shall be
our end. He beats the air, and thresheth the water, who walks without
these considerations, as he sows the wind, he shall reap the whi^le wind.
Many abhor Satan in word, who render themselves to his guiding: And many
honor GOD in word, who pull their shoulders from his obedience.

61. Trial of Truth.
OUr speech in praise, and dispraise, arise of Estimation, and Estimation
comes of Discerning, and Discerning of Knowledge* A clear particular and
distinct Knowledge, makes good discerning, due Estimation, and a true Speech:
But Ignorance makes bad discerning, wrong estimation, and a false testimony,
we cannot pry in the heart of man immediately, but the worlds affection is
seen in their praise, or dispraise: For the most part, gold is called dross,
and dross gold, good is called evil, and evil good, virtue is called vice,
and vice virtue. And every man persuaded of his own wisdom, is both
peremptory to pronounce of things themselves as he conceiueth them, and
credulous to believe other reports of them. There is no just testimony, but
from a sound Mind enlightened of God, and that as it is such; a moate may
trouble the eye that is otherwise enlightened, so will passion or prejudice an
understanding Mind.

I pity posterior Ages, who have no further of former times, than historical
report, which carry as much of the affection and disposition of the writer, as
verity of the matter: Except the sacred History, there is none that has
infalible truth; it is a vexation to find out the Truth in the multitude of
diverse, yea, contrare reports. A blind man eats many flies, and a credulous
mind many untruths.

I reverence every man as God has gifted him, but I keep obsequious
credulity to God alone in his word: I find nothing therein, but Truth: as for
other reports, I have often found by diligent search, that to be dross which
was called gold, and that to be gold which was rejected.

62. Politics secrecy is open.
Worldly Politics affect nothing more in their business than secrecy, but
they are not so close as they believe: They are as the fish which thrusting the
head under a stone, thinks all is hid, but the Fisher pulls it out of that
supposed secret: They laugh all the world to scorn, and sees not that they
are seen by these whom they would blind: Conuoy as they will, yet they are
perceived, and more justly mocked, both for their crooked doings and conceate
of secrecy.

They delight to deceive man, but indeed they deceive themselves: As they
gloss man, they cast a veil between God and them, thinking that he sees
them not, because they wink. and will not see him. But all that is seen of
him, and shall be manifested to him all at the last day: Since men enlightened
of God, do now see through these vailes, shall not his face at the last day,
more clearly discover their supposed secrecy and wickedness lurking under it.

If they work directly their mids, tell both their grounds and end: If
indirectlie (as now many do, affecting Gods prerogative to work by contrars)
yet are they seen: They who can infer a like of like, can also infer a
contrare of a contrare.

The truly wise in God sees him thoroughly, smyleth at his opinion of
secrecy, and sorroweth for his crooked policy: He out-seeth him in a better
sight, and foreseeth his disapointment and repentance: He could as well mind
and counter-minde him, if he pleased, but he will not. It is not lack of
wit, but of will, and of corruption of wit, that stays him from playing
the politic: He knows God has given him wit for a better end to honor
God, do good to his neighbor, and save himself, but not to abuse it in
weauing the spider web, or hatching the Cockatrice eggs. Isa. 59.

The troubler of mankind furnishes Politics with a quick VVitte, and hard
heart, and harder face, the first for plotting evil against Conscience: The
second for affecting it against God: The third for effecting it with man. The
first is both a corrupted and corrupting mind, the next, a senseless heart, the
third, a shameless face: Such Furniture is neither to be enuyed nor coueted.

It is a witless Wit, that is witty to warppe a mischief to it self.
Achitophe^s policy, put his house in order, and himself out of order: He
gained by it nothing, but a roppe to his neck, and confusion to himself, and
his estate.

This is true Wisdom, to fear God* and to depart from sin, is good
understanding.

63. The life of the Soul.
THe Soul is the life of the body, but it self must live by some other life,
and that not from within, but from without: Every one seeks not that same
thing for the life of it. It is a second life in time, but should be better
than the first, because it is the life of the first, even of the Soul it
self; and should as far excel the Soul, as the Soul does the body: But
the multitude chooses a worse and a baser life to their Soul: Some live by
their riches, some by their fame, others by their pleasures, and others by
their conceates. This is not an exalting, but a debasing of their Soul, not a
quickening, but a killing of it. It is Gods work to quicken our earthly
lumppe by an heavenly substance, but to destroy that Soul by a lumppe of
earth and vanity, is Satan's destroying work.

It were extreme senslesnesse to live a day or an hour, and not know if our
Soul were in us; and yet many put off long time, and never try if they have
this spiritual life. They lack it who know it not, a special work of it, is
to reveal it self to them who have it: It is a vigorous life, all in action
and cannot lurk: Holy Motions Operations, and assiduous Care to keep it, are
euidencies that we have it.

I will seek nothing for the life of my Soul, but that which is infinitely
better than it, and that is God himself: When he dwells in the Soul, he
makes both Soul and body live in him, and exciteth them to an higher degree
than they had before. There is no food so sweet to the mouth, as the sense of
Gods love to the heart; when it is warmed by that heavenly sweetness, then the
body is refreshed by a wondefull presence.

The life that is of God, and is himself, living in me, both gives me life,
and tells me what that life is, and by the sense and conscience of it self,
redoubleth that life in the abundance of peace and joye.

Henceforth I live not, but Christ lives in me, and the life that I live, I
live by the Faith of the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself
for me: yea, has given himself to me, and taken me to himself. Galat. 2.
20.

64. Sense of weakness.
IT is absolutely necessar to be kept under the sense of our weakness, but
all means for it are not alike: Some learn it by falling in great
temptations, as David in his sin, other find it in smaller and trifling
ouersights, as rashness in words, or out-breaking in passions: Both grievous
falls and small ouer-sights discovers our weakness, but this last has
neither such guiltines before God, nor such slander before man, nor such a
wound to our conscience as the first.

It is a great mercy of God, to be schooled by lesser infirmities; and it is
the blessing of that mercy to make use of it: This is a point of heavenly
wisdom to be made as conscious of our weakness, by small slippes as by
grievous sins; if it work in us a distrust of our selves, a constant
adherence to God, we are brought to a guarde for our weakness.

It is extreme weakness, or rather death, to be ignorant of our weakness,
And it is both strength restored, and increased to feel it. Death feels no
disease, but life and the integrity of it makes us sensible of any thing that
hurts us.

The trial of it, is to enterprise nothing, without earnest incalling of God
for wisdom and direction: Never to proceed in any thing, without imploring
his assistance and blessing, and that not in greater business only, but in
our smallest adoes: The watchman of Israel will then preserve our going out,
and coming in. When we absolutely rely on him in every thing.

He is most secure and safe from his weakness, who by many proofs is made
conscious of it, and by that conscience does ever depend on GOD; he shall
overcome great difficulties to his own, and others, admiration. But he who
presumes in his own strength, is overthrown of smaller business: Humility
in the one, grippeth God, to be led of him: But Presumption in the other, is
Satan's snare to entrappe him, Humility, is both a degree of Gods present
assistance, and a presage of his accomplishing presence: But Presumption in the
other, is both a just desertion of God, and a surrendering of the presumptuous
man, to fearful inconuenients. Conscience of weakness finds want within,
and seeks supply in God: But Conceate of strength holds them within: The
first is blessed with help of God, the other is co^vinced by grievous losses.

65. The Scriptures unspeakable profit.
IT is impossible to live either Christianlie or comfortablie, without the
daily use of Scripture: It is absolutely necessar for our direction in all
our ways, before we begin them, and for the trial of our ways, when we
have done: For the warrant of our approbation of them, for resolu^ng of our
doubts, and comforting us in our griefs: Without it our conscience is a blind
guide, and leads us in mist of ignorance, error, and confusion. Therein we
hear God speaking to us, declaring his will to us concerning our Salvation,
and the way of our obedience, to meet him in that his good will.

What Book can we read with such profit and comfort: For matter, it is
Wisdom: For authority, it is divine and absolute: For Majesty, GOD himself
under common words and Letters expressing an unspeakable power, to stamp our
heart: And where shall we find our minds so enlightened, our hearts so
deeply affected, our Conscience so moved, both for casting us down, and
raising us up: I cannot find in all the Books of the world, such an one
speak to me, as in Scripture, with so absolute a conquesh of all the powers of
my soul.

Contemners of Scriptures want food for their soul, a light for their life,
and the sword of their spiritual warre-fare: But the lovers of Scripture, have
all that Furniture: Therein we hear the voice of our Beloved, we smell the
savor of his Ointments; and have daily access unto the Arc of propitiation:
If in our knowledge we desire Divinity, Excellency, Antiquity and
Efficacy; we cannot find it, but in Gods Word alone. It is the extract of
heavenly Wisdom, which Christ the eternal Word of God brought out of the
bosom of his Father.

Oft-times on this Meditation, I do both pity the Pagans, who have not this
sacred Book, and were without warrant of their doing or comfort in their
trouble: And I wonder at many Ch^istians, who^ God has blessed with this
Book, but they know not their bl^ssing hereein; they find more delight in
other books tha^ in this: And some affect such Treatises, as may be instruments
of their uncleanness or ambition, and trifling complementing: Filthy and
obscene Pamphlets are bought and read more greedily, than this sacred Write.
But this is a discovery of men's profane disposition.

It is a token of profannesse, to loath Scripture; but a note of true Grace to
delight into it: And of a growing grace, to grow in that delight. The happy
man that walks not in the way of the wicked, nor stands in the way of
sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful, comes to all this
blessedness, because his delight is in the Law of God, and he meditateth
therein night and day, Let good Christians choose our these Pearls, while the
Swine eat up their husks. It seasoneth the heart with an heavenly taste, and
inducth it with divine p^operties.

If the Jews did recei^e an odd temper of body and Spirit, because of Manna,
shall we not have a greater excellency by this heavenly Manna, and Jesus
Christ in it, If we would be sure of the life of God in us, let us continually
drink in these heavenly Oracles. The daily seasoning of our Souls by holy
Scripture, keeps in us the vigor of that life, and fostereth our Soul
constantly in a spiritual taste.

66. The fearful calamity of Wars.
AS the Earthquake to Earth, so is War to Mankind, a fearful commotion:
The calamities of it destroys Civility, Liberty, Laws, Religigion, and
Humanity it self. It is a grievous thing to see man made for the good of man,
so earnestly to destroy his neighbor, and that with the hazard of himself:
For the desire of the life and blood of his Brother, to be prodigal of his own:
And for the opinion of most manfull men, to turn beasts, void of humanity,
in destroying their own kind, and devils in defacing the Image of God: God
commanded man to increase and multiply, but they turn it in diminishing of
mankind, and make a craft of it* to destroy one another. I cannot think, but
mankind mourn more to find such rent in her bowels, than the persons so
disposed.

It is one work, but has diverse respects in it: Some thereby ambitiously
seeks preferment, some avaritiouslie hunt for gain: Others cruelly seek the
sythment of a reuengfull heart, and others in that loosing of all order seek a
license to all wickedness. But God both intends and works his good ends
into it.

It is his Chirurgrie to draw some superfluous blood of mankind: And his
discipline to such as are dissolute: Doubtless God has some as Cornelius,
warriors fearing God, but it is as sure that many are void of the fear God:
they initiate themselves for wars in the Aile house and Bordell: And so soon
as as they are girded with the Soldiers girdle, they loose themselves to all
profannesse: God disciplineth them with the Muscat, Canon, and Sword, in the
field, who would neither abide the admonition, nor censure of Pastors at home:
It is his ehastening of his Church, she abuses her peace in warring against
him by sin, therefore he makes man to war against her, to bring her to
repentance.

No wars are so cruel as these for Religion: In civil jarres it is but as
one Devil smiting another, the strokes will be soft: But here Satan is
smiting the Light and the bearers of it; and that with certain victory to
Gods enemies, so long as Gods quarrel remains against his Church: It is a
part of his process against her, and his enemies are a scourge in his hand,
therefore, they must prevail, till his Church be sufficiently humbled.

Here the case of the victor, is worse than of these who are overcome; for the
one are corrected in a wrath mixed with mercy, but the other is employed in
that service, in a simple wrath: And while they are Gods instruments to punish
the sins of his Church, they are filling up the cup of their own sins,
that full vengeance may overtake them.

It is our best not to fight against God in our peace; and if he bring war
on us, not to rest, till we be at peace with him: The rage of War is
bounded, if we be one with him, he will either give us our Soul for a prey,
or take us to a better life.

All deaths are sanctified to the Elect, and to die for Religion is a most
glorious death. Soldiers call it the bed of honor to die in the battle
(though many of them be dead in sin) but to die in the Lord, is the bed of
honor indeed, to lay down our life for his cause, who gave it; and to turn
the natural debt of Death, in so glorious a sacrifice. It is a token of Gods
honorable account of us, to charge us with such a service; of his presence
with us, in so triumphing a Grace, and a pledge of the greatest degree of
Glory in Heaven.

67. God sees the heart.
THat GOD sees the secrets of our heart, is a point terrible to the wicked,
but joyful to the godly: The wicked are sorry, that their heart is so open: It
is a boiling pot of all mischief, a furnace and Forge-house for evil: It
grieueth them that man should hear and see their words and actions: But what
a terror is this? that their Judge whom they hate, sees their thought. If
they could deny this, they would: But so many of them as are convinced and
forced to acknowledge a God, are shaken be times with this also, that he is
All-seeing* Other proceed more summarlie, and atonce deny a God-heade in their
heart, and so destroy this conscience of his All-knowledge.

But it is in vain, the more they harden their heart on this godless thought,
the more fear in them; while they chock and charm their conscience, that it
crow not against them: It checketh them with foresight of fearful vengeance,
and for the present, conuinceth them of the conscience of a Godhead, the more
they preasse to suppress it.

But the godly rejoice herein, it is to them a rule to square their thoughts,
there is no liberty of Thinking, VVilling, VVishing, Affecting, in the heart:
where that candle shines, all are framed as worthy of him, and his sight whom
they see, seeing their heart.

This work is all secret, and known of them alone in whom it is: The
stranger shall not meddle with the joye of that Soul. It sees GOD All-eye,
looking on it, and lays it self open both to see him, and to be seen of
him: And that not only for to be directed, but to be allowed: The first is
the warrant, to do: The second, is the seal, that it is well done.

It is their comfort against man, traducing their words and actions: When man
that sees not their heart, expounds them contrare to their heart, they
solace themselves in this appeal in the conscience of Gods both knowing, and
acknowledging sight of their heart: So also it is our best, while the world
either thinks that God sees not, or would it were so, that we ever delight
to cast our hearts open to God, not because it must be so, but because that
we rejoice that it is so: We count not that terrible, which we find so
comfortable.

That Soul is sufficiently guarded, for its innocence and sincerity,
against the scourge of the tongue, which is conscious and sensible of Gods
Seeing, witnessing, and approbation: The seals of that approbation in a solid
peace and unspeakable joye are stronger, than can be broken by the breath of
man: That lying breath cannot dissolve, but doubleth them both in themselves,
and the joyful use of their possessours.

This made the holy Apostle to say with as great liberty as truth, I pass
very little to be judged of you, or of man's judgment; for I am not conscious
to my self of any thing. 1. Cor. 4. 3. 4.

68. Rest on Providence.
SOme cares are necessar, because commanded of God, others needelesse because
forbiden: Every day has enough of his own grief, and we should not care for
to morrow: God relieueth us of that care: He who made the World, disposseth
all, and cares for all in it: Before we were borne, he ruled all, and
needs not our help in any thing; and when we shall be at rest, he will
rule all.

It is a matter of pity, to see many rent their heart, when they need not:
Gods providence eases us of that care, if we be at peace with him, his
providence is for us, it has nothing more in head, than to content the Lords
beloved.

If once we loose our minds to apprehensions, and fears of crosses, there
will neither be end, nor remeede of them: One will breed an hunder, and every
one will multiply answerablie, so that we shall be buried and overwhelmed with
fears, before the feared evil come.

But these and the like shreds of tortouring apprehensions, shall be cutted,
if we close our self within the compass of a merciful providence, and this
shall be, if we can persuade our self: 1. That there is a GOD. 2. And that
this GOD rules all. 3. That all his ruling works together to the good of
them that love him. He needs not be afraid of any thing, who is at peace
with him, who rules all things.

By distrustful care, we offend God, and make his providence to work matters
to our grief. The course and event of things I leave to God, and his
providence: He is more wise see, and more able to do that which is good, than
all the world. I have no care, but to see that I offend him not, either in
abuse of means commanded, or use of things forbidden: This provides with a
certainty of good, a solid contentment also; When I rest on his providence,
fully resolving to welcome what it brings. I trust his Grace will work
contentment in his work when it comes: Since I reverence it before it come:
If any take on them to counsel, or command providence, or to control the
work of it, let that Soul resolve to lodge in continual miscontent. It is
good wisdom to keep our selves in peace with God, who directs providence,
and to submit our selves unto it, so we shall find it serve us, and Gods
Grace to give us contentment in the work of it.

Commit thy ways unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he will do them. Psalm.
37. 5. Cast thy burden on the Lord, and he will sustain thee. Psalm. 55. 22.
God dwells in that heart that so reposeth on him, but he deserteth the Soul
that chydeth his Providence. He who trusts in God, shall be as Mount Sion,
that can not be removed. Psalm. 125. 1. He shall not be affrayed of evil
tidings, because his heart is fixed on the Lord. Ps. 112 7.

This is Christian Stoicisme or rather spiritual Security. The old Stoickes
preassing to exalt the natural man, above the reach of humane passion, did
both thrust him out of Nature, and shake him loose of Gods protection: And
turned him from himself, as far, as from God: But this holy disposition
makes us rest out of our self, in God: And so to find our self secured in
him.

69. Afflictions fruit.
THere is nothing more grievous to man, and nothing more profitable, than
Affliction: How foolish are we in the day of trouble? We think that God is
slaying us, when he is saving us: A life indeed is taken from us, but such a
life as we both may and should want: Such a life as kills our Soul, but
quickneth us by the want of it: We have a worldly and a sinful life, even our
love of the things of the world: God gives them as coards and wings to lift us
up to Heaven, but we turn them in weights to hold us on the earth.

When we love our name, our goods, our Children, our body, our self, more than
we ought, God has two quarrels at these things: The one of Jealousy, because
we love them to his prejudice: The other of Violence, because they detain our
Soul in them.

When he crosses us in them, then he slays that our life in them: He
kills it in our name by calamities, in our goods by their remouall, in our
friends by death, and in our bodies by sickness: Then that hurt life
reteareth from a wounded member of our lot, at least does not so use it as of
before: When we are wounded in all these, the Soul draws from them to GOD.

If he saw us not excessiuelie affecting them, he would not wound us in them,
but there is no choice, herein it is better, to live in God, than to die by a
seeming life in them: And this wounding is not so meikle the work of his
Providence without, as the mighty draught of his saving love within, pulling
us out of that wherein we would die, that we may truly live in him.

His blessings are good in themselves, but our corruption abuses them, and
kills us: And it is necessare that our corruption be killed, we die by the
leaving of it, and in its death we live: Crosses are pressours to express our
corruption, even that venom of Satan which oppresses us. The life of God,
and of sin, have their contrare growth, standing and decay in us, as the one
increases, the other answerablie decays, and the reign of the one is the
destruction of the other. In all crosses God intends the health of our Soul.

Many see the hand of the Physician, that see not his heart; and many feel the
bitterness of his potions, and the pain of his cutting, that see not the health
that follows: as the first sight of sin is fall, because it seems
pleasant and profitable; so the first sight of Affliction is false, because we
see nothing then, but loss and hurt: The second sight of sin in Repentance,
is the best, because we see it vile, so is the second sight of Affliction,
then we see and feel the peaceable fruit of Righteousness, and the health
of our Soul.

Every sanctified cross to the godly, has both a sensible decay of that
outward life, in the blessings of God, and as sensible an increase of the life
of God, in God himself. The life of God, is more strong, and manifest by such
wounding, than without it. I count it no loss to want that life, that chocketh
the life of God in me: the more that life is destroyed, the more I live in
God, and God in me: Herein is that notable saying verified, WE HAD PERISHED,
EXCEPT WE HAD PERISHED.

It is good for me, that thou have afflicted me, for thereby I have learned
to keep thy Law. Psalm. 119. 71. Many dear Children of God in their own
sense, had perished eternally, if they had not been brayed in the mortar of
Affliction.

70. Man the most disobedient Creature.
ALl Creatures stand in their order to God, as he placed them in the
beginning, but Angels and Men his best Creatures, brake their order, and left
their place: They were best gifted, and yet fell most, yea, they only fell,
and Angels better gifted than man, fell worse than Man. And now, while all is
subject to vanity, Man is most refractarie to God, what law God has set for
other Creatures, they keep it without any break: The Seas keeps their
bounds, and passes them not: The Birds know their time, and slip it not: The
Heavens and Earth their place, and change it not; and all Creatures follow
their Creator, and are in their kind affected toward Man, as God directs
them. When he is angry with Man, they can grieve him, when he is pleased,
they comfort him: Only Man, knows not, or keeps not bounds, time, place,
nor disposition like to God.

Gods will finds no rebellion in the whole Creature, till it encounter with
the Will of Man: The Patrons of Free Will may be ashamed of such a Client, and
in that plea do profess a captivity of their own will, in the wilful
defense of such a rebellious free-dome.

This is our shame, that being better gifted, we are less obedient, although
that Gods Law to us, be more perfect, and his disposition more revealed to us,
yet his law finds not disobedience nor his disposition a contrariety, but in
us.

Unspeakable is his patience that bears with it, and his mercy, that
pardons it: But let us strive to be pliable both in obedience and conformity
with God. The gifts of God do both engage us to obedience, and enable us for
it: And disobedience is punished answerablie to the greatness of our
obligement: When we see these meanest Creatures keep their course, we should
be astonished; their obedience is our conviction, as they declare the work of
God in their order, so they preach our rebellion, who come not near to them in
obsequiousness to him.

71. Good men most injured.
THe Christian warfare is full of mistaking; some knows not the parties,
other know not the cause: It is not aye e^ill men that suffer, neither at the
hands of evil, neither for evil. But oft-tentimes good men, even the best do
suffer, and that for God, and at the hands of good men: Gross evils are soon
discerned, and as they make a dittay and bring on punishment, so they close the
mouth of the guilty sufferer: But it is more hard, when Grace and acts of
Grace, worthy of love and honor, are taken for gross sins, and that not of
the wicked only, but even of the Children of God. This sinister judging is in
them, not as they are his Children, but as corrupted.

He is blockish, who thinks Satan so gross, as to enjure the Sainct^s
only by the wicked: As he can transfigure himself in an Angel of light, so
can he dye the corruption of men, otherwise godly with the color of Grace,
and rub upon Gods Children, and their obedience to God, the color of
impiety.

Grace is never contrare to GODS Grace, but loves and honors it, as a
stream of that same Fountain, and Image of that same God: It is corruption
that opposes Grace: And the like corruption in others, does allow that
opposing corruption as grace: And condemns injured grace as corruption.

This mistaking runs so deep and strong, that I think never to see it
mended, till Christ come in the clouds.

Let every one, who sets his heart to serve God, resolve to suffer at the
hands of the godly, and that for good: He shall not be a loser therein: That
Grace shall grow, for which he is injured. It is a weak Grace, that is not
worth an injury, and a weaker, that bringing an injury from indiscreete man,
cannot sustain him who is injured for it. And let every one pray for Charity
and holy Prudence, to keep us, that we offend not God, in injuring his
Children, and his Grace in them.

72 Gods Beggars are best heard.
IT is not between God and us, as between man and man, when man gives any
thing to day, he is slower to morrow, and though some three or four days he
give, in end he will refuse, and vpbraide the suter as importune, and
impudent. But God gives liberally, and reprocheth no man. Iam. 1. 5. He has
an infinite treasure, which can neither be exhausted nor diminished.

His liberality is great, and the gifts he now gives, are not our full
portion, but beginnings and pledges of that perfection, which he has promised
and intends to give us; till we get perfection we have not gotten the full
measure that he has ordained; and the oftener we ask, the welcomer are we:
And the more we receive, the more he gives; he counts it good service to
beg his blessings.

It is happiness for our misery, to have such a Fountain and River to run
to. Our condition is all in necessity of his goodness, and his goodness is
all for the help of our necessities.

GOD indented with Abraham, under the name of All-sufficient, to tell him, that
as man brings nothing to the Covenant but All-necessitie, so he should meet
with All sufficiency in God: Our state is nothing, but All-necessitie, a want
of all good: A want of the sense of that want: So the want of an heart to
desire the supply; of a mouth to ask it, of an hand to receive it, and of a
price to purchase it. But this Fountain sends out a supply to all these
wants, he makes us feel our misery; gives us an holy thirst of his
supply, the mouth for prayer to ask, a price in Christ to obtain it, and the
hand of Faith to take it.

What is more convenient to help our necessity, than this sufficiency? It is
a goodness both full and free to imparte it self, that it will both help the
indigent, and in a sort act some part of his work, rather than it help him
not. He is willing to give alms, who opens the hand of the beggar, and then
thrusts money in that hand which he has opened; so does God to us. There
was never such a meeting, never a more indigent beggar, than man, nor a more
liberal giver, than God. If as we are great beggars in poverty, so also in
importunity of suting, we shall find his fullness running over to our
superaboundance, and his All-sufficiencie turn our necessity in sufficiency.

It is helpful in the nature of it, in that it is good, contrare to our evil,
and for the disposition of it, in that it is liberal to communicate it self
to our help: But he comes nearer to us, in that he has made the fullness
of his goodness to dwell in Christ, that is near to us; that is come to our
nature: All Grace is treasured in Christ our Head: Beside this approaching of
Grace in him, it is near to our possession, when as he has it, so he has
procurred by his merits, the right of it to us, and by his intercession,
obtains it, and by his dispensation, distributeth it daily. Here are
grounds sufficient, both for suting, and confidence of obtaining.

I find him never more ready to give, than when I have new received; neither
is my Soul more desirous to crave of him than when it is yet warmed with the
sense of his mercy in his new received blessing: He will never cease to give,
till we cease to crave, perfection is his last gift, and our greatest measure:
We need, no more, nor can contain no more, when once his bounty has
perfected us in glory.

73. Good motions are of God.
WE are not sufficient of our selves to think any good. 2. Cor. 3. 5. As
every good gift, so ever good motion comes of God.

Hereby we understand not fleeing motions of his common and t^mporarie
gifts, but the constant work of his indwelling Spirit, who after our sealing
by him, abides in us: That sealing is not so much in any motion, as in
himself, for we a^e scaled by the Spirit of promise, for the day of
Redemption, as the earnest of our Inheritance.

Infused habits of Grace, are his great work and gift, but they will remain
habits still, or rather decay, and never produce actions without his operation.
His Spirit is free, and works where he lists, and in them whom he
possesses, he works not aye to their feeling, but when he will: His
working, as his Kingdom come not by observation: The waters of Bethesda had
their time of wholesome troubling, and so the holy Spirit has his own diet
of powerful operation. Occasion may be offered outwardly, but the inward
power can not stir it self, without his hand, who gave it.

It is a great blessing to have that virtue and power of infused Grace, and
good occasions; and holy necessities in our callings, are great prouocations,
but above all, the holy Spirit dwelling in the heart, is to be sought, when
he kythes himself, small gifes will utter themselves excellently according to
their Nature: When he lurketh, great Graces are on a sleep, they can neither
move themselves, nor the Soul that has them.

The Soul is the life of the body, and gifts and Graces are the life of the
Soul: But the holy Spirit is the life of them all: Both they and we are dead
without him: But in his mighty operation we are quickened, and that to our
feeling.

So long as I find God in mine heart, I am sure of a timous and fruitful
stirring up of his gifts, his own work assures me of his Presence, and his
presence persuades me of his work: His time I leave to himself, who is as
wise to choose the opportunity, as he is able to work the work: If I grieve
not the Spirit of promise, and be not lacking to his working; I will find
tymous and powerful operation in my necessity. Every life has its own
natural actions, whereby it is both manifested and discerned, and so has the
life of God, and it is a special work of it to keep it self in us, but to
be careless of it, is a work of the flesh, and not of the Spirit.

74. The right use of observing of our neighbors infirmities.
Observation is a Commentary of every occurrent, but that Commentar is
written in the heart of the obseruer: It is wisdom to observe at all times,
but there is no necessity to utter all our observations to other: There is as
great wisdom in some cases to suppress, as to mark them.

If we see God offended, we ought not then to be silent; when we see him
dishonored, it is our part as loving Children, to plead zealouslie his cause,
and to admonish the offender according to our calling. But if we observe our
self injured by me^, it is better to misken that wrong, and suppress our own
observation.

He who trauelleth through a rough Forest, should not rub on every thorn,
and brier; that will both rent his garments and flesh, and stop him in the
way: He is more wise, who draws his garments hard to his body, and shifteth
the touch of thorns: And (if they fasten on him) softly freeth himself off
them.

It is a safe course through this thornie world, to have no meddling, but
necessar: And then not to prouo^ke men's infirmities: Or if they will rub upon
us, wisely to decline or pass them over.

He who carpeth at every thing breeds much needless and endless labor:
But he who passes by tolerable things without challenge, provided great peace
to himself: Observation is the eye that sees these thorns, Patience and
Prudence are the two hands, the one to decline them, the other to loose them,
when they fasten in us.

This is not a politic Dissembling, but a Christian disgesting of wrongs: The
first is a crafty smoothering of anger, which will arise to reueng at the own
occasion, the second, is a burial of it, never to reviue or be remembered. The
work of observation in it self, is a good degree of wisdom, but the right
use of it is greater wisdom. If we shall ever communicate all our remarkes to
men, we could not have peace in the world, men are not so sanctified, as to
suffer themselves to be challenged of that whereof they are guilty: Passions
in their hearts when they are touched by observation, are as Lions in the
den, and Serpents in their holes. To show that we see them, prouocketh a
greater irrit^tion. It is better to let a Dog sleep, than to waken him: It
is sufficient to know he is a Dog, and wisely to decline his barking and
biting.

The particular directions of this point would be many, but this is the sum
of all; to make such use of observation, that GOD be not dishonored: Our
Neighbor be not offended: Our peace with God, our Neighbor, and our selves
be not broken.

75. Hardness of Heart.
Doubtless the heart is naturally hard, and accidentally soft, as iron holden
in the fire, is hot and soft, but out of it turns cold and hard; when God
warmeth it with a spiritual motion, and sense of his love, then it is soft as
wax, but atonce it becomes as a stone: By day even under spiritual exercise
it steals it self away from sensiblenesse: And in the night, though we
close our eyes, under a strong spiritual sense and softness, yet in the
morning, we shall find it hard in our breast: It can be hardened not by
Commission of evil only, but also by omission of good, and that while we are
laboring to soften it.

Next to the pleasing of God, I never found an harder task than to keep the
heart in tenderness. There is no pleasure to the softness of it, and no
grief to the fel^ hardness of it, and yet when I grieve for that hardness, I
shall rejoice; if it were incurable, it would be unfelt. The Conscience of my
endeavoring to fly sin, gives some comfort, and the unspeakable grief for
the hardness of it mitigateth that grief. An heart fully deserted of God,
and judiciallie hardened, can neither feel that hardness, nor grieve for it:
If I fear it and feel it, I have it not; grief for it, is a softning and
loosing of hardness.

He has need to dwell in his heart, and in these thoughts continually* who
would keep his heart in a tenderness and affectuousnesse to God.

The best way to keep hardness out of our heart, is to intertaine an heavenly
heat of Devotion in it: The Altar of God had always the fire that came down
from heaven. If we keep our heart under the sense of Gods love to us, and the
work of our love to him, that warmness shall preserve our heart in that
temper, that God at no time shall want a sacrifice, nor we a comfort.

76. Gods worship done as his worship.
MAny exercise themselves in the work of Gods worship, but not as his
worship: The Hypocrite does it to be seen of men, and to purchase a name of
piety; the Politic to be counted a professor, and eschew the suspicion of
Atheism: And the Atheist himself to feed his curiosity. It is a good work
in it self, but to them who do it with by respects, it is sin. Their life
do prove how profanelie they act it, they are never one whit better, but go
on in their profannesse, they obtain the end that they intend, and can suit no
further: Their end is not edification in the Grace of God, but other base
respects, the desire whereof cerieth them to the work, and in it they find
their satisfaction, further they look not, and find not.

The end of Gods worship is our union with him, to partake his forgiving
goodness, in the pardon of sin, and his giving goodness in all saving
Grace: The form of it, is in giving divine homage and honor to him: But they
mind none of these. If they can purchase the name of zealous professors,
suitors of Sermons; though indeed they be but naturally or ciuillie disposed
in all the work, and seekers of novelties, they have all their desire.

But to do the work of Gods worship, as his worship has unspeakable
profit; we do it so, when the love of God and his Grace allureth us, and the
grief of our misery forces us to him, when we preasse not to please men, but
God, and seek not any base respect, but his Glory, and the rest and comfort,
of our Souls in Christ: We take time, occasion, place, Texts, and all as Gods
providence does offer them to us, and in all we seek him, and find him, and
rest on him. We may both please men, and our self, and deceive us both
therein, in such by-respects: Yet God will not be deceived, what ever his
secret goodness work in man, yet no spiritual fruit is due to so fleshly a
disposition.

77. Gods stamppe in the Soul and Body.
GOD has reserved the immediate search and knowledge of the heart to himself:
But so as he has left some indices for others to observe it.

GODS Image is principally seated in the Soul, yet it is not enclosed there,
but the body has the own part in it: Election, Justification, Sanctifiation,
pertains to both Soul and B^die; though the soul be both more capable and
se^sible of them. Gods treasure of Grace in his own, is so laid up in the
Soul, that it may be seen in some measure in the body, and that not only as
the Souls Instrument, but as a Companion: That fellowship in partaking Grace
with the Soul, does more affect the body, than a naked Instrument.

The countenance, conuoy of business, gesture, and words, give some notice
how the heart is set: Though man by Education, Letters, Religion, and Grace,
be subject to a change from his natural disposition, yet there is ever some
Characteristicke thing in Nature to be seen in every one.

Hypocrisy (the fittest visorne for deceat) cannot hyde that from the
discerning eye: As the color of people testifies the soil; their language,
the Nation, their accent of speech, their Prouence, as a Galilean from an Jew:
So every man's Character tells his disposition; he must cast off himself
before he cast it off: It is the Souls lineaments in the body, words and
deeds; if we find it, we have found out the predominant, both in its ^eate,
and chief instrument: It is matter for our circumspectnesse to eschew men's
evil, and of our hope to look for their good: What either good or evil can
be remarkable in them, is marked by, and tastes of that stamppe.

It is good, when the natural Character is stamped with Grace; when God
renews me to his Image in righteousness and holiness, sure I am, he will
make me a signet on his arm, and his heart; when he fills all the heart
with his Grace, his Name will be written in the forehead, so that they who
can, may read, Holiness to the LORD.

Courtly attendance gives men a courtly countenance: And Satan's slaves by
their deuilish consulting with him, draw on their face, a stern rasednesse,
the horror of that unclean Spirit, deformeth his familiars: And shall not the
heavenly familiarity with God, give an holy impression to his daily
attendants: Familiar conuersing with God, made Moses face to shine.

The Soul is naturally both affected with, and affects the body with the
things that it most loves. And what is more excellent, or gives stronger
impression in it, than God? If we come seldom to him, we are but lightly
touched of him, but if our Souls by continual mynding of him, be sub-acted
by these thoughts, and kned in them, doubtless as our Spirit within, so our
body without shall give some testimonies of a divine disposition.

78. Of great natural Spirits.
I Saw never greater folly, than in these named greatest natural Spirits, odd
wits have as odd gaddes, no great ingyne without some mixture of madness, and
their vice oft-ten does equal or rather exceed their virtues: No moderate
thing can content them, but al their work is in excess, and that in the worst
sense; their end in intending, their practice in plotting, and they choose
rather to hunt an uncertain, and imaginate contentment, than to enjoye a
certain and present estate.

I do not so wonder at their course and folly, in judging it, as at the world,
that counts them great Spirits: Alexanders Courtiers mocked Diogenes, but he
in his Hodged, was a greater Monarch than Alexander: For he commanded Pride,
Ambition, and Lust, whereunto Alexander was a slave. I will leave reasoning
with those Spirits, till they come home to themselves: They are not brought
home usuallie, but by some great calamity, and many, not till their death.

Moderate Spirits prove best: With little business they do much, and holding
themselves within their reach, they come softly to their just and desired
ends: But the other take great liberty over their Spirits and States and
outreach them both: But Providence will not be commanded of them: It c^osseth
their desires, and breaks their purposes in shiuers.

What ever Spirit we have in natural parts, it is good to have it
sanctified; our care shall be helped with heavenly prudence, and furthered by
Gods providence: These shall bring to our hand, more than ever we could
dream. The supposed base Spirits of this holy temper, do infinitely exceed
these falsely named great Spirits: Their greatness is more in the worlds
style, than in the thing it self, but the event will prove them great in
misery, they are great only in humane things, and in man's account: True
greatness is in true goodness: It is a base and bastard greatness, that is
separate from goodness: These two are infinitely and joyntlie in God, who is
both Optimus and Maximus, thee Goodest and Greatest: There is more true
greatness in the meanest degree of saving Grace, than in all the humane
greatness in the world. How ever the world count of their own greatness, and
of the baseness of the godly, yet the Saints are Gods excellent Ones on Earth.
Psalm. 16. 3.

79. The work of Conscience.
THE Conscience is the most wonderful power in our Soul; it is both a part
of it, and a Party in it; a power created in us by God, and set over us with
divine authority: An eye looking out on all, and most on God, and returning
again, and reflecting on our self; it has in it atonce, both a light to see
God, and to see him looking on us: The work of it is 1. to direct us in the
right, 2. to watch over us in obedience of that direction: 3. To witness how
we obey: 4. To judge our obedience and estate with God: If we obey, to gladen
us with a sweet testimony; if we disobey to grieve us with a fearful
check.

These offices are fruitful, but the last is the strength and force of the
other: There may be Watching, Direction, and Witnessing, and yet but slow and
weak judging in it. But when the conscience is brought to some odd exercise
in that judging part; the other offices are more conscientiouslie discharged.
After that exercise, her watching is more particular; her directing more
forcible, and her witnessing more sincere.

GOD uses a great variety in this exercise: For the Measure, some are more
heavily pressed down in their sense to the lower Hell; other more easily pass
that burning fire: For Matter, some tremble before that fire, for supposed or
small sin, where other are scarcely touched for gross offenses: For Time,
some know it not, to their middle or old Age; others are prevented by it in
their Youth. It is in it self a fruit of sin, a process of Gods justice, a
work of the Law; and a cross of crosses, when the Charter of our peace with
God is turned in a bill of diuorcement from him: And the ordinar applyer of our
comfort, applies nothing, but wrath to us: Yet it brings forth a glorious
fruit in the Saints, and the sooner we be schooled in it, the greater
fruit.

In our Youth it is a notable preparation for our effectual Calling: And when
Grace is weak, and corruption strong to break forth at every occasion, and
Satan busy to lead us in all sin, it is then a great blessing to be
bridled by these terrors: Thereby sin is restrained, and a way prepared, both
for obedience and sincerity in it: The Soul that has been burnt with that
fire, will never do that which will kendle it again. He who has seen an
angry God, and bears the marks of his anger, dare not bourd with him:
Thereafter, our Reading, Hearing, Thinking, and all occasions are turned to a
conscientious kno^^edge, and that knowledge is set on work, to keep the peace
and approbation of GOD, and GOD in them both.

The sooner we find that Exercise, we are the sooner schooled, for keeping
our Conscience, in walking with God: There goes nothing to odds in our
deeds, or words, or thoughts, but all is called to the Touchstone, and tried
how it may stand with the will of God, and peace of our Conscience. It is good
for a man to bear the yoke of God from his youth. Lament. 3. 27.

He who so judges himself daily, and keeps himself clean, shall find at
the last day, a friendly Judge, a favorable reckoning, and the greater and
sweeter Glory, by resenting his former terrors: Though Heaven be infinitely
pleasant in it self, it shall be the more pleasant to them who have tasted
the sorrows of Hell in this life.

Happy is he, who is conscious of his own Conscience, and both sets it to
work, and reports the daily fruit of that work: And more happy is he,
who knowing the weakness of his Conscience suteth Gods presence to ouerrule
his Conscience: It is indeed our Watch, but that watch has need of a better
Watchman; and this is Gods Spirit, who is that Conscience of consciences.

When our body waits on our Soul, our Soul on our Conscience, and our
Conscience depends on God: Then God by our Conscience will direct our Soul
and Body in the good way, and bless us with happy success therein: And in
end eternally sease on our Conscience, Soul and Body, with his full and
perfect Joys.

80. Tenderness of Body, a Blessing to the godly.
A Tender Body is an heavy burden: yet it is profitable to the renewed man:
Health is Gods blessing in it self, but sanctified infirmities brings health
to the Soul: Constant health in many, is taken for a natural gift, as it is
not sought of God, so neither is it holden of him as his blessing, nor used to
his Glory. Their minds do neither mark the course of it with joy, nor turn
them to God for it.

It may seem grievous to be night and day perplexed with a weak body, but
the fruit of it is better than all these pains: God gives not health in a
constant tenor, but by parts, he tapes it so piece and piece, that every
hour he gives us both matter of prayer and praise. When I find daily the
sentence of death, I have daily recouse to God for life, and every delivery
of every onset is a new gift and taker of the life: It is not sought for it
self, but for God, that it may be employed to his honor.

A godly Soul has more fruitful remarkes in one day about his tenderness,
than a secure Soul in a constant health in all his lifetime: I had rather
undergo the bodily infirmity, than want the daily spiritual profit: It is
a sort of spiritualizing our bodily life, when all the hours of it are sought,
obtained, possessed, and spent on God; and these frequent infirmities are
tolerable that bring so spiritual a life both to Soul and body.

Profane men abuse the strength and health of their bodies to sin: They take
it as an instrument and measure of their iniquity: So long, and so far do
they offend, as their body serves them: This is a giving of their body to
be a weapon of unrighteousness, and a sacrificing of themselves to the
Devil: Hereafter they will wish, that their strong body had been tied to the
bed continually. But tenderness in the godly, turns all their thoughts and
care to immortality.

Strength and health of body is Gods blessing, but our corruption abuses it,
either to needless business, or in gross acts of sin: Tenderness is a
cros^e, but where it is sanctified, it is a bridle to hold us from sinful
works, and a spur to Devotion. It sends us oft-ten to God, when possibly
we would be worse exercised, as often as it humbles it self to God, among
other suits, it puts in the hand of our Spirit, the supplication for health
and sanctification of that tenderness.

There is no cross, that either more occasioneth or causes a serious
preparation for death, than bodily weakness: When they find daily the coards
of their tabernacle loosing, and the pillars of it bowing, they deal with God
for a Mansion in heaven. That weakness may possibly hinder them from some
bodily work in their calling, but it stays them also from many bodily
sin, and holds them ever upon the maine point, how they may be clothed
after this life, with glorious immortality. As abused strength posteth to
Hell, so sanctified terdernesse creeps to Heaven.

81. Matter of continual ejaculations.
NOne observing Spirit can want new matter of continual prayer to God: If he
be secret, he fills his heart in reteardnesse: If he go abroad, it is forced
on him. What difficulty shall we find to converse with men? What ignorance in
our self to foresee, and weakness to eschew foreseen, or secret
inconvenients: When God may desert us for a time, and leave us to the counsel
of our heart, like Ezechiah; or Satan surpryse us by passion, or deceive us by
allurement: These and the like shall give us matter with Nehemiah, to send up
pearcing ejaculations to God.

It is necessar we ever be requesting God, that we neither offend nor be
offended of other: The least liberty of our thoughts may draw us to grievous
inconuenients: There is no sure Guarde to us and our heart, but by a special
guarding Grace: and that guard is most close about us, when we feel the need
of it, and are earnest with God for it: So long as there is evil in the world,
malice in Satan, weakness in our self, and goodness in God, we cannot
want matter of continual prayer: That same light that sees the necessity,
directs us to the Fountain, where it may be helped: And the goodness of
God persuades us of a supply.

Our necessity is great, and God has promised to hear when we call, his
mercy and truth in Christ, are chief grounds of my persuasion: But I am
greatly confirmed by a secondarie mean, when I am conscious in all my doing
with man, that I seek nothing, but Gods glory, man's good, and mine own
Salvation: We draw near to the Throne of Grace with boldness, when our
hearts are purged from every evil Conscience. The gift and liberty of fervent
ejaculations, are the work of God in us: He will doubtless answer that
desire, which his own Spirit works: We need not in such stratnesse of time
and business look so much to the shortness of our ejaculations, as to their
feruencie.

Plurality of business, lack of time, and throng of company, seem to cut
off the possibility of these short prayers; But indeed they beget and bring
them forth: Gods intercourse with the godly Soul, knows no such
impediment: Moses distress at the red Sea forced out these secret cries, and
God answered him to his desire: The searcher of hearts hears these secret and
pearcing prayers, and will answer them openly.

They are not so much in voice as in groans, and these groans are not
separate from the heart, but in it; and the heart in them immediately
thrusting it self on God: A free desire goes out in words; but a restrained
and suppressed desire doubleth it self, as a sparkle of fire, is hotter when
it is covered with cold ashes.

82. Complementing. is a windy fullness.
COmplementing in speech, is a verbal, Idolatry; it is counted a perfection
in talking, but is indeed the quintessence of prattling, and vnworhtie of a free
and ingenuous mind. The giver and receiver are both deceived; the first
speaks that which he means not, and the other troweth that which he
exspecteth not: At titling men have arms and facts of hostility without
wrath, they break their spears on other, and intend none hurt; so
complementing has friendly words without love: As jesters break their jests
on other, so do Politicians their smoakie wishes and praise.

They live by that smoke; but modest Spirits are tormented with it: That mist
flees most among men of least true worth: Where that flattery is mutual,
then two birds of one feather ^lee together, and two horse (of one itch) do
nippe other.

It is a pity to see men teach their tongs to speak lies, and to labor to be
trusted more than understood: But they trow not themselves, how shall other men
trust them? No man can justly crave more credit to his speech of other, tha^
himself gives to it, or if he do, he must conceat strongly that he deals
with a fool.

He mindreh one thing, and speaks, or rather sounds the contrare: He
knows his Heart thinks not what he speaks, and therefore he takes the
floorish of fair speech to supply the want of truth: His heart must fetch
the reasons of his own persuasion from his mouth, and measuring others by
himself, he thinks that many fair words shall beguile them, as well as
he beguileth himself with them.

They are no more vexed to coin their words, than I am to keep my
countenance when I hear them.

Ingenuitie of affection goes plainly to work: The more care to fill mine
ears with officious offers, the less credit they find in mine heart: I
think their Spirit is so spent in that vapor, that there is left neither
spirit nor life in their affection.

This sort of lying is not vulgar, but with a singular mode: Poets have
liberty to lie, and for keeping their Rythme, they are licenced to quite
Reason oft-times. There is none odd vein of Poesy, without some degree of
abstractnes of Spirit, the strictness of meeter loses them from the
strictness of verity, and secureth them from rigorous censure for that
slip: And their hyperbolees do pass for good coin. But the Complementer
do lie without either liberty or license: And their hyperbolees are none
other thing in broad terms, than lies in folio.

Their speeches run usually on three things, 1. large praises of some
excellent worth in them whom they idol: 2. Officious offers of service as due
to it. 3. And large wishes of all happiness to them. In the first, their
idols know they are speaking false, except they be as sensles of flatteries,
as there flatterers are shameless. In the second, their own heart gives them
the lie: For they think themselves more worthy of service, than he to whom
they offer it. In the third, their Conscience checketh them for mocking of God:
For they pray for that which they desire not to be granted: Yea, they would
be grieved if it were granted.

They are equivocaters, minding one thing, and speaking another: Many do
practice the Jesuits, mental Reservation, who know not their doctrine: (It
must be a cousening Religion that teaches, practices, and allows such
cousening.) I never suspect them more, than when they double their complements.

He is short and shallow witted, who is glosed with these flowrishes* Let them
paint out their speech and gesture, I will give less credit to so onerous and
insidious speech. I shall trow the heart and the person so affected as it
deserves: An honest meaning simply expressed, has more weight, than all
these buskinges and fairdings.

The heart that God made (but they abuse) has the own meaning: I trust that,
but not the person which they assume, and lay down, as soon as they have
spent their borrowed breath. The next moment, and the first man they meet
with, finds them in another, if not in a contrare mind; it cannot bide in
their heart, which bred not in it, nor was never in it: Their words are but
carcases of language, and let the credulous believer look for no more, than
carcass of offices. Belike, they think their words either not to be idle, or
that they shall not give an account of them at the last day.

The Soul indeed must be filled with something, but we may soon choose
better substance to fill it withal, ^han that wind of frothie complementing:
While they are feeding themselves with their fancies, let the children of
Truth, speak the Truth from their heart.

Let complementing have the own due, without a complement: It is the birth of
an empty brain; the mask of hatred and envy: Refined hypocrisy, with
simulation and dissimulation, her twins ingraned; the breathing of an evil
mind under hope of good deed. He who knows it, can neither be moved to
offer it, nor patiently admit it.

83. Conscientious, Knowledge.
If our hearts were narrowly searched, Atheism would be found in them; we
know better then we do, and we worship not God as we know him: We can
say, That God is good, and yet neither love nor seek him, that he is just and
powerful; yet we fear not to offend him: That he is wise* yet we submit
not our selves to his Wisdom; that he sees our heart and thoughts afar
of, and yet we breed and feed wicked thoughts in our hearts, which we would
be ashamed to show to our neighbor: We believe there is an Hell for evil
deeds, and yet go on in the way of sin: And that there is laid up a Crown of
glory in Heaven for well doing, yet we are not moved to do good. What is then
in our heart for all our knowledge, but Athiesme and Infidelity: Our actions
giving our words the lie, and proclaming to the World that we believe not
the thing that we speak. The want of the work of Conscience, is a special
cause of this fleshly disposition: Without that work, Christianity is nothing
but a speculation: We consider all things in abstract, but take them not in
our persons and to our heart: We can abhor sin in it self, and in our
neighbors, but excuse it in our self, we magnify Virtue and Grace in it
self, but yet thirst not for it: Papists talk mightily of the worth of
Faith, but do scorn the sense and Conscience of it: And many Christians will
hear and read their own sins, convicted by the word of God, and yet not
think themselves particularly taxed, nor bide at the conviction.

Happy is that man whose Conscience pulls all to his heart, and his heart to
God, who turns his knowledge to Faith, his Faith to feeling, and all to walk
worthy of God, and to live in Christ, as he learneth him daily: He has not
rest, but in walking according to the light of a well informed Conscience: when
theorie is turned to practice, and speculatio^ to a conscientious sensing, and
doing, then we are Christians indeed.

Gods word is his stamppe, he has deeply sunk his Image in it, but it does
not instamp our heart, except some power thrust it upon us: When the holy
Spirit makes our conscience to set that word to our heart, then we are
stamped, and take deeply the impression of his holiness in the inward habits,
and express it evidently in our life and conversation.

God has blessed us with many means of knowledge, but they do no more, than
propone and open matters to us: They inlighten the mind, and go no further:
But the Conscience works mightily on the heart. It lets nothing abide in
generalities, but turns all to our particular and personal respect, and that
not in the mind alone, but most in the heart.

As it reduces all duties, promises, and threatninges to our persons, so it
joyneth affection to light, and moves the heart according to things known:
And out of all draws actions that serve to express that knowledge, and does
all as in the presence of God.

When Conscience brings Religion to the heart, and from the heart to the
life, then we are truly religious.

84. The wise mixture of mankind.
HOw wisely has God tempered humane societies? All are not of one
disposition; some hot and some co^de, some harsh and headie in their
judgment, and violent in their actions, other ryper wits, calmer in their
affections, and posed in their doings: Some again as grossly senseless; some
crave the bridle, and some the spur.

If a man cast his eyes on a multitude, he shall observe as much diversity in
their disposition, voices, and opinions, as in their faces. If all were of a
fiery humor, the world would fire at once. If all were sluggish, it would fall
down in the pot: Stirring wits as quickening barme, put the dou^nesse of the
simple to working: and the slownesse of the other, tempereth their
fordwardnesse, and so both these extreamities are brought to mids.

If either extreme prevail, matters go wrong, but our wise God makes that
counterposing bring the balance to an equal standing, and so tumultuous
meetinges bring oft-ten forth just conclusions. There can be no standing of
matters, if either witlesnesse or wilfulness predomine; but where contrars by
their strife, are brought to a mids, there is the good of mankind. Our
complexion is made up of contrare qualities, of the elements; and harmony is a
meeting of contrare sounds.

It is worth our labor to mark this disposition, and Gods prudence bringing
all to a temper, and a good end. And withal to incline to a tempered and
tempering wit, and moderation, of courses: If there be any fault in such
moderation, it is both less in it self, and more curable, than the faults of
fleshly extremities.

If any consider these extremes a part, he can not be without passion; he
shall offend at the headie and hotter sort as firebrarnds, and at the coldness
of the sluggish, as impediments of good: But being joyntlie considered as they
are tempered of God, to his own glory and the well of mankind, he shall lay
down his offense: Their nature and action several, is to hurt, but God
causes every one of them to hemme in another, and so disposes them to a
better temper.

But the moderate Spirit shall be beaten of both extremes: He is indeed a
friend to both, and yet is counted of both as an enemy: As a Land lying far in
the Sea, is beaten on both sides by waves, yet keeps the soliditie of earth:
So he is assaulted of both, and yet keeps his moderate temper. Both extremes
take him for their contrare extreme: Fyrie men call him sottish, and soft men
call him fyrie, but he stands at his stayed posednesse, and enduring their
frivolous censure reduces them (if they be curable) to the golden mids.

He rejoices in God, who has given him eyes, to see that his divine
contemperation of mankind, and has turned his Spirit (of it self inclinable
to extremes) to moderation. While both parties stand out against other in the
claim of perfection to themselves, and imputing of folly to the other, he
thanketh God, who both at the first, and in the constant carriage of his adoes,
has blessed him with that temper, which they can never attain, but by
Repentance and amendment.

85. Needless fears are fruitful to the godly.
EVen false and needless fears, work true good in the godly: If they come
not as they apprehend, our profit is double; one in the escaping of the feared
evil, the other in the great store of Grace, which they produce: It is the
best sort of error, when fears prove false, and the feared evil comes not,
but that error is recompensed with a true fruit, when it draws us near to
God: There is great odds between the true and false fear in their grounds,
but not so in their f^uit: For the false does shake us, and bring out
Repentance, and resolution for death, as well the other. Beside, the contempt
of the world, the loathing of the vanities of it, holy vows of better
obedience to God, a renouncing of all, come of such fears.

It is great mercy in God, to work the same work of Grace in us by false
fears, that he would by true fear, and the greater that our losses are
less, and our lesson the same. Wise Captains can give false alarmes to their
Soldiers; if they go frankly to their Arms, they conceat of their courage:
So, if we go to our spiritual Armor, we are not feeble; if we look to our
deserving, every appearance of danger may make us fear, we are under
guiltiness, and God has us under process for it, and all Creatures are
ready to execute his will, how soon may the sentence both come forth, and
bring forth the execution against us: and it is a great mercy that the fray
comes before the stroke.

His judgment comes out in the own degrees. 1. We sin: 2. And his
justice-inquiring fi^deth our sin worthy of punishment. 3. Our Conscience
convincing us, and justifying him, do apprehend the presage of punishment.

If all these can turn us to Repentance, happy are we, with Ninivie we shall
eschew the stroke it self: we may call fear needless, in respect of the
event which God in mercy withholds but it is not causl^sse, so long as sin
remains. The best way to mitigate our needless fears, is to be at peace
with GOD; and if they come, to reap that good fruit of them, Repentance,
Resolution, and Obedience. Grace so obtained, is well purchased, and the peace
that comes after, is double pleasant, because it is so far contrary to our
deserving and expectation. All things work to the good of these that love God.
Romans 8 28.

86. Thirst of News.
ALl are not borne, or live in Athens, yet we are all sick of the Athenian
disease, in a desire to hear and tell news: And that not in the younger so^t,
who may have a longer time in this life, but even in the aged, who are at the
end of their race: Belike they are providing fresh News to carry with them
out of this life^^ but such wares will give no price th^ae.

What^ business in inquyring for News and in reporting of them? Scarcely are
they heard when they are loathed: They become stale with the first report, and
are old in the very birth, the desire is full of them at their first noise,
and yet desirous of some other: To tell these same news over and over again,
is as tedious as their first report was pleasant. It seems to be a new work
of a new man: To be ever thus busied about news, but it will be found the
work of the old man.

There may be, and is a fruitful disposition about News in the prudent, but
that is so new to these Nouellers, that they know it not: They seek only
News for News, and go n^ further, than to hear, and then to (...) of them,
and that not as they hear them, but as a liberal hoas they send them away
with a new porta^^* They give them a large allowan^^ (...) pass for News,
that is, newly ^^^mented lies.

They may have some ground of truth for their beginning, but by few reports
it is buried in the multitude of new additions. We would think it strange, to
see a Book have as many editions as it finds Readers: And yet News have
that current and changing Novelty, that many reporting the same thing, make it
still new by some alteration or augmenting: Books have that immunitie, because
they are a standing report in print; but News le^t to a vanishing report,
cannot be secured from change.

It is Satan's policy to abuse our ears in ^earing, our tongues in speaking,
(...) our hearts in believing lies, to disabl^ us from the discerning of
Truth. But God has given them to be busied ab^^t Truth.

God has given to his own a souera^^^e remeede of that disease, to be ful^^
possessed ^ith the best News in the worl^, and then to make a spiritual use of
common News. I find these good News: That Christ is come to save sinners:
And that I am one whom he has saved: The testimony of mine adoption; the
Spirit witnessing to my Spirit, that I am one of his Children: The testimony
of my justification, Son be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. The
Seals of mine Election and calling in the ^ruites of the Spirit.

These and the like are excellent news, their matter is good and glorious:
Their delight is great and constant: Though they were heard every hour, yet
they are ever fresh and new to the New man: They fall neither under stalenes in
themselves, nor loathing to me; but their last hearing, delights me as much
as the first hearing.

As for other matters, I rest not on them as News, but observe in them the
providence of God, how he rules the world by ouer-ruling the malice of Satan,
and madness of man, to his own glory, and good of his Saints, to make them
new, and to put in their mouth a new song. To be grieved with Nebemiah, when
we hear of Ierusalems desolation, and rejoice when we hear of her
prosperity, is a mark of Grace in the New man: When all trifling News shall
be ended, God shall put a new Song in his mouth* to praise him eternally. The
Soul enstamped with News of Grace, turns all occurrent News to that better
and biding substance.

87. The comfort of Calumnies.
ACalumnie is the Devils mind in the mouth of Man: and his arrow shot by man's
bow: He lends him his lies and malice and borrows his tongue to utter
them: He has this name from traducing and thrusting through the fame of the
godly. His first and maine care, is by temptation, to destroy their
Conscience, and if he prevail not in this, he turns him to their name,
that he may rent it by Calumnies, whose Conscience he could not defile by
temptation.

This is his policy against Gods dearest Children, they are most hated of him,
who are most beloved of GOD: He cares not to make evil reports of his own,
and counts no great gain to defile the face of a Moore, but all his care is,
to blamish the face, and stenzie the name in whom Gods Grace shines cleerelie:
He knows that treasure in them is given for his hurt: He cannot stay God
from giving it to his beloved, but he turns him to the next, to make it
fruitless to other: He cannot stay a daily and fresh increasing of that
Grace, but he pr^asseth to make it distasteful to man, that so it may be
fruitless.

Surely he loses not all his labor, though he be overcome by the Saints,
whom he calumniateth, yet he overcomes them, who do calumniate them: It is
a fearful thing, to lend to Satan the Heart for devising, the Ear for
hearing, and the Tongue for uttering of Calumnies, and in all, to disgrace the
Grace of GOD in his Children, and make it fruitelesse to themselves. Where
Satan has set his porter of prejudice, though Christ himself were on Earth,
that Soul would take no good of him: It is a deuilish work, to envy the Grace
of GOD, but more, to deny it, and most of all, to disgrace it.

We find herein a great proof, of that particular work of Conscience, in
justifying us: At other times we can content us with common and slender
examining of our selves, but being so falsely misconstrued, we are put to a
second and a stricter trial, which upon the case of our tried innocence,
ends in a notable seal of the holy Spirit: He both approves our first
innocence as good service to God, and our suffering for it, as a just matter of
our gloriation. He who offers up his Soul and body in a Sacrifice to God,
must resolve to be crucified, in his Name daily by Calumnies, and these
daily blows are an argument that his sacrifice is acceptable to GOD, because
Satan rages at him, who serves God vprightlie, he knows that Conscience
within is repleate with God, and his peace, therefore he labors to rent
their Fame without, whose inward peace he cannot trouble. It is better to have
him molesting us without, than possessing us within.

The godly Soul so afflected, goes to God in the bitterness of Spirit,
appealing him as a Judge of their cause, in the Conscience of their innocence:
They commit their cause to him, and prays for pardon to their injurers: Their
innocence is both the occasion and cause of calumnies with the Devil; and the
sovereign remeede of them with God and their own Consciences. Herein they have
a triple conformity with Christ: He was innocent, and yet he was calumniate,
and prayed for his injurers. Better it is to endure the scourge of the tongue,
than want this triple conformity.

Why should we not glory in so clear an Evidence of Gods special love? Satan
takes both the cause of his hatred and the measure of it from the love of God:
He hates them most, whom God loves most: He had more calumnies, and evil
tales against Job, than against many thousands in his time: He was a thorn in
his eye, because he was dearly beloved of God, and acceptable to him.

It is then the glory of the Saints, to be calumniat: Rejoice and be glad,
when men revile you, and speak all manner of evil against you, for my sake
falsely. Mat. 5* 11. It is a token Satan has not prevailed against our
Conscience, but is now in his flight, when he renteth our Name. As strength of
Gods grace, keeps the Soul in temptation, so the Conscience of innocence,
will comfort the heart under Calumnies.

The hail shower of Calumnies, proves on Gods part a special love to us, and
on our part true happiness, in that his love and vigor of his Grace in us,
ouer-comming^ Satan: And on Satan's part, a double malice, for that our double
happiness: And in the calumniator, a double misery; one, in being the Devils
instrument in calumniating the Saints, the other in defrauding themselves of
the fruit of Gods Grace in them whom they traduce.

The best refutation of Calumnies is not by word, but by deed; GOD and our
Conscience sees our innocence, let men see it in our life: When Gods Grace
shines in us as a light before men, then we refute realy our traducers, and
proclaim them liars to the world.

88. Men are blind and quick sighted in their own cause.
EVery man is both blind and sees best in his own cause: He knows the
circumstances of his deeds, but is blind in the question of his right:
Self^-loue makes him ingrosse his person in his deed, and transchange his
deed in his right: And so confounding right and deed in his own person; to
take all as good. The Laws of God and man must give place to his opinion and
humor, they are either close forgotten, or being applied to him, he is made
the rule, and they must suffer such construction as his self-love appoints.

It is kyndlie to an erring mind to nurish the own birth: As it erreth in
directing a course, so in approving of it when it is done. It is no more
fordward to devise it, than pertinacious to defend it: and herewith is joined a
more fearful sin, that as his humor is put in place of Gods Law, so
himself is put in Gods steed. If many courses that seem good, were tried to
this touchstone their appearing equity would be found iniquity, and their
seeming obedience to God, would prove contemptuous rebellion.

Self-love is such an enemy to truth, and righteousness, as they can never
prevail at her bar: She sets us as a center to al her supposed good, and
pleads greatest iniquity in the terms of our wealth: In just reason, sight
should master that blindness, but the tyranny of Self-love blinds our
very light.

The special remeede of this voluntar and wilful erring, is to transfer
both our deeds and rights to the person of some other: We would judge more
vnpartiallie in that case. If we censure them in other, and apply that our
censure to our self, we shall be convicted of many infirmities, which we take
for perfections. If we could draw our cause, deeds, and persons in the light
of Gods countenance, such selfe-deceiuing would not have place in us: Man's
judgment and our own may fail us, but there is no place for deceit, if we
can sincerely process our selves before God, in the person of another. The
strength of Selfe-deceit is in confusion and assuming an other person than our
own, but the remeede of it is in discerning that confusion, and transferring
our person to another.

89. Particulars are mixed with common causes.
I Saw never a common cause without some particulars; all may seem to concur
to choose and use good means to a common end: But if all hearts were
disclosed, the ends might be found almost as many and particular, as the
persons: By-ends are ever set up beside the maine and good end, and for
these, either means diverse, or contrare to the wholesome means, are invented.

If God did not overrule so diverse and co^trare projects, there culd never a
common course be happily prosecute: As day and night make up time, and heat
and moystnesse the life and health of man; so he turns man's cont^are
particulars to his good end: He can suffer them to intend their own ends, and
plotte their own means, but yet wisely in his own time, he wosteth all
their particular and curious spinning in the great web of his providence.

As little Brooks falling from sundry Hills in a great River, keep no
longer their course or channel, but are carried with the River to the Sea: So
men's particular ends and ways are carried within the source of Gods providence
to his own end.

They may fight one against another, but cannot all resist him: His ouer-ruling
power and wisdom, makes good matter for his end out of them all. It is a
wonder to see every man draw the public to his own particular: But more, how
God sustaineth the public, in so manifold and manifest direptions of it: And
most of all, how he turns them to the preservation of the integrity of it It
is a grief indeed to see men spoil the common with their own particulars,
yet shall it be no prejudice to God: Man may propone, but God will dispone:
the more impediments, the greater discovery, of man's folly, and the more matter
for proof of Gods wisdom.

There be some particulars, which agree with the public, and are rather
parts of it, than particulars: They intend a common good, and quite themselves
for sustaining of it, and suffer their own small stream to fall in the
greater River, and so come under Gods blessing to the common.

But destroying particulars fall under his curse, who is the ranuerser of al
crooked ways: They are the ivy or woodbeane, that draws out the juce of the
tree, which it strictly embraces, and turns the waters of the river to
their own ditch: Though they suck the marrow of the public to themselves,
yet God makes it to dry their bones, and not to feed them. Such interuerters
like Pharaohs lean kyne, are as lean after the devouring of the fat kyne,
as before.

It is a safe proceeding, to have our end one with God, and our mids, these
same which he has commanded: If we see men vntimouslie broyle with their
particulars, let us not dispare of Gods end: Whither man prosper, or fail of
his purpose, yet the counsel of God shall stand. Prove. 19. 21.

He has provided great furtherance for his adoes, who refuses particular
ends: GOD who watches over all things for his own purpose, shall bring it to
pass. We may be sure that he will accomplish our desires, when they are
closed in his.

We should not stay on this only consideration, but ascend more high, to
conceive, that Gods mercy from eternal, purposed to determine our will to a
conformity with his, that in time he might bless us in the accomplishment of
our will in his.

90. The Remeede of our Corruption.
^Ho can look in his own heart with the light of God without astonishment?
All our natural powers given at the first for our good, are armed for our
destruction: These who should suit and rest on good, as our Desires, Love,
Hope, and Joy, etc. are set on evil: And they which should fence us from
evil, as Fear, Hatred, Dispare, and Grief, etc. are either id^e from their
work, or adhere to evil: And some monstrous passion seasing it self in
every faculty of our Soul plays the tyrrant by course.

And all these to be directed by an ignorant and erring mind, and sweyed by a
will free indeed, but all its freedom inclining and captiuate to sin. The den
of lions was no more terrible to Daniel, or the fire to the three Children,
than these tyrrannous passions in the heart, are to him that sees and feels
them: What pleasure can we have to dwell among such Vipers, and to be daily
stunge by them. This is our state, so long as we sojourne in Meshech and dwell
in the tents of Kedar. Psalm. 120. 5.

What joy can our hearts possess so long as they boil in these corruptions,
Ambition in one corner, Avarice in another, Lust in a third, and miscontment
distempering all: We can neither cast them out of us, nor separate our selves
from them, except we provide some remeede, we must be burnt by that fire and
rent by these beasts.

If God dwell in our heart, he will quench that fire, and stop the mouths of
these Lions: He turns these powers on their abused passions, in a godly
grief, to be sorrowful for them, and a godly fear to eschew them, and by
their renouatio^ destroys their corruption, and that not for their slaughter
only, but for their burial: A watchful Conscience over their sturring, that
they draw us not to sin, an in-calling on GOD for pardon, and assistance
against their fury, a striving to defraude their desires, and cross them by
their contrares, are good remeedes for our corruption.

When that work of restraining and renewing Grace is constant and sensible in
us, then the jaws of these Lions are broken, and the just cause of our grief
is turned in as just matter of Joy.

I wish curious Spirits who neglect their own calling as too narrow a task
for their large hearts, and busy themselves on the by, to take this cure of
their corruption to heart: Though they had the power of seven Souls in one,
there is here matter of work for all. But in the godly it is a work of Grace
prevailing against Nature, when they so curb their corruptions, that the first
motions of it are choked as the Cockatrick eggs are broken, before they bring
out that serpent.

91. The godly heart has both constant war and certain Peace.
THe heart in which God dwells, has both continual War and Peace, War
with sin both in others and in it self: The world compasses us with evil,
and is set on one of two works, either to infect us, or to injure us. It
allureth us with the own vanity, to be like it, and if that succeed not, it
afflicts us, and God moves us to renounce it, and it cannot digest that
injury, at our hand, it has the own peace in it self, and with its own,
but the godly renouncers of it are noisome to it; it has no rest but in their
separation or destructio^n

As Grace in the godly makes them withdraw from the world, so Satan in the
world makes it to cast them out: God cannot abide the wickedness of it: His
Spirit moves them whom he possesses to please him above all, here are the
grounds of perpetual warring.

As though that were not enough, our own corruption within molesteth us, we
may shune the wickedness of men, but we are never out of the grippes of our
own corruption, and that as an adversary, and on the worlds part. We are no
more bitterly assaulted of the world, than checked and vexed by our own
corruption, for not following the world; the outward world has the own inward
extract in us working us to a conformity to the own pattern.

But all this war troubles not our Peace: To be so exercised is a just
matter of peace unspeakable: God by his Grace guardeth us from the worlds sin,
and by his providence secureth us from their injury: And that same grace that
makes us overcome the world, defeateth also our corruption: When the inward
evil is subdued, the outward has no strength against us. The sense and
conscience of this batteling, is our Peace.

It is better to endure the worlds violence, in wronging us, than to be like
them in sin: And better to find our corruption in a daily stur, than in a
false calmnesse. God is good to his own, who by such dealing both makes them
daily to war, and yet keep a solid Peace.

There can be no greater joy to the godly, than to find outward and inward
corruption ready to destroy them, and God delivering them from both. This is
the shame of the outward, and destruction of the inward corruption: The glory
of God in both these works, and our security in all. The world thinks that
they undo the godly by trouble, but they work them to their grace: Their
troubles chase them to God, and God embraces them lovingly who are troubled
for his cause: When Babes are affraied, they cast themselves in the Arms and
bosom of their mother. Both these troubles are fortold, and the blessing is
promised: As we feel the one, we shall find the other: In the world ye
shall have trouble, but in me ye shall have peace, be of good comfort, for I
have overcome the world. Ioh. 16. 33.

92. Religious Religion.
IT is good to profess true Religion, and to practice the exercise of it, but
the most part go no further, and so are void of Religion it self; and the
fruits of it: To stand on the outward work of praying, preaching, praising,
etc. is to offer the carcass of our service to God. To worship God only with
our body, is an irreligious worship; our body may be busy, but they will
never fasten upon God in such a superficial work: He is a Spirit, and will
be worshipped in Spirit, else none union with him.

When he sends out his Virtue to our Souls, and our Souls do meet him
answerablie, that is inward Religion, and our binding to him; he is most true,
we trust in him; He is most gracious, good and merciful, we love him
withal our heart: He is most powerful, we fear to offend him, and confide
in his protection: He is most wise, we quite our own will, and reverence
him: He is most holy, we adore, admire, and imitate his holiness.

It is a mocking of God (if he could be mocked) to profess an union with
him, and yet be loose from him. This Union is the end, and Religion the way to
it: The end of Gods infusing of saving Grace in us, is to bring us to him, and
bind us to him.

But he is pitifully selfe-deceiued, who contenteth himself with a profession
of Religion, and neither knows nor cares for this Union: He who is not
fastened to God in this life, shall have no fellowshippe with him hereafter.
It is a religious Religion, when we become one Spirit with God in Christ.

These and other points make up our inward Religion: God revealing himself in
his divine properties, our Souls affecting and adhering to him in their
answerable powers; this tyeth us not only for the space we are in the work
of his worship, but by death constantly in us: The work of Preaching, or
Praying, or Praising, do end in their time, but these inward ba^ds are never
loosed: This inward Religion does both set us on work, and quickneth in us
the outward exercise of it.

There is more fruit of one hours service in such a disposition, than in
years business without it. He who keeps his heart under this religious
disposition, lacks never a manifest object to worship, nor a sacrifice to
offer. He is sensible of God, and the very moving of his Soul in the
Conscience and sense of these bands, is a sacrifice most acceptable to God, and
profitable to himself.

The fleshly minded do wonder at the constant labor of the godly in Gods
worship, but if they knew these religious bands, they would not wonder.
Natural actions often repeated bring habits, and these become another Nature:
Shall not the work of Grace, which has both infused and acquired habits, turn
in a constant disposition.

This is not obtained in our beginning of Christianity, but after long labors
in the Lord. The daily tasting of his good nesse, brings our hearts to such
a temper, that religious disposition turns to be our element for place, and
our diet for refreshment: It is our meat and drink to converse with God, and
do his will. When God brings us to this degree of continual minding, loving
and delighting in him, and to the sense of these religious bonds with him, then
our divorce with the world, and marriage with God, are near their perfection.

93. Predominant vice and virtue.
COrruption is spread over the whole man, and all in man; there is neither part
nor power of Soul or Body, which is not defiled therewith: According to the
several powers it has names: Original sin goes under one name, yet has
many branches: In one power it is Avarice, in another Lechery, in a third
Ambition: All these sinful powers though they both incline to, and urge their
own work, yet have they a predominant among them; a master vice, or captain
sin, which commands both the man and all other vices in him: It is evil in
it self and worst in the kind.

Here is a mass of wonders; one that so many evil things in man can have
their order and respect to other, as a Captain among Pirates by Sea, or
Brigants by Land: Next, that all of them can submit themselves and suffer the
predominant to strengthen it self, by their defrauding: Pride in the wretch
will quite honor to purchase gain, and avarice in the proud man will quite
gain to purchase honor: Thirdly that it can change with time and age, so
uncleanness in Youth, Pride in midde Age, and Avarice reigns in old age.
And most of all that it remains in the godly: Nature neither knows nor
admits this, that two contrars shall dwell at once in their greatest degree,
and predominion in one power of the Soul.

This is Satan's chief fortification against God and his Grace in us: His
Posterne door whereby he enters our Soul at his pleasure: The chain
whereby he both binds and leads us in captivity: And the archetratour of
our Soul yielding to his temptations.

It is good, both to know it, and find remeede: Natural complexion points at
it, what ever excels in our temperature, is the ordinary seat of it, but
there are more infalible signs to find it out. 1. Frequencie of Satan's
temptations, because he ass^ulteth us oftenest in our weakest part, and that
our strongest corruption, is our greatest weakness. 2. The multitude of our
thoughts, for what is most in the heart, is most in the thought. 3. The end of
our imaginations: Where ever they soar, it is sure, that as a weary bird
after long fleeing, they light on our predominant.

But the remeed of it is most necessar: 1. To watch over all the motions of it,
with a wake-ryfe Conscience. 2. To exercise our self daily under contrare
virtue. 3. To pray to God daily for his mortifying Grace against tha
corruption, that thereby we may overcome that master sin.

It grieueth God to see us pestered by Satan in our own corruption: He has
provided saving remeede for his own, and erected a counter-sconse against
Satan; and placed our predominant Grace in the seat of our predominant sin:
Grace in it self every way is above sin; it is of a divine Nature; but sin
is deuilish: Grace infused, is stronger than corruption, and the New Man
stronger than the Old; but the principal Spirit dwelling in us, is above all:
The meanest grace of God in his hand, is stronger than our predominant vice.

This profane Age has multiplied predominants: Senslesnesse domineth in the
fleshly men: They know not their predominant in the kind, in the change, nor
in the degree. And it is a predomining Grace, to know the sorts, changes, and
degrees of their vices; and oppose them by the contrare good, and virtue: It is
indeed a wonderful senslesnesse, that lets men not feel so many tyrants
in them: He is a Slave of slaves, who has both losed his liberty, and the
feeling of that tyranny. But he is Gods freeman that remarketh all their
changes, and labors for the dominion of Grace in himself: Both the Son
and holy Spirit have made that man free.

This is a comfortable experience of the Saints, to find their predominant sin
subdued, that tyrant that gave them Laws, to take Laws and admit the own
defrauding: This is an happy change when grace ouerruleth corruption, and Gods
spirit subdueth Satan in us. There is no condemnation to them that are in
Jesus Christ, for the Law of the Spirit of Life in Jesus Christ, has delivered
me from the Law of sin and of death. Romans 1. 2.

94. Fantasies Tyranny, and Remeede.
MAny count it a foul aspersion, to be called Fantastic; but nothing to be
so indeed: For what is man, but a fountain of fancies, intending, affecting,
desiring, apprehending, absurdittes, impossibilities, impieties. We imagine
that which was never, can never, nor will never be: Building and casting down,
forming, and reforming, and in all, a strong apprehension of great wisdom.

It is hard to determine whither the imagination be more free to fancy folly,
or we more confident of the verity of it.

As Boys with their breath, raise bells out of a little water, and then do
pursue them in the wind: Either they do not at all catch them or if they do,
they are nothing in their hand: So is all fansied happiness, it is the work
of an humorous imagination: And either never attained, or if it be, there is
more vanity in the obtaining, than in the want of it.

We come from imagination of our desires to a possibility, and from a
possibility to a true existing, what we earnestly desire, we think it
possible, and what we think possible, be time we take it as done indeed: So
great is the power of fancy, that though it cannot produce the things
themselves, yet it can force us to think that they are produced: The things
themselves work no stronger affection, than this fansied apprehension does.

It is a mould that can form many strange fashions, and as other things are
formed in it, so are we our selves: Though it be in us a restless power, yet
we are as oft-ten framed in it, as we grant it liberty to plat-forme and
fashion our lot.

If guiltiness were not joined with the work of it, it were a matter of sport
to see how busy it is to weary it self and us also: And yet it were
something tolerable if it took this liberty in trifles, but it ascends even
unto God, and our lot in him: It presumes both to appoint a course to
providence, and to judge, and sentence what Providence has done. It carueth
for us, according as it conceateth our worth, and gives a reason to us how to
count of things, as it counts.

We dream in our sleep, and roue in our Fevers, but our fancies waking, are
worse than both: For we count our dreaming and rouing to be such, but we
count our fancies to be wisdom: How many are dreaming and rouing all their
days, and yet neither waken of their dreams, nor cool of their Fever, till
death or some calamity come.

Fantasies have no fixed ends to bound them: Therefore they run out as water
on plain ground, or air in an open field. They are extrauagant indeed, and
the inter-course between a vain mind and Nothing. And what soliditie can
there be in a course, between such two terms, as Vanity and Nullitie? If we
could hold our Spirits directly on God, and hem in all their thoughts within
the compass of his will and providence, we would relieve our selves both of
wearisome labor, and disappointment following.

They spend our spirit more than serious thoughts, and their end is at the
best, repentance of that fruitless labor.

They are indeed but fansied errors, yet they bring a real hurt. They bereave
us of the use and comfort of our present lotte upon the imagination of a
better, and so at once work a double discontent: One, present in not resting
on our present Lotte: Another to come, in counting our Lotte, as a loss in
respect of that other Lotte which we fansied to our self: He who takes
liberty to desire much, and then deuoureth that large desire, by as large an
hope, will never rest content with his present Lotte, though it were too good
for him.

He has escaped the tyranny of fancy, who is full of Truth and Humility.
He seeks nothing but true good, and has drawn the portrate of true
happiness in God, that his fantasies can no more abuse him.

His mind cannot fancy so much seeming or conceated good, as he finds true
good in himself already, by the Grace of GOD: To be a Child of GOD, an
heir of Heaven, and a fellow-heire with Christ, is more than all the forged
birth of out-racked fancies of earthly things.

They may break in, and scanne some odd excellencies for him, but at once he
dasheth out these lines: He rests so on God, and the work of his Spirit
that fantasies are choked in their beginning.

Whom have I in Heaven but Thee, and and on Earth I have desired none with
Thee. Psalm. 73.

95. The Christians refuge.
We live in a dangerous time; the full measure of former sins, and the
rypenesse of Gods wrath makes every hour a time for calamities. Craft and
policy in Satan, wickedness in the world, and nothing in us but weakness
to resist them, drives us all to a necessity of refuge.

The most part put the evil day far from them, and are surprysed by it, they
are nearest to it, who put it farrest away. Other provide for it, but do it
amiss: They run to the bruised reed of Egypt, and not to the Lord of Hosts.

It is indeed a tempting of God, to neglect lawful means, but it is a
forsaking of him to trust in them. There is no sure refuge in the day of
trouble, but under the shadow of the Almighty. Psalm. 91. 1.

Many seek surety for their goods and life, but neglect their Soul. If the
Soul be well secured, all the rest shall be disponed off by a merciful
providence: It is foolishness to guard them, and leave the heart guardlesse,
if it be chocked with fears, what comfort have we in the saftie of these
things? We will have no comfort, but rather grief of them under such
astonishment: The more the heart go out to outward things, it is drawn the
more from it self, and from God, and more guardlesse, than if it had no guard
at all.

As necessities try our disposition, so danger discovers our refuge, because
we are ready to deceive our selves with conceate of confidence in God alone,
Therefore, GOD sends oft-times trouble to try our hearts. Rumors of trouble
are as the Hunters horn, and the trouble it self as the noise of Dogs in the
Forest. What ever we run to in our danger, that is our refuge: The Soul
that has God for a refuge, runs the first way to him, and abides in him.

This is our best at all times, to dwell in God and find him dwelling in us:
If we be in his secret, we shall be secured, he shall deliver us from
outward troubles, and inward fears. God is our guard, and the peace of a good
Conscience is our lurking under his shadow. Though all turn vp-side down,
Ps. 46. 2. yet he will give rest to his beloved Ps. 127. 2. I know whom I have
believed, and am persuaded that he will deliver that to me which I have
committed to him. 2. Tim. 1. He is a faithful dispositar, and will restore it
better than it was committed, we committed to him a frail and a mortal body,
and an infirm Spirit, but he shall render it to us a perfect and glorious
Soul and body.

96. Mankinds threefold degree.
MAnkind is one spece of Creature, but Gods wisdom has disposed them with
three considerable degrees, The first in natural gifts and abilities, and so
every man has his own natural and humane privileges; as gifts of body, of
mind, and of estate. The second is civil, and so every man has his particular
calling: Some are as the Head in this Body, as Kings: And other as the Breast;
some as the Hand and Feet of this great Body. The third is spiritual,
whereby man is the mystical Body of Christ, wherein some are as the eyes
directing, as Pastors: Some the other parts of this Body according to their
spiritual gifts.

It is both profitable and comfortable to take up this triple respect: Every
man has some place in every of them: God has so disposed, that diversities of
gifts, callings, and graces, serve all to make up a comely proportion, and so
a beauty in mankind in every respect, all natural gifts, though diverse in
kinds and degree make up a comely beauty in the first respect: All callings
from the King to the grinder at the Mill, have in their variety and
diversity, a comely civil beauty, every one filling his own place, and
looking to other with the respects both of necessity and help: As the meanest
calling has need of the greater, so it helps it again in some necessity:
And all spiritual gifts in Christ make up the heavenly proportion of Christ's
mystical Body.

Though mankind be the subject of this wise ranking, yet the most part of men
consider it not: They see no more in man, than Soul and a Body, and outward
respects in prosperity or adversity. Their sight is so short, that they
neither see these diverse degrees, nor the Harmony which is among them all:
Every one answering another, and all making up that beauty: Their thoughts
herein are gross and confused, and their carriage is all for confusion: They
disturb the order established of God, and deface the beauty that comes of
it: And so defraude other and themselves of that fruit that God offers in
the wise ranking of mankind.

But there is some in-equalitie in them, for natural gifts are sufficient
Furniture for the civil callinges, but both the natural and civil gifts do
not so rule the spiritual calling: God in things natural has a more press
course, to lay callinges on men, as they are naturally gifted: But in
Christianity his work is more free, therein both the gift and their place in
Christ go together, and they have no ground nor reason from man, but only
Gods most free disposing: Consider your calling, not many mighty, not many
noble according to the flesh are called. 1. Cor. 1.

The best fruit of this consideration is, to know our place in all these
three respects, and to use it to the good of mankind: To be thankful to God,
who has so many ways blessed us, and so we shall be most respective to our
self, and others in all these respects. As this third is more excellent than
the other two, so is it the right disposer of them, God craves of these lower
respects, that all return to him, but the most part stick on themselves, and
forget God: But this is the blessing of Christianity, that it makes us
worthily to carry our self both in our natural and civil place in mankind.

67. Man's threefold Perfection.
GOD has disgested mankind in three several ranks, but therewith he gives
three sorts of Perfection indifferently to all ranks: And what ever be our
place in nature, in civility, and Christianity, yet these attend them. The
first is natural, and that is Reason, which perfecteth man as man: The second
acquired, and is Learning, a perfection to Reason, and a lifting up of man
above himself: The third is divine, and that is the Grace of Christ, and true
sanctification, the perfection of both these Perfections.

Reason is a sort of ground to the other two; a solid wit is a good substance
both for Learning and Grace: Reason enableth the Soul fundamentallie, making
it capable of good: Learning enableth it accessorielie and artificially; what
ever be our natural gifts, or civil calling, we are the more enabled for
them by Learning, so a King governs more wisely, the Pastor teaches the
word of God more skilfullie, the Lawer pleads more pertinently: And the
meanest Callings are done more dexterouslie by Learning.

But Grace enableth us in both, the other with a transcendent perfection; the
former two may be in Reprobates, and though good in themselves yet hurtful to
the possessour, and his neighbor: Great wit without Learning, is a good knife,
without a whetstone, and learning without solid judgment, is as the edge of
glass, it is sharp but in brittle mettell; and wit, and Learning without
Grace, are a body without a Soul, a carcass of perfection, and a sharp sword
in the hand of a mad man. They serve to devise and defend evil, and so to
destroy the possessors.

Grace is merely transcendent among the blessings of God, it translateth from
Nature, and makes us partakers of the Divine Nature. 2. Pet. 1. Reason does
not so far exalt man above beasts, or letters the learned above the
unlearned, as Grace does the sanctified man above them both: These other
differences may be counted, but this of Grace is as far above them, as
heaven above the earth.

Happy is the man whom God has blessed with sound Understanding, light of
Learning; and life of Grace: All these three Perfections do meet together,
and rest in him, to his compleete perfection.

All these deserve great respect, but not all alike: And there is a great
mistaking of many herein, Grace is incomparably the most excellent, and most
to be sought, yet least respected of many. It is counted a common and base
thing, but the other are admired for their supposed excellency, yea, riches,
honor and the baggage of the world, are counted more excellent, and sought
more than they all: The world ever loves that which is like it self, and
misliketh true Grace.

But he who has the Grace of GOD, surpasses the Wretch, the Ambitious, and
the accomplished man in Nature and Art: And is exalted to a degree of Angelike
perfection. The first two may be in old Adams corruption, but the third is
our partaking of the second Adam.

98. Providence is particular to the Saints.
ALl things are subject to Providence, and this is the godly man's privilege,
that he is both sensible and conscious of it: Grace in him makes these
fruitful Observations, and then disposes him with Love, and dependence on
God, who sweyeth it so sweetly to his good.

Many blessings it brings to us, we know not how: Many are our seen dangers,
and our dangers unseen by many millions exceed them, but God by his
merciful Providence delivers us out of them all.

Though we see not Satan, yet at every moment he would swallow us up, if God
defended us not: He either withholds occasions of evil that they come not,
or if they come, he restrains their work, that they hurt us not. It is
impossible to see all the goodness of his Providence to us, but he acquainteth
us with some of them, that we may see his goodness in the rest.

The particular respect of Providence to the godly may be seen in two
special things: In the furthering of our designs, and in the crossing of
them: for the furtherance, how does God tell us that he watches for us? We
have possibly some business in hand, and have necessity of some persons, and
occasions, and circumstances, and with all we are perplexed, how these things
shall be brought together: God brings them to our hand, we go out full of
desires, and as full of solicitude how to satisfy them. And he makes men,
time, and occasion to tryst so together, that our desires are satisfies, and
our expectation overcome.

Oft-times at the going out of our doors, we encounter with men, and
occasion, longed for and desired, that our very imaginations could not devise
better opportunity for our adoes. This comes neither of our desert nor our
disposing, but of Gods mercy wy^ding and turning all about to their good, who
depend on him. It is his will who rules the world, and has the ways of all
creatures in his hand, to dispose times, ways, and all, so as may best fit
their desires who are at peace with him.

The crossing of our designs have no less proof of his Fatherly care, how
often do we fret in our self, and chyde men for their neglects, that bring
disappointment to our designs, and yet if we can have patience for a time,
we shall find that disappointment to our greater contentment: He blesses us
in a means and way known to himself seuenfold more, than if our first desire
had been accomplished: No, he turns our chyding off men upon our self and
our miscontentment for the first disappointment, in a thanksgiving that we
were disappointed: If we could at such crossings rest on God, and persuade us,
it is for a better in that same point wherein we are crossed, we should find
in end our expectation were the work of his own Grace.

Scarcely shall a day go over without some occasion of this Observation: If
we mark it not, we are ungrate to so particular and gracious Providence: If
we mark it aright, as furtherences, shall give us contentment so these
disappointments shall give us patience, till a double contentment come.

99. The sight of a new and a better World in this old bad one.
^EE are called unto, and do profess a Pilgramage in this world, but how few
do either understand or practice it? Some profess a contempt of it, and yet
oft-times are courting its applause by that contempt.

He is as well a slave of the world, who thirsts her applause, as he who
courteth her vanities, and that far more; because her applause is her vainest
vanities: And others possibly shift themselves both of her vanity and love,
and yet are not fastened on a better. He is foolish who loses one thing, and
finds not another.

But the truly godly man, sees and follows a better world in this wicked
one, we have in this visible world, an Heaven, and Stars, Earth, Air, and
Creatures for our temporal use: But the spiritual eye takes up an higher
one: He sees GOD for his Sun, and from his Face takes his Light, from his
Love his Warmenesse, from his Presence his Seasons: It is light and Day, when
he shyneth on our Soul in the Face of Christ: It is Night and horrible
darkness when he hydeth his Face. The course of his times, run not as in the
world: The heavenly Day may fall at the midst of the natural night, and
heavenly Summer and Harvest in the midst of the natural winter. Even at
midnight it is midday, in that Soul where God makes our reins to teach us
knowledge.

All Seasons are numbered by his F^ce allcane^lie: The earth of this world, is
the Rock of Syon, Jesus Christ. No stabilitie or rest to the Soul, but in
him: The Air is the sense of his Favor and the comfortable Creatures are his
Saints, who walk with him in righteousness and holiness.

This heavenly world is better, than that visible one, and will remain when
the other is destroyed. It is a strange conceate in them, who by an odd
Prospect sees an earth, and cities, and men in the Moon: That fiction and
fancy is verified in this Truth: The spiritual man sees this heavenly world
in the temporal one.

And with that same light, he sees an hellish world in this visible one: For
what is Satan abusing the world, and leading it in evil? but erecting of a
world of his own, in the defacing of this created world.

These are solid grounds, to make us strangers on earth, and Burgesses in
Heaven, when we take up these worlds distinctlie: And the more cleerelie we
see them, there will be less difficulty to forsake the evil, and ^eeke the
good one: Let the men of this world reckon their Seasons, Times, and Occasions
by this world that they see: Our reckoning is better and surer by that
supernatural one. They change their Almanackes from time to times: But our Sun
of Righteousness shall distinguish our Seasons, and shine upon us both in this
life and in Heaven.

This sight is the work of a new light and is to be found only in the new man
whom God has ordained for the new Heaven and for the new Earth: His Calender
is neither directed by Stars in heaven, nor Tides in the Sea, nor Horologes
on the Earth: His Sun and stars is Gods Face, his Tides are the ebbing and
flowing of the influences of Grace: And his Horologe the secret, yet the strong
motions of Gods Spirit, showing the increase of Grace in the own periods,
though the promouing of it be oft-ten hid from us.

This Earth is a sort of mids between Heaven and Hell, and yet both of them
have their image and beginning in it: We are called to forsake the evil, and
seek the good, and what worse than Satan, and sin^e, and the wicked? And what
better than GOD, his Grace, and his Saints,? If we see these distinctlie, we
shall be the more enabled to move our self from the evil to the good. This
sight is the work of Grace, but the natural man takes all confusedly, he
neither sees nor seeks better than the world: And if he make any
distinction, it is false, he forsakes good as an evil, and cleeueth to evil
as his happiness.

100* God is the dwelling place of the godly Soul.
Every Creature has the own element and rest, for dwelling security, and
delight; therein they are both frequentlie, and pleasantly: It is a means to
try our state by our resort and rest: The Worldling is ever in the world; there
is no difference between him and the Earth, but that the one lives, and the
other does not; and this that lives is worse than the other, because he
lives in sin.

The godly Soul rests on God* in all business it looks to him, and all
the thoughts of it end in him; to him above all it returns, and rests
pleasantly in him, and from him it can not be rent: All being and business
out of him, is a vexation, and our greatest labor is sweet by this only,
that it goes to him, and is acceptable to him.

God dwells in that Soul that cannot rest but in him; he has loved it from
eternal, and called it in time to himself, that is so taken with him and his
delights: No rendeuous is so known to any Creature, and used of it, as God is
to that Soul that rests in him.

A proof of this rest, is God resting in us: In all the world he found not
rest but in man: When he created the Heaven and the Earth, all Beasts and
Fowls, he rested not til he created man, his Benjamin, his last Creature in
work, but his first in affection, there he rested as in the end of his
Creation.

His delight is to dwell with men, and among men with the godly, for them
only of all mankind has he assumed to union in Christ. If we find him dwell
in us, then surely we dwell in him, and we may easily know if Christ dwell in
us, except we be Reprobats. 2. Cor. 5.

There is great wisdom in choosing the best Lodging: We lodge now
conveniently in our Body, but at Death it will cast us out, and the world
our pleasant House will decay: We rest now in our contentmentes, but must
flitte from them.

But God can neither decay nor cast us out, and at Death we shall still abide
in him: We need not then flitte from him, but ascend, and be more joined to
him: We cannot have Tabernacles here, nor abide, no, not in the beginnings
and growth of Grace, which is now our contentment, but shall be received, and
bide in everlasting Mansions that are in him.

Man naturally inclines to two things, his beginning and end: His beginning
recalleth him by right of his Original: The fishes will visit the place of
their spawning yeerelie: And men of an hurt health, return to their native
soil; as the air which they took in at their birth, gave them the first
outward matter of their natural Spirits, so the use of it may bring them back
again to their first integrity: The end calls us to it, by right of
perfection: the pryse of the runner, and the house of the Traveler are
earnestly desired. So is it to the godly: Our beginning in Grace, is in God:
The River of living waters flow out from the Sanctuary, from under the Throne
of GOD, and the Lamb.

The Grace of election has no latter beginning than eternity, nor lower
descent than heaven, and turns us up to it again: The waters of life which
Christ gives us, shall be a fountain in our belly springing up to life
eternal. How can it in our belly spring up to life eternal? but because it
lifts our hearts to GOD in Heaven.

The Soul which so adhereth to God, is more in him, than in the body, which it
quickneth: both because it goes gladly out of it self, to be all in him;
and next, because it cannot dwell in it self, but because of him; it can
better dwell among Monsters in the desert, that in it self without him: And
thirdly, because when it is lost in sin and security, it seeks and
finds it self more in him, than in it self: When we may say to him, O thou
whom my Soul loves! All these sorts and degrees of union with him are found.

The bosom of the mother is a kindly rest to the Babe, both for sleep in
health, and recovery in sweruing; that natural heat wherein it was formed,
does kindly cherish that life, that proceeds of it: When we lie always in
the bosom of God, and are warmed by the sense of that saving love in Christ,
we are both sensible of the virtue of our beginning, and of the first fruits
of our end.

The Needle of the Dyall stands not but toward the Pole, so does the godly
Soul to God. If the secret virtue of a small stone can so move iron, shall not
the Rock of Syon, Christ Jesus, the Miracle of love, draw our tender loving
hearts unto him. How securlie shall we contemn all other things, and rest
sweetly content in him, under the sense of this his drawing and uniting
virtue, expecting that happiness, which his saving Love procures to his
Beloved: Return now, O my Soul to thy Rest, and abide in it, for GOD has
been, and will be for ever beneficial unto thee. Psalm. 116. 7. AMEN.

FINIS.
A RESOLVTION FOR DEATH, written under the sentence of Death, in the time of a
painful Disease.

And now published for their comfort who study to approve themselves to God:

And to assure all that live the life of the Righteous, that they shall die the
death of the Righteous.

By the same Author. M. W. S.

I desire to be dissolved, and to be with CHRIST. Philipp. 1. 23. EDINBVRGH,
Printed by the Heirs of Andro Heart. Anno Domini. 1628.

Philipp. 1. 21. Christ is to me both in Death and in Life advantage. Luke 2.
29. 30. Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, according to thy
Word. For mine eyes has seen thy Salvation. 1. Cor. 15. 55. 56. 57. O Death,
where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy Victory? The sting of Death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be to God, which gives us
the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. A Table of the following Treatise.
THe proposition of the Resolution. Number. 1. The first ground from present
misery. 2. The misery of our Body. 3. The misery of the Soul. 4. The
misery of our Lot. 5. The second ground from our Happiness. 6. The
happiness of our Soul. 7. The happiness of our Body. 8. The happiness of
our Lotte. 9. The third ground from Gods work in us concerning our misery and
happiness. 10. Sense of misery in the Body. 11. Sense of misery in the
Soul. 12. Sense of misery in our Lotte. 13. Sense of Glory in Heaven. 14.
Resolution it self. 15. The godly man dies not. 16. But ouercometh Death in
Christ. 17. He preuenteth Death in his Life. 18. He preueneth his Burial in
Life. 19. Four joyful solemnities. 20. Joy at Birth. 21. Joy at Marriage. 22.
Joy at Triumph. 23. Joy at Coronation. 24. They are all at the death of the
Godly. 25. Incourageme^ts against Death from them. 26. The noise at Death. 27.
Fearful cries to the wicked. 28. Comfortable cries to the godly, 29. A
glorious change at Death. 30. Many unions with the Body 31 Necessity of
separation. 32 Documents of the sentence of Death. 33. 1. Mortality of the
Body. 34. 2. Immortality of the Soul. 35. 3. Gods love saving us from Hell.
36. 4. That his love stands with affliction. 37. Experience of Death. 38.
Eight comfor^able contraries in Death. 39, The Wicked tremble at it. 40. But
the godly rejoice. 41. Incertaintie at Death is fearful 42. Certainty is
comfortable. 43. It is obtained by Faith. 44. By Prayer. 45. And conuersing
daily with God. 46. Our light clearer in Death than in Life 47. Acquaintance
with Death. 48. Sentence of Death. 49. Lawful desires of Life. 50. Hope of
glorious Resurrection. 51. Hope of eternal Glory. 52, Hope of the Lords Rest.
53. Our Rights to that Rest. 54, A Catalogue of GODS special blessings to
strengthen these our hopes. 55. The fearful Death of the Wicked 56. The
joyful Death of the Godly. 57. The remainders of fear in the best men. 58.
But they are soon overcome. 59. The godly man's Testament. 60. A Prayer for an
happy Death. 61. And for the sight of Christ at Death. 62. Confidence to
obtain them both. 63. And glory thereafter. 64. The last and greatest desire.
65. And last, an eternal delight of the godly Soul. 66.
Revel. 14. 13. Blessed are the Dead which die in the LORD, for they rest from
their labors, and their works follows them. A RESOLVTION FOR DEATH, written
under the sentence of Death, in the time of a painful Disease. December. 1627.
And now published for their comfort who study to approve themselves to God:
Adam that has subjected me to mortality, and come to the privilege of Grace
in Christ, which has delivered me from the curse of it; I say not I make me
for Death, because I must die, but because I would die: Long have I thought on
it, and earnestly longed for it; if I stagger and fear at his reproach, my
desire has either been foolish, or my Spirit is faint.

The grounds of my desire are 1. Present misery.

Frail is this lump that has an hourelie necessity of so frail things, and
the necessity so great, that the pain of it is intolerable, and the easing of
it by means convenient is wearisome, and that ease beginning with ending, and
ending in the beginning: Scarcely is it refreshed, when it hungreth and
wearieth again.

One necessity sends it to another, and the satisfying of one brings on
another, and that same that was now eased, returns shortly. If I satisfy
Hunger and Thirst. Drowsinesse calls for Sleep; if I refresh it by Sleep,
Nakedness must be covered, and scarce have I covered Nakedness, when new
Hunger calls for Refreshment, and Refreshment sends me to Sleep again.

Weak is that Life, that needs so weak means, Clay laid to Clay, Dust
unto Dust, and the shadow of Death a refreshment of wearines. Our nourishment
is but dust, and our sleep an image of Death, and Death in end must dissolve
that dust that stands upon so base pillars, and is so often wrapped up in the
image of it.

Though the first work of our nourishment, be to susteene the body in life,
yet in a second work it furnishes matter of diseases, and so of Death: And
though our Sleep in it self refresh us, yet it is a presage and an earnest of
a longer sleep in Death.

If Sickness fasten on the Body, for remeede thereof, I take on another
disease: Medicine is indeed a gift of God, a necessity to Nature, an enemy
to the corruption of it, and ha^sh and unpleasant to the integrity of it; yet
when I render my self to it, I embrace a lesser Death for avoiding a greater:
One dolor is a remeede to another dolor. And all is but an off-putting for a
time. Mortality is so seized in the body that our life is stolen through
innumerable diseases and deaths, and in end a yielding to Death. This is the
misery of a mortal body in the circle of daily and unavoidable necessities,
and at last in despite of all their supplies a necessity of Death.

in the matter of a worse: The natural powers in their work do trouble it,
the Imagination runs out in phansies, the Mind in inquiring is vexed and
tortured by scruples: The Will in inclyning, declining, and suspending, is not
so much delighted with good, as crossed with the evil object, and that work of
it is a toil to it self, and to us: The Affections set contrare, Fear,
Sorrow, Hatred, tormenting, us; and Hope, Joy, and Love, busying us more in
their object suspended, removed, hurt, or destroyed, than they do in the
enjoying of it: Never any of these sweet affections in us, alone but their
co^trare is fixed on them, while we are in hope or joye, and enjoying of God,
we fear to lose that joye, and sorrow comes in with that fear.

But the torment of temptation is intolerable, that Satan does so far prevail
in us as to stir up our inbred cor^uptio^, and that our corruption does yield
to him, and we our selves in a perpetual trouble either watching over
temptions that they surprise us not, or resisting them when they are moved, or
repenting for them, when they have prevailed to our insnaring. And the
Conscience above all set on a continual work, to direct us aright in all
our ways, to try our obedience to her direction, and if we have failed to
torment us in our arriegning before Gods Tribunal, and the fear and sense of
his wrath to come.

How can I either delight to dwell in this Body, or carry about so grievous a
burden as this? A vile prison, an hole of Serpents, and Co^katrices: A body of
earth, and a body of sin, and death in it, a mass of corruption, ever
stirred of Satan, and breaking out of it self: Here is a burden
insupportable, a labor without end. The sense of it self is enough to the
sensible Soul, to mourn for abiding in it, and to cry, VVoe is me that I
abide so long in Mesech, or dwell in the tents of Kedar, And miserable man that
I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Death.

It is impossible that perfect happiness can lodge in so miserable a creature:
It craves a Soul and body perfect and free of all evil, therefore I must
be dissolved ere I be perfected, the Soul purified in God from all
sinfulness, and the body refined in the earth from all frailty; and so the
whole man freed of all misery: Though fleshly Self-love sometimes blind me,
to desire to abide in this body, yet a bett^r love of my self in GOD, bids
me, desire to be dissolved, that I may be perfected. The greater light, the
greater liberty in visiting these Mansions in Heaven and adoring my God, who
has prepared them for me: The greater liberty, the gearter desire to be out
of this body, wherein so long as I dwell* I am absent from God, and these
Mansions where I long to enjoy him: This is the misery of a sinful Soul.

is under continual changes. Our Husband and Wife, Parents and Children,
Friends and Familiars, are subject to Sickness and Death: Our name is subject
to Infamy and Calumnies: Our goods laid open to man's deceit or violence, and
to Gods most free and just Providence. They are either with holden from us, or
taken from us, or if they remain with us, they decay. So we are either
chastened with a simple want of them, or a loss, or a change.

Our Lotte in it self, is a blessing of God, but this change and decay is a
matter of grief and fear: As though God did augment our Lot for this end, to
augment the mark for his Arrows, and the matter of our grief.

There is nothing whereof we can say, that either we shall have it long, or
in that same state wherein it is now. It is either subject to want in measure,
or change in standing: There is none hour, wherein we are not either under a
sorrowful remembrance of bygone Calamities, or under sense of some present; or
under a fearful foresight of Calamities to come. This is the misery of a
changeable Lotte.

All these miseries God has laid upon man, to humble him thereby, Ecclesi. 1.
13. and to make him weary of this present life. For man that is borne of a
woman is of a short continuance, and full of trouble. Job. 14. 1. He is borne
to trouble, as sparks flee upward. Job. 5. 7. If we found full and constant
prosperity here, we would desire to remain in this life. There is neither
necessity nor desire of a better life in them who find all things according to
their heart in this life: But God has so tempered the Cup to his dearest
Children, that it has more gall and worme-wood than honey, and more sour than
sweet.

Our life is short in it self, and made shorter by grievous Calamities: If we
count only that time for our life, wherein we have been free of Fear, of
Sense, or memory of evil, it will be shorter than the natural course of
life, if all be well examined; scarcely shall the best living find so many
peaceable hours, as his natural life has days.

God knows that naturally we are given to nest in the world as birds: To
root in it as Trees, and sit fast in it as Rocks. Therefore he changes our
Lotte, and crosses our contentment, that he may both loose us and keep us
loose from the Earth.



The Soul shall see God immediately, and perfectly, and be filled with love
and heavenly affection, with that sight, it shall enjoy God, and rejoice in
that perfect enjoying, and rest as in the desired end in a a glorious Peace.
This is the happiness of a glorified Spirit.

who shall change our vile bodies, and make them conform to his glorious
Body. Phillipp. 3. 21. This is the happiness of a glorious Body.

There shall neither be lack of any convenient good, no sorrow for losses, no
fear of change, and decay of our estate: No Thief shall be there to steal,
no Cousner to deceive, no tyrrant to oppress. God who has blessed us with it,
shall maintain our Lotte, and that in a place most secure from violence or
changes. Vanity and changes are only under the Heaven, but above it, there is
no change at all. This is the happiness of an unchangeable Lot: Then all things
shall agree well: A glorious person, invested in a glorious estate, a glorious
place, and that eternally.



Oft-ten have I found the frailty of my body, but now more than ever, for now
my reins are full of burning, and there is nothing sound in my flesh. I am
weakened and sore broken, I roar for the very grief of mine heart. Lord, I
power my whole desire before thee, and my sighing is not hid from thee. Mine
heart pants, and my strength fails me, and the light of mine eyes, even
they are not mine own. Psalm. 38. 7. 8. 9. 10. Painful nights have been
appointed unto me. If I laid me down, I said, When shall I arise? and
measuring the Evening, I am full of tossings till the dawning of the day. When
I say, My Couch shall relieve me, and my bed shall bring comfort in my
meditation. Then fear thou me with Dreams, and astonishest me with
visions Job. 7. v. 3. 4. 13 14. The sorrows of the Grave do compass me
about, and the snares of Death overtake me. Psalm. 18. 5.

to him: My Conscience at her best, watches over Satan to mark his
machinations, and over my corruption that it yield not: And when I fall,
checking me till I repent.

Since I knew thee, O Lord, and the power of thy Grace, I have been rent by a
continual striving. 1. My passions fighting against other. 2. My passions
against my reason. 3. And my Conscience against them all. I know all these
discords may be in the natural man, yet are they stronger in the renewed man,
because of greater light discovering* and Satan's more bitter persute: And the
tenderness of Grace, impatient of sin. 4. And above them all, the battle
between the flesh and the Spirit, every one of them lusting against another.

This has been mine exercise since I renounced the world: Because these three
Children, Faith Hope, and Love, do not worship the image of Popularitie, and
Vanity, that is adored by the world: Therefore, Satan held them in the
furnace, and heateth it seven fold, both in the worlds revenging humor, an^
in the rage of my curbed corruption, breaking out in passions.

Solomon preached of the vanities of the world, thou have in some measure
taught me by dear Experience.

So that I may justly even in thy presence use the words of thy dear Prophet
Jeremiah. I am the man that has seen affliction in the rod of his
indignation: My flesh and skin has he caused to wax old, and he has
broken my bones, he has hedged about me, that I cannot get out: He has
made my chains heavy. Also when I cried, he stopped out my prayer. He has
bent his bow, and made me a mark for his arrow. He caused the Quiver of his
arrow to enter in my reins. He has filled me with drunkenness and made me
drunken with wormwood. Thus my Soul was far from peace, I forgot
prosperity, remembering mine affliction and my murning, the wormwoode and the
gall, my Soul has them in remembrance, and is humbled in me. I have borne the
yoke from my youth, and sitten alone, and kept silence, because I have borne
it. Lament. 3. v. 1. 4, 7. 8. 12. 13. 14. 15. 17. 19. 20. 27. 28. And now I am
afflicted and at the point of death: From my youth have I suffered thy terrors.
Psalm. 88. 15.

I protest by our rejoicing which we have in the Lord Jesus Christ, I die
daily. 1. Cor. 15. 30. Always bearing about in the body, the dying of the
Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body.
2. Cor. 4. 10.

So thou have fed me with the diet of thy dearest Children, both to fit me
to a public Ministry, that I might speak of thee and thy ways, not from
any humane teaching, or abstract speculation, but as being taught of thee by
dearest Experience. And to work in me a loathing of this life, wherein every
day brings a new grief to the godly. Herein thou have given me the just
Commentar of that Text which all of us can read or rehearse, but few do
practice. He who will be my Disciple, let him renounce himself, and take up
his cross daily and follow me. Luc. 9. 23.

Pegans to desire death, but they saw not a Glory to come: God has enlightened
thee in the face of Christ, thou know that there is Glory laid up for thee
in the Heaven, thou belieuest it, hopest for it; thou have tasted it, and is
under a longing desire of it.

Call thy self to mind of the days of old, when either a sense of mercy,
or more usuallie affliction sent thee to God, did he not then allure thee, to
the wilderness, and speak to thine heart, Hosea. 2. 14. Wast thou not then
under his liberal hand, as a small vessel under a large Fountain? Did not
his joys so abound in thee, that thou could neither receive them all, nor keep
them in the measure that thou received them?

Tell me what was then thy comfort? Thy God so sensible to thee, in that
diffusion of his love, that thou wast in a sort drawn out of thy self, at
least drawn out of me: Could thou either hold thine affection off God, or
contain it when it returned to thee? Could thou lodge it, or God that it
brought with it? or that sense of him, and joye that it reported to thee?

Did not thy body partake of that thy joy? with a sweet complacence it rested
on that sense, and was glad to be so honored, as to be a lodging of a
Spirit, which had so sweet and friendly an intercourse with God? When his
love shed abroad in thee, could not abid in these bounds, whither was thy
grief greater, that so good a God should be at any time displeased by thee,
or thy joye, because he was then reconcealed to thee? Then atonce were the
deep groans both of grief and joy, but more of joye than grief; and of joye
for that holy grief, for offending so good a Father.

If thou remember these excessive joys, why do not thou make good use of
them? They were not given thee for that time only, but for this that is now:
What were these tastes and first fruits, but as the wine grapes that the Spies
brought out of Canaan? They were so great, that they could not bear them in
their hand but were a burden to two men: When these two senses of spiritual
joy, and Sonlie grief reported their burden of an excessive sweetness, was
not that a taste of the fruit of Canaan? If a Cluster of that Land be so
sweet, so great to thee What shall thou find when thou enters in that Land?

How can thou but love that Land, that has such fruits, and long for the
fullness of that fruit that is so sweet to thy taste, when thou wast under
that sens^, thou was more in God, than in thy self, and more in Heaven, than
on Earth: Since the remembrance of it does both present the Image of it, and
waken it self again in thee.

Be of good courage, enter and possess the Land. God has discovered it to
thee off the top of Nebo and Pisgah: Thou have tasted the fruit of it by the
report of the Spies: Lay hold on it by the hand of thy love, and longing
desire: God has cast down the walls of Jericho before thee, and has wounded
the world, the sons of Anake at thy conversion, and daily is killing the
sons of Harapha, in thy daily battles.

Be strong, and go fordward, for God is before thee. Consider by the satietie
of the tastes, how great a satietie thou shall have in Heaven, when the
smallest blinke of Gods face made thee patiently to bear and forget thy
greatest affliction, what shall that full presence work in thee? In his
presence is fulness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore.
Psalm. 16. If thy taste be upright, thou cannot but long for that fullness,
thou must welcome the Messenger that calls thee to it.



Natural miseries made natural men to desire Death, and shall I not desire it
more, who have an hope and sight of Glory which they knew not. I will not be
as a Meteor in the Air between them two, but I resolve to leave the Earth,
that I may go to Heaven.

Who can either delight to abide in such an Earth, or refuse to go to such an
Heaven? All things here enforce a removing: Our life a weariesome journey, our
walking in it laborious, and it self a way, and not our end: And while we are
here, we are absent from God. But in Heaven all is contrare; our life shall
be pleasant without labor: It is our end, and not the way: Our home in the
presence of God. This is sufficient to chase thee from Earth, and set thy
desires on Heaven.

in God in heaven. It is hid with Christ in God Coloss. 3. 3. And the life that
I live, I live by the Faith of the Son of God. Galat. 2. 20.

My death comes not so much of pains, thrusting me out of this body, as of
that life and fountain of it in God, sucking and drawing my Soul to it; and
that not to slay or destroy it, but to quicken and perfect it.

Consider thy self, art thou not dwyning and dying in this life, when sin
lives in thee, and stays thee from good, and compels thee to evil? The
Body though an help, as it is boared through by the windows of five Senses,
yet it is an hinder to thy proficiencie and perfection of knowledge and doing.

A Cage suffers the Bird to look through the wyres, yet it is a prison to
keep it from liberty: When thou art loosed from that cage, thou shall have
greater light in liberty.

it at him as his last and most fearful mastiue, but he destroyed it; they
went together in others grippes to the Grave, but Christ did strangle it in the
own dungeon: He arose, and left it behind him, as a conquered and triumphed
Enemy, he did not that for himself, but for us his own Body and will do it
in every one of us in our time: He fulfilled the Law, took away Sin,
satisfied Gods Justice, and so brak the jaws of Death.

Shall I then fear to follow such a Captain? He has made Death but a
carcass of an enemy, I have neither to fear in it, Sin which is pardoned,
nor Law which is fulfilled, nor Justice which is satisfied: It is a Serpent
without the Sting* a Giant without bones or arms, though it swallow me up in
a natural dissolution, it shall cast me out as the Whale did Jonah in an
immortal condition, when this mortality shall be swallowed up of life.

When David had killed Goliath, the Israelites ran as fast to see him, as they
fled* before from him, being alive: Doubtless they contemned that sometimes
terrible Giant, they trod upon him with their feet, and cut him with there
swords: They did that securely, because he was dead: He who was even now the
matter of their fear, his lifeles carcass is turned a matter of their
contempt, and his death a cause of their joye.

Death may separate thee from this Body, but neither from God nor his life in
thee, it shall the more unite thee to him, and this Body that dies by thy
departing, shall live in Death. It dies as a creature, the part of such a one,
but it lives as a member of Christ, and the Temple of the holy Spirit: both
because it is separate from all spiritual corruption of Sin, and quickened
spirituallie by the holy Ghost, who departs not from it, and in the Spirit of
Jesus who remains our Head, even in Death.

And lastly because thou my best part shall be in liberty with God. Death
may destroy natural life, but not the Spiritual, neither in Grace nor Glory:
It can sease on no more than I had, when I sinned in Adam, I got nothing then
but a sinful body, but now in Christ I have a new body, created to his Image,
who is Life it self, and so far is it from either destroying me, or
dissoluing my union with him, that it both saves me, setting me at liberty
from sin, and perfecteth mine union absolutely with him.

It rusheth indeed furiously on me, but grippeth nothing but my shadow: I
am in God in Christ, as I am beloved and chosen, called and sanctified. As I am
such, Death cannot find nor grippe me: While he grippeth nothing but this
body of dust, as Potiphars wife laying hold on Joseph: I go to God, and leave
my garment in his hand, I am dead to the world and sin, and my life is hid
with Christ in God, and when Christ my Life shall appear, then shall I in
Soul and Body appear with him in Glory.

Resent thine own estate, and thou shall find what I say: Have thou not dyed
to the world, and left it, before it left thee? And have thou not left the
body before it leave thee? If thou had not come to God, till the world had
forsaken thee, and the body chased thee out, he had found just cause to
forsake thee, and send thee back in disdain to these thy beloved false
friends.

But now since in thy prosperity thou renounced the world, and in thine
health and strength, thou went daily to God, choosing rather to be in him,
than in the body: Surely he will welcome thee: That is a token of thy living
in him, and his living in thee.

Joseph of Aramathea hewn thee a Sepulcher in the Rock? And cropen in by the
holes of that Rock that was pierced for thee? How often have thou gone in by
these wounds of Christ to his heart, by his suffering to his love, and the love
of God in him, and washen thy self in the blood of his satisfaction.



And have thou not, provided Oil for thy Lamp, that when thou go out of
this body, thou wander not in darkness, but enter straight way in Heaven? All
thy care in this life has been to get Oil, and to make it shine, to find
light, and walk in that light.

The Rock, thy Sepulchrie has enclosed thee, the Linen of his Righteousness
covered thee, and that burning Oil in thy Lamp shall not waste, till thou
enter in Heaven: Since God even thy God, has anointed thee with some measure,
of the Oil of gladness, he has prepared thee for his Heavenly burial, and
the smell of his Ointments, powered out on thee, has wrought a distaste of all
worldly pleasures.

Birth, Marriage, Triumph, and Coronation. Death is my best Birth day:

Marriage day with Christ mine Husband, he has loved me with everlasting love,
and betrouthed me to himself, in righteousness and truth: And our Bands
are daily proclaimed in his worship, his Gospel preached is the
signification of his love on his part, and our Prayers and desires are the
signification on our part, since I am glad of the Match, and rejoice at the
proclaiming of these Bannes, why should I fray at the solemnizing of the
Marriage?

God sends out Pastors, as Abraham did his servant to choose a wife to Isaak:
These Messengers have found me continually about the well of living waters:
The sight of Abraham's riches, even the chose Graces of God, have wone mine
heart to Isaak, and I have gladly condescended to forsake all, and go to him:
Though I find him at the Evening and Sun-sette of my life, I shall enjoy with
him an everlasting day of heavenly contentment. Esther was not sorrowful, but
rejoiced to be taken by Ahashuerosh to wife, and should not I rejoice when the
Lamb of God, Christ Jesus sends for me.

glorious triumph: David was glad, when he heard the people sing of his
victory over Goliath, and shall I not rejoice when God has stramped all mine
enemies under my feet, when the devils are howling for their defeat, and the
good Angels^ and Spirits do welcome me with joyful Acclamations: It is more
seemly that I put in my part with the glorious Spirits in the heavenly
harmony, than with the evil ones in howling: To be dashed in Death is to let
the present victory go out of mine hands, Satan shall then overcome me when
I am triumphing over him: And while I am breaking his power, his policy
supplanteth me, if I be dejected for that which is my glory.

Coronation day, why should I be ashamed of it, Joseph and Mordecay were not so
base minded, as to sorrow at their preferment, and why should I not rejoice at
this my greatest exaltation, to be taken up to Heaven, and honored to an
equality with Angels, and conformity with Christ.

and out of this greater Tabernacle from this visible world, and go to God:
So long as thou art enclosed in the strait bounds of the creature, thou cannot
enjoy freely thy Creator. Arise and make thee ready to meet thy Bridegroom,
he is coming to thee, and his reward is with him, prepare thy Lamp, power
out thine Oil, make thee to meet him, who is coming to thee, and has wooed
thee to himself.



O Lord, I have foughten my fight, I have finished my race, and kept the
Faith, henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of Righteousness, which God
the Righteous Judge will give to me, and not only to me, but also to all
that love his glorious coming. 2* Timoth. 4.

Iakob revived when he saw Joseph's Chariots to bring him to Egypt, though his
posterity were thereafter in thrall, shall thou not be glad to go up in
these Coaches to Heaven, where thou shall ever be with Joseph, and under a
good King, who knows Joseph, and will never die.

This noise is nothing but the sound of Christ's key opening thy prison and
fetters: Lift up thine head and rejoice, for thy Redemption is at hand, he
that is to come, will come and not delay: Behold he comes, and his reward is
with him.

Thou shall hear in due time the voice of thy beloved crying, Arise my spouse,
my beloved, arise, and come away, for the winter of thy calamitous life is
gone, the raines of thine affliction are passed. Cant 2.

Fearful indeed are the cries which torment the wicked at Death: The cry of
their sins accusing them, the Law condemning them, the Conscience tormenting
them, the Gospel testifying their contempt of it; Satan insulting over them,
and of a crafty tempter become a* cruel tormenter: The creature cursing them
for wearying it with sin and vanity: The Heaven debarring them, and the
hells gapping for them.

their disappointment: The Heavens opened to receive my Soul, and Angels
ready to carry it to Heaven: So long as thou hear these sweet voices, the
noise of Death shall not trouble thee.

All this noise of a decaying body, is for thy liberty, as it decays, thou
shall increase, as it goes to the Earth, thou go to Heaven: You came from
diverse beginnings, the body of the Earth, and God put thee in it, in your
loosing you seek back to these beginnings, the body to the dust, and thou to
God that gave thee, thou will be stronger, freer, cleanner when thou can not
utter thy self to man, than ever thou was before. The Balance are well casten
when the more the body returns to dust, the more thou ascendest to God thy
Savior.

Mine ears are slow of hearing men, but my Spirit quick in hearing the
consolations of the holy Spirit: My taste distasteth meat, but the delight in
tasting the sweetness of God, increases: All my natural powers are failing,
but my Spirit is more vigorous in affecting, and more peaceable in resting upon
God and his happiness.

It it a fearful change which goes all to the worse, and in end, to
destruction, but this change is all to the better, and shall end in Salvation.
This is a sure token, that as I have not enjoyed mine happiness here, so I
have not lost it here: But living in the hope and beginnings of it, I am now
going to the possession of it.

This my change tends to happiness, though the body by dissolution seem to
go far about, yet it is in the way to its own perfection. And thy change is
directly for it, from Faith, to sight, from hope to possession, and both Soul
and body in their several perfections, shall be in the last day conjoined to
make up my compleatest perfection: There shall neither be sin, nor pain in
body or Spirit, all miseries of both shall be gone, and happiness of both
shall be complete: That work of Gods Grace perfected in glory, and his hand
crowning my desires with enjoying himself.

Adam an union in innocence, in my birth an union in uncleanness, I am begotten
and borne according to the image of Adam fallen and sinful, in the
resurrection I shall have a glorious union in Christ, and but only one
separation in Death. This separation is now needful, it was threatened in
Paradise, if we offended, and now I cannot enter in Heaven without it, except
I either live till the last day, and be changed, or be translated as Enoch and
Elias.

To hold all mankind alive till the last day, is against GODS appointment, who
has drawn our days to an hand-breadth: To be translated, is the privilege
of a few, and cannot be the lot of all: Therefore the separation is in mercy,
that the Soul may enter in Glory, and the body rest in hope for a time: It
is not casten away, but laid up, and God has a special care of the dust of
it, to raise it up again: When our friends and neighbors have laid it in the
cold clay, they leave it there, but God leaves it not, but keeps it till the
last day.

thou shall die, and thou shall return to dust, the example of Christ in death
is followed, our best part is translated for our happiness and the assurance
of the bodies reunion, and a way to all. Death in this respect is not penal,
but premiall in a sort, not of Gods anger for our sin to punish us, but of
his mercy for our well to perfect us.

Oft-times God gives us plain documents hereof if we would observe them,
every twenty four hours we have clear proofs of four things. 1. Our Life in
the day time, when we are busied in our Calling. 2. Our Death, at Even, when
we rest from our labors 3. Our Burial, when we go to bed* we are not
casten in them, nor our gar^ments pulled off, but we go in quietness, and
lay our garments down in order, intending to take them up again: 4. Our
Resurrection, when we rise in the morning more vigorous to our Calling, than
when we lay down, then we shall behold his face in righteousness, and when
we awake, shall be satisfied with his Image. Psalm. 17.

of clay so often and so hardly beaten, must once fall.





O how far am I bound to thee my Redeemer, who has delivered me from the
fire of Hell? If a short and light pain under thine hand in love be so
heavy, how intolerable is that pain of soul and body eternally under thy
wrath.

O what a Jewel is a good Conscience in affliction! Though no man want his
slips and infirmities, yet he may eschew the grossest sins: though none can
attain to a legal perfection, yet he may have an Evangelicall perfection, in
Faith, Repentance, and begun obedience.

When the Soul darre attest God, as witness, and appeal him as Judge to its
sincerity: In intending nothing but his Glory: In inquiring his will as the
way to that Glory: And endeavoring to do according to his knowledge for that
good end: Then in some measure we may say with Ezechiah, Remember, O Lord, how
I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart.

The conscience of these things have so taken up my Soul, that my pains at
the greatest are mitigate; that holy and heavenly diuerting of my Spirit by so
sweet and spiritual influence, sometimes beguyleth my bodily sense, that it
does but tolerablie affect me. The present sense of thy love in mine
acceptance in Christ, and assurance of Glory to come, are strong ingredients
to temper the greatest pains in this life. And it is a profitable pain in the
body, that both occasioneth the seeking, and brings out the feeling, of the
health of the Soul, in thy sensible love.

self it is a curse, but to the Saints a blessing in him who has overcome
it. 5 I find it both a dissolution from the world, and of Soul and body, and
of every part of the body from other, and my first great union with GOD, the
Saints and Angels. 6 It is both my death and perfect birth day; I have now a
seeming life, but I live not perfectly till I die, the New man shall then come
forth to a glorious liberty in the face of God.

7 It is my last and greatest pollution, my body is sometimes and by parts
affected with weakness, and Death turns all in a lumppe of vile and
lifelesse clay; and yet it is my first and greatest purgation: Many purgations
spiritual have thou given me in this life, in Baptism the Laver of
Regeneration, from sin in every act of Faith, purifying the heart; in every
act of Repentance, washing me in the blood of Christ, in every exercise of
spiritual worship clensing mine hands in innocence to compass thine Altar:
But this is the great and last purgation, when I am cleansed from all sin: In
that same instant when my Soul and body do separate, all spiritual blemishes
are separated from me: That is the work of thy Spirit in me, he knows no
unclean thing can enter in Heaven, and therefore at my last breath he will
give me the last and full cleansing, and last degree of sanctification; I
tremble not at the fire of Purgatory.

The enemies of the cross of Christ, are justly so punished by that their
error; when Christ's Blood has cleansed me from all guiltiness of all sin,
and his sanctifying Spirit has purged out the nature of it: And his perfect
obedience has relieved me from all punishment, there is neither place nor use
for that purging, or rather tormenting fire after this life: 8 Death is in it
self the most terrible of all terrors, but I find it in Christ most desirable.

fearful respects, as a destruction, a curse, an end, a death, a dissolution,
a pollution: Therefore they abhor it, and the mention of it, is to them as
the hand-write on the wall was to Beltashar.



What wonder that the godly and wicked upon so contrare grounds, and respects,
have so contrare thoughts and desires of Death. Thou have builded my Soul upon
these best grounds, and filled it with consideration of the best respects of
Death, therefore it is that I love it, and desire it as thy Messenger in
mercy, for mine eternal good: As Laban welcomed Abraham's servant, and said,
Come in thou, blessed of the Lord; so I set me not to flee, but occure to
it, not to shune it, but to welcome it.



Their Soul curses their body, because it was too ready an instrument to
execute the wicked desires of it: And the body shall curse the Soul, because
it was an evil guide to misleede it in sin. They live now in concord and
mutual flattery of other, which is nothing but their conspiracy against God:
But when both are sensible of their estate, they shall curse other mutuallie.
As they part at Death, so shall they be joined at the last day, and curse
other eternally in the Hell upon the same grounds.

But to the godly, all things are contrare: They know whither they go after
Death, and their Souls and Bodies at their parting bless one another, for
their joint happiness in the state of Grace, and in mutual testifying of
their several labor in the Lord, for attaining that happiness. They part
full of the peace of God, full of the desire of their reunion, and full of the
hope of it, and eternal Glory thereafter.

Thou have blessed me with this certainetie: For my bygone condition, thou
perswadest me of my Calling and Election, and have made them sure in me by thy
constant working since thou called me to Grace: For my present estate I find
my self under thy favor in Christ, reconcealed to thee in him, as one of thy
called and chosen Ones: For my future estate, I know that my Redeemer lives,
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth: And though after my
skin worms consume this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall
see for my self, and not another for me, though my reins be consumed within
me. Job. 19. 25. I know that if the earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, I have a building of God, an house not made of hands, in Heaven. 2.
Cor. 5. 1.

Many seek certainty of uncertainties, to secure their worldly state on
Earth, and neglect their spiritual state in thee: But all fastening in the
world is loosnesse, and a losing of a better: But I seek for a certainty of
that better substance.

world, I have no promise of their particular state, thy Providence will secure
it self of them, and they may possibly fall in the hand of mine enemies. But
as for my Body, I know it shall rest in hope in the dust, till the
Resurrection, and my Soul shall be carried to Abraham's bosom.

When at evening, morning and midday, yea, seven times a day I call on thee, my
Father in Heaven; then am I visiting these Mansions: I cannot bow my knee
religiously to thee, but mine heart is then with thee, adoring thee in the
Heaven of heavens: In the time of thy worship when I seek thy face, though
my Body be on the Earth, yet my Soul is beholding thy face, thereby
acquainting my self with the light of thy countenance, which I hope to enjoye
for ever.



Shall I not then know that way after Death, which I daily have trodden in my
life? Or shall that light which now leads me in the darkness of this life,
be put out at Death? I must die, but it will not die to me: Thy face that now
inlightneth me, shall send out a more glorious splendor in the hour of my
Death, than ever it sent in this life: There is no fear of darkness in the
path of Death, when the discovered face of God in mercy shines on me, and
perfectly inlighteneth me in that glorious light.

candle lighted at the means of Grace in reading, hearing, and meditation: But
when these means end, and mine outward senses do cease from their work, I
shall take light immediately from God himself, he works by his ordinance,
so long as their necessity or use remains, but when these end, he comes in
himself and works more fully.

I need not be grieved, nor my friends cry out in the bitterness of heart,
when my senses fail: The light that I look for in Death, shall as far
exceed my present light, as the Sun in his full beauty at midday exceeds
the light of a small candle. I shall find no darkness in the passage of
Death, since I am in Christ: He who is in him, shall not walk in darkness,
but shall have the light of Life. The immediate ^ight of God, needs not the
use of outward means: It shall be no loss to me, when perfection supplieth
and succeeds imperfection.

Death, and made me feel in some beginnings and resemblance that same which I
will find at his dint; that sentence of Death puts me to the hight of
Resolution, and I am under thine hand, as Isaak under the hand of Abraham,
bound and laid on the Altar, and know nothing but that the stroke will come, I
am ready for it, and look for none other than dissolution.

But thou know thy thoughts concerning me. If thou spare me at this time,
this lesson is profitable, that thou have showed me the face of Death, and yet
brought me back again.

renouncing the world.

O Searcher of hearts, that I neither love this life, nor desire to abide in it
for it self, but for thy Glory, Though I be full of days, yet if I can
honor thee in it, I care not what miseries I undergo: I had never greater
contentment, than when I was most injured for thy cause: As I count of no life
but in thee, so I desire not to live but for thee.

If thou bring me back again, serve thy self of me in mercy, and do with
me as seems good in thine eyes. If thou have decreed that at this time, I
shall not die, but live, then grant that I may declare the mercies of the Lord:
That in my lent and prolonged days, I may magnify thy glorious Grace in
Christ, in teaching sinners thy ways, and turning them to thee: That thy vows
may be on me, O Lord, and I may pay them in the sight of thy people, in the
great Congregation, that when thou have redeemed my Soul from Death, mine eyes
from tears, and my feet from falling, I may walk before the Lord in the Land
of the living. Psalm. 116.

And may both feel and say with thine holy Apostle, Blessed be God* even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all
comfort, Who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort, wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God. For as the sufferinges of Christ abound in us, so our
consolation also abounds by Christ. And whether we be afflicted, it is for
your consolation and salvation: Or whether we be comforted, it is for your
consolation and salvation. 2. Cor. 3. 4. 5. 6.

Resurrection and eternal day of light, and comfort after it, all my
deliueries in this life, has some night of affliction following, and the very
day of prosperity may both have gloumie clouds of miscontentment, and the
eclypses of thy face in some desertion: But that day in Heaven shall have no
night following, none obscurity, by raines or clouds of affliction: None
eclypse by desertion, but the constant enjoying of thy face for ever.

will wype all tears from mine eyes, both the tears of sorrow under
temptation to sin, and under guiltiness for sin committed, and under
affliction: As also the tears of joy, I shall then rejoice without tears, for
my body shall have none excrementitious humor, to cast out at mine eyes: And
that joye shall not be by way of passion as now, but of a glorified affection,
it shall not be mixed with fear of ending, but endure eternally.

Who can refuse to die for to obtain such a Glory, Death is but short, and
that Glory beyond it, is everlasting and shall wype away all sorrows both of
this life, and death. David's Worthies for a little water of the well Bethlehem,
brak through the Army, and shall not we for the well it self of living waters,
adventure upon Death? Men sick of Ambition, cast away there life in battles
or combats where the victory is uncertain; and the following fame is but
smooke: And shall we not combat with Death, where the victory is certain,
and the following glory is weighty and eternal.



Though there be sundry degree of of Glory in Heaven, yet the least degree
(if perfection can be little) shall have fullness. It can neither desire more
nor receive more: When desire is satis^ied and capacity filled that is
absolute perfection.



Thou have his right of the promise, in the Covenant: Of his acquisition, in
the purchase of Christ: Of his Legacy, in the Testament, Father, I will that
these which thou have given me be where I am. Of Infeftment, by the earnest
of the Spirit: Of begun possession, by the first fruits, and of perfection
by so many fulnesses. Thou art full of days, and full of labor, both of Gods
work in thee, and by thee in other in thy calling, and full of desire of
dissolution, and of that better life.

What then can hold thee out of it? God is the Donatour, and has it in his
hand. Since he has made thee all these rights, he will maintain them, and
put thee fully in the possession. Go, and claim it of his mercy, thy claim
will be admitted of him, who has both founded and fraimed it in himself.

How can I but expect the happy end of thy work in me, O Lord, who have
found thee so merciful in the bygone course of it: As thou beginnest in thine
own, so thou proceedest till thou crown it with glory: My feeling of it, is by
parts and degrees, but in it self, and in thee, it is a continued and
compleete work.

Thou did begin in it my free election, and seeing me lie in the lost mass
of mankind did choose me in Christ: Thou broughtest me in the world, in a
time and place where the Gospel was preached and Grace offered: And scearcely
was I borne, when thou washed me in Baptism in the blood, and renewed me by
the Spirit of Christ.

When I was offered to thee in that Sacrament, little did I know what grounds
of Grace thou was laying in me. Thou broughtest me up in humane learning
under good Masters, and hemmed in, the folly of my youth with the care and
proficience in learning.

With these good occasions thou blessed me with the hearing of godly Pastors,
who did sow the seed of godliness in mine heart, so that in the very throng
of Schoole-studies thou drew me to a set diet of private devotion, in reading
thy word, and in calling on thy Name.

So soon as I could discern any thing, thou inclined mine heart to the sacred
Ministry, and made me desire to serve thee in it above all callings: And
sweyed all my thoughts and studies for the obtaining of the abilities of that
work. In the very course of humane learning, thou put thine hand in mine
heart, and entered me in the grievous exercise of Conscience, to prepare me
for thy service: and gave me no solid peace till I took on me both the yocke
of Christ in mine effectual calling to grace, and of the Ministry of the
Word. By this doing thou drew all my thoughts to practick Divinity as to the
best sort holding me ever about the end, and the use, and the fruit of the
best means to it. for keeping of a good Conscience.

Thou have joined four things in me, that furnishes daily exercise to my
Spirit. 1. A natural disposition inclining to pensiveness, so that my
greatest rest is in the multitude and throng of enquiring thoughts. 2. The
work of Grace in the sanctified exercise of Conscience. 3. And thy providence
without every day furnishing a new cross, as mine ordinary diet and a matter
both to my natural disposition, and Conscience. 4. And with all these the
assiduous labor of a painful Ministry, changing the nature of rest and
labor in me: So that my greatest rest is in greatest labor, and a short
relaxation does weary me more, than long bending of my Spirit.

As thou did separate me to the Gospel, of thy Son, and counted me
faithful, and put me in the Ministry, thou possessed me with a care to be
faithful in it, and to approve my self to thee, in preaching thy word as thy
word, and in partaking of that Grace which in thy Name, I offer to other. Thou
made me think it a fearful judgment to feed others and sterue my self:
To build the Ark of Noah to save others, and perish in the waters my self,
but to strive to this complete fruit of the Ministry by faithful discharge
of my duty, to save my self, and them that hear me. 1. Timoth 16. I cannot
but count this among thy greatest mercies to me, that in the midst of my
trouble thou fillest my Soul with thy peace, and that in the multitude of the
thoughts of mine heart, thy comfortes delight me, Psalm. 94. 19. While I am thy
prisoner in this bed of disease, and cannot declare thy mercies in public to
thy people; Thou give me liberty to speak of thy wondrous works to them
that visit me, to exhort them to live the life of the righteous, and in as
great confidence in thy Name, to assure them, that in that case they shall die
the death of the righteous: And to say with thy Prophet, Come, and hear all
ye that fear the Lord, and I will declare what he has done to my Soul. I
cried unto him with my mouth, and he was exalted with my tongue. If I regarded
iniquity, in mine heart, the Lord will not hear me, But truly God has
heard me, and has hearkened to the voice of my prayer. Ps 66. 16* 17* 18* 19.
For he sees no sin in Iaacob, nor transgression in Israel. Numb. 23 21. But
as many as walk according to this rule, his peace is on them, and his mercy,
and upon the Israel of God. Galat. 6. 16.

This I take as a seal of thy love, that thou have both accepted me, and my
former ende^ours, and pardoned all my sins in the Son of thy love: What
would be my case, if in those pains my wonted terrors had possessed me: But
thou who comfort the abject, and know my weakness, layest no more on me
than I can bear: Thou make thy Grace sufficient for me, to gi^e me the out
gate with the temptation, that thy power may be manifested in my weakness.
1. Cor. 12. 7. 9. Blessed be God, who has not turned away my prayers, nor his
mercies from me. Psalm. 66. 20.

How precious are thy thoughts to me, O God, how great is the sum of them,
If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand. Psalm. 139. 17. 18.

Many, O Lord my God, are thy wondrous works, which thou have done, and thy
thoughts which are toward us, they cannot he reckoned up in order to thee.
If I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered. Psalm.
40. 5.

But this is a small sum of a greater roll, that I may both testify to the
world my thankfulness to thee, who have ladened me daily with thy blessings:
And stir up others to mark thy merciful dealing with them in their youth.
That finding thy goodness in good occasions and education, and the blessing of
both in learning and godliness, they may be thankful to thee.

O what a mercy is it in so dangerous a time as Youth, to be brought by thy
Spirit to true Wisdom and godliness: Then Wit is weakest and corruption is
strongest, and we ready every hour to cast our self in sins, which may
cost us eternal murning. But thou preuentest Satan, and ingageth us in thy
Grace and obedience, before either he can abuse us in iniquity, or we do
know what good thou art working in us.

Thou know how forcible the sense and conscience of thy mercy is, both to
make us thankful for it, and desirous and confident of more: None can feel
thy love in thy Fatherly care over him in his Youth, but his heart must
dissolve in love to thee, and pouring out it self on thee, wait upon the due
accomplishment of such good beginnings.

When I remember these thy mercies, I find them mine obligements to thee: How
thou did bear more with me, than all the world, or I could bear with my
self: I both wonder at thy unspeakable love pursuing with kindness so vile a
worm: And am confident that thou who has begun thy good work in me, will
also finish it, till the day of the Lord Jesus: Who^ thou love, thou love
to the end. Thy calling and gifts are without Repentance. Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life,
nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to
come nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans 8. 38. 39.

Under this acquaintance with Death, and certainty of these glorious things
after it, the bitterness of Death is disgested: As the godly and wicked have
contrare respects of Death, and contrare grounds, and contrare desires, so also
contrare disposition, and practice when it comes.

before he die.

attending graces and gifts in the way: When we are come home to Heaven,
there is no use of them: But it directs Love, Peace, Joy, and other home
graces, that as they conveyed us in the way, so they attend us at Death, and
enter in the Heavens with us.

The first sort begins and ends here their being and use: The second of a
more enduring Nature, do begin and grow here, and shall abide in us for ever
in Heaven, as a part of our perfection. Mark the just man, and consider the
upright, for the end of that man is peace. Ps. 37. 37.

Moses after he had been all his days a faithful Servant in the house of
God, dyed peaceably on the Mountain, in the Arms of God: He lived all his
time in Gods obedience, and dyed full of his favor and peace: God welcometh
them kindly to his joyful Rest, who serve him faithfully in their life.



But so soon as our Spirits gather themselves, and sees God in Christ, with
the Crown of Glory in his hand, and the good Angels come to carry our Souls
to Heaven, all that amazement shall euanish.



Many things give up their last work at our death: Satan his last on-sette:
The Conscience (if it be not fully pacified) her last accusation, and then
turns to be a continual comforter: The Body the last feeling of pain, and
all these are greatest, because they are last, and yet do not argue strength
or prevailing but decay: Deadly diseased bodies have some sort of bettering,
immediately before Death. It seems to some a recovery of health, but is
indeed a dying.

So all these things at our Death cease from their work by their last
on-sette. Pharaoh made his most fearful assault on Israel at the red Sea, but
these men which now ye see, ye shall see no more, said Moses. We may bear
with Natures last assaulting and braids in Death, it shall never molest us
again.

but that now it be filled with thy self.

I have not much to transport out of this world: My Soul in the strongest
affection is gone before, and when I come away, I shall bring nothing to
Heaven, but thy works in me, and with them a good Conscience, my daily
obseruer: As for things worldly, the baggage of this Earth, I leave it as the
house sweepings to them who come after in this great house of the world; I had
none other account of it, even in the time of necessity, of the use of it,
what shall I count of it now, when that necessity is ending.

As for my sins, which thou have pardoned in Christ, I lay them over to
Satan, as their Author, they were mine in their Nature, Action, and
Guiltiness, but they are his in Origination: He spewed that poison in Adam
whereby all mankind are originallie defiled.

Thy saving Grace I render to thee again, thou have given it to me, to bring
me out of Nature: And the native course of it is to return to thee, and in
that returning, to carry me with it toward thee, the Fountain of Grace.

So in Death I desire to be as a Pitcher broken at the well, while the
potsheard turns to the dust, let my Soul with thy Grace run back to the
well again, even to thee, from whom I received them. Confirm this my
Testament, O Lord, as thine own work, and a part of the meeting of thy
Testament to me.

Nothing but my sins can hold me out of Heaven, which receives no unclean
thing: Cast them behind thy back, and bury them in the bottom of the Sea:
Seal up the discharge of them in my Conscience, that when I go out of this
life, I may present it as my warrant and thy token to be admitted within the
gates of Heaven, assure me more and more of that remission, that I may also
be assured of all the following blessings which thou have purchased with thy
blood.

Thou sanctified our Nature, and assumed it in the Virgin, to work the work
of our Redemption thereby: To make it a pattern and samplar of our
sanctification: A conduit pype to convey Grace to us: And a pledge that in due
time, thou will make us like to it in a fellowshippe with thee: Sanctify me
thoroughly with thine holy Spirit, that I may be fully received in thy
fellowshippe, and enjoye all these glorious privileges in thee.

This Salvation thou have purchased for us, and promised to us, and have
wrought in me both a desire of it, and a particulare persuasion of it for my
self. This is a true saying, and by all means to be received, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the chief. 1. Timoth.
1. 15. Remember therefore thy promise to thy Servant wherein thou have made me
to trust: This is my comfort in mine affliction, for thy word has quickened
me. Ps. 119. 49.

Shore and the Land beyond the River: In mine effectual calling thou brought
me through the red sea, bring me now safely through Jordan. Then thou
drowned mine enemies in Baptism: These waters that washed me, destroyed them:
Divide likewise, O Lord, these waters of death, that I may safely enter into
thine heavenly Canaan: Elias Mantle divided Jordan; wrap me up in Christ's
righteousness, that I may pass through Death: For there is no damnation to
them that are in Christ. Rome. 8. 1.

Set the Arc of the Covenant in the midst of it: Where that Covenant comes,
these waters divide themselves: Let me see the high Priest of my profession
(who is the Arc himself) carrying that Arc before me: Where he sets his
feet, there is dry ground to pass through the midst of dangers. O Son of
God, show thy propitiation to the Father, to appease him: To me, to encourage
me: To these waters, that they may flee away, and to mine enemies, that they
may be destroyed,



this I know, this I believe, and hope for, and feel already begun in me
in some measure, and persuade my self as now I think it, and write it, that
in due time, I shall find it, and praise thee in Heaven eternally for it,
when thou have crowned thy mercies in me.



Though thy presence comfort me now in these my Soules-speaches with thee, and
refresh my weary heart both under present pain, and foreseen pains of
death, yet I stay not there: These cooling tastes do rather inflame my desire,
than quench it, and increase my longing for the Well it self: That I may be
satisfied abundantly with the fatness of thine House, and drink of the
River of thy pleasures. For with thee is the Fountain of Life, and in thy
Light I shall see light. Psalm. 36. 8. 9.

All my joys in the way cannot satisfy me, till I be in that City, whereof
the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb is the Temple: That new Jerusalem that
has no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon, for the Glory of GOD does
inlighten it, and the Lamb is the Light of it. Reuelat. 21. 22. 23. I long for
that pure River of the water of Life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the
Throne of God, and the Lamb: I long for the fruit of the Tree of Life, that
brings fruit every Month, (ever constant and new joys) that I may see the
face of the Lamb, and have his Name written in my forehead, and follow him
vvhither soever he goes. Revelat. 22. 1. 2. 4.

Till I come to this estate, my Soul will ever thirst for thee, more than the
thirsty land does for rain, or the chased Heart pants for the river of
waters: My Soul thirsts for God, even for the living God, Oh, when shall I
come and appear before God. Psalm. 42. 2.

Desire in me, but thou only, and none can, or shall satisfy it, but thou,
and that by none of thy gifts but by thy self alone: It is a desire of thy
self above all, and cannot rest without thy self: It is stronger than all
other desires in me, they are all silent when it reigns, they cease
willingly, and quite their private contentment, and seek it in the
satisfaction of this greatest One. Come therefore, O thou, whom my Soul
loves, and satisfy my Soul in her greatest desire of thee.

greatest satisfaction of my greatest desire, shall work my greatest delight:
Sight, and Sense, and Fruitio^ shall then teach me, that which now the eye
has not seen, not the ear heard nor the heart of man conceived: But when I
shall see thee, as thou art, and shall know thee, as I am known, then I shall
see that which now I believe and hope for, even mine happiness in thee
perfectly.

When the end of thy love to me, and of my desire of thee, do meet in that
glorious perfection, there shall neither be matter nor place for more desire:
The infinite weight of Glory: The eternal indurance of it: The constant
freshness and continual newness of it in my neuer-loathing nor decaying
feeling, excludes both the increase and being of any desire: When thy delight
in me, and my delight in thee do concur, then my glorified delight shall
rest on thee, and thy delights contentedlie. I cease now to write, but not to
think of, and affect thee as mine only happiness.

Let thy good Spirit, O Lord, keep my Soul, under the sense of these
delights, or under the memory of them, or the fruit of them, that I may walk
in the strength of their co^solations, delighting my self in thee, and in that
mine happiness, which is thy self, till I perfectly enjoy Thee. Into thine
Hands, I commit my Spirit, for Thou have redeemed me, O LORD GOD of Truth.
COME LORD JESUS, AND TARRY NOT. AMEN.

FINIS.
The Table of these OBSERVATIONS.
A
ACcidents rare, make many Prophets. Obser. 51 Affections right placed. 46
Afflictions great profit. 69 Athiesmes poison. 27 Ambitious men die of their
disease. 48
B
Our Bodies spiritualitie. 40 The Bodies tenderness, a blessing to the godly.
80
C
Callings are our trial. 35 Gods Calling a sufficient warrant. 26 Fruitful
labor in our Calling. 8 Calumnies Comfort. 87 Christian Furniture. 1 Combat
between the Earth and the Wretch. 17 Company usuallie hurtful. 15
Complementing is a windy fullness. 82 Contemplation and practice ought to be
joined. 47 Conceate of Wisdom is great folly. 44 Conscience Exercise. 79
Conscientious Knowledge. 83 Constant inconstancy. 30 Corruptions Danger. 56
Corruptions Remeede. 90 Credulity and Confidence. 41
D
Death surpriseth the most part of men. 6 Devotion and Obedience are twins.
12
E
Eiaculations continual. 81 Experience fruitful. 14
F
Fantasies Tyranny and Remeede. 94 Faults with the World, but not with God.
23 Fears needless are fruitful to the godly. 85 Flesh and Spirit discerned.
58
G
God alone better than all. 50 God merciful presence. 59 The sight of a
present Godhead. 42 Gods best gifts. 57 God sees the Heart. 67 Gods Beggars
are best heard. 72 How to please God and man. 33 God the dwelling place of the
godly. 100 God and Satan contrare in ends and ways. 60 The godlies war in
peace. 91
H
Concerning happiness we are greatest fools. 5 Hearts discovery. 10 Hearts
hardness. 75
I
Injuries inflame our corruption. 32 Insolent fittes. 29 Judging wrong. 31
L
Short life ought a short care. 20 Love of good and hatred of evil. 54 The
best Lotte has some want. 55
M
Man's threefold perfection. 97 Man most disobedient of all creatures. 70 Man
both blind and quick sighted in his own cause. 88 Mankinds wise temper. 84
Best men most injured. 71 Mankinds threefolde respect. 96 Meditations profit.
39 The Merchant wise and foolish. 53 Good Motions are of God. 73
N
Holy Necessities are no distractions. 13 Thirst of News. 86
O
Observations right use. 74 Operations of the holy Spirit. 2
P
Particulars are mixed with common causes. 89 Passions disease and Remeede. 22
Patrons of Grace and Nature. 43 Peace of God a sweet Vade-mecum. 4
Perplexities disease, and Remeede. 21 Politickes secrecy is open. 62
Predominant virtue and vice. 93 Prayers great profit. 7 Providence particular
to the godly. 98 Rest on Providence. 68
R
Religious Religion. 82 Refuge of the Christian. 95 Resolution performed. 34
S
Salvation of God alone. 24 Scriptures unspeakable profit. 65 Security in
God. 38 Selvishnesse damnable. 52 Sense of weakness. 62 Sin an evil Guest.
28 Proud Sinners post to Hell. 25 Souls life. 63 Souls Food. 36 The stamppe
of God in the Soul, 77 Great worldly Spirits. 78 Good Spirits most free of
Passions. 49
T
Our Thoughts fruitful work 3 The godly Traveler. 16 Trial of Truth. 61
Trial of our Time. 19
W
VVarres fearful calamities. 66 VVayes of God well expounded. 18 World worse
and worse. 9 Dead to the world. 45 A new and better world in this old bad one.
99 Worship of God done as his worship. 76 Constant diet in Gods worship. 37
Y
Youth and old Age. 11
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing, in the Observations.
Page. Line. Fault Corrected. 53. 1. delate deleete. 57. 1. friend frrine. 68.
2. add Post. 79. 5. wrath worth. 87. 17. craves carueth. 111. 21.
co^uersatio^ couersio^. 113. 1. crave carue. 152. 14. to in. 157. ult dele.
him. 180. 10. calamities calumnies 212. 19. taker tacke. 218. 11. titling.
tilting.

In the Resolution.
2. 3. reproach approach. 39. 10. it is. 49. 2 secure serve.


