A Crystal Glass for christian women: wherein, they may see a most wonderful
and rare example, of a right virtuous life and Christian death: as by the
discourse following, may appear.
CAlling to remembrance (most Christian reader) the final end of man's
creation, which is to glorify God, and to edify one another in the way of
true godliness, I thought it my duty as well in respect of the one, as in
regard of the other, to publish this rare and wonderful example of the
virtuous life, and Christian death of Mistress Katherine Stubbes, who whilst
she lived, was a Myrrour of womanhood, and now being dead, is a perfect
pattern of true Christianity. She was descended of honest and wealthy
parents. Her father had borne diverse offices of worship in his company, Her
Parentag^
amongst whom he lived in good account, credit and estimation all his days:
he was zealous in the truth, and of a sound religion. Her mother was a Dutch
woman, both discreet and wise, of singular good grace and modesty: and which
did most of all adorn her, she was both religious, and also zealous. This
couple living together in the City of London certain years, it pleased God
to bless them with Children, of whom this Katherine was youngest save one. But
as she was youngest save one by course of nature: so was she not inferior to
any of the rest, or rather far excelled them all without comparison by many
degrees, in the induments and qualities of the mind. At xv. years of age (her
father being dead) her mother bestowed her in marriage to one Master Philip
Stubbes, Her marriage.
with whom she lived four years and almost a half, very honestly and godly,
with rare co^me^dations of all that knew her, as well for her singular wisdom,
as also for her modesty, courtesy, gentleness affability and good government.
And above al, for her fervent zeal which she bare to the truth, wherein she
seemed to surpass many: in so much, as if she chanced at any time to be in
place where either Papists, or Atheists were, and heard them talk of Religion,
of what countenance or credit soever they seemed to be, she would not yield a
jot, nor give place unto them at al, but would most mightily justify the
truth of God, against their blasphemous untruths, and convince them, yea, and
confound them by the testimonies of the word of God. Her godly ^eale.
Which thing how could it be otherwise? for her whole heart was bent to seek
the Lord, her whole delight was to be conversant in the scriptures, and to
meditate upon them day and night: in so much that you could seldom or never
have come into her house, and have found her without a bible, or some other
good book in her hands. And when she was not reading, she would spend the time
in conferring, talking and reasoning with her busband of the word of God, and
of religion: asking him, what is the sense of this place, and what is the sense
of that? How expound you this place, and how expound you that? what observe you
of this place, and what observe you of that? so that she seemed to be as it
were, Her love of ^he word of God.
ravished with the same spirit that David was, when he said: The zeal of thy
house has eaten me up. She followed the commandment of our savior Christ,
who bids us to search the scriptures, for in them ye hope to have eternal
life. She obeyed the commandment of the Apostle, who bids women to be
silent, and to learn of their husbands at home. She would suffer no disorder
or abuse in her house, to be either unreproved, Her gentleness.
or unreformed. And so gentle was she and courteous of nature, that she was
never heard to give any the lie in all her life, nor so much as to (thou) any
in anger. She was never known to fall out with any of her neighbors, nor with
the least child that lived, much less to scold or brawle, as many will now a
days for every trifle, or rather for no cause at al: and so solitary was she
given, that she would very seldom or never, and that not without great
constraint (and than not neither, except her husband were in company) go
abroad with any, either to banquet or feast, to gossip or make merry (as they
term it) in so much that she has been noted to do it in contempt and
disdain of others.

When her husband was abroad in London, or elsewhere, there was not the dearest
friend she had in the world that could get her abroad to dinner or supper, or
to any disports, plays, enterludes, or pastimes whatsoever: neither was she
given to pamper her body with delicate meats, wines, or strong drinks, but
rather refrained them altogether, saying, that we should eat to live, and not
live to eat. And as she excelled in the gift of sobriety, so she surpassed
in the virtue of humility. For it is well known to diverse yet living, that
she utterly abhorred all kind of pride both in apparel, and otherwise. She
could never abide to hear any filthy or unseemly talk of scurrilitie, bawdrie
or uncleanness, neither swearing or blaspheming, cursing or banning, but would
reprove them sharply, showing them the vengeance of GOD due for such
deserts. And which is more, there was never one filthy, unclean, indecent, or
unseemly word heard to come forth of her mouth, nor ever once to curse or ban,
to swear, or blaspheme God any manner of way: but always her speeches were
such, as both might glorify God, Her integ^^^tie of life.
and minister grace to the hearers, as the Apostle speaks. And for her
conversation, there was never any man or woman that ever opened their mouths
against her, or that ever either did or could once accuse her of the least
shadow of dishonestie, so continently she lived, and so circumspectly she
walked, eschuing even the very outward appearance or show of evil.

Again, for true love and loyalty to her husband, and his friends, she was
(let me speak it without offense) I think, the rarest Paragon in the world:
for she was so far of from dissuading her husband to be beneficial to his
friends, that she would rather persuade him to be more beneficial to them. If
she saw her husband merry, then she was merry: if he were sad, she was sad: Her
demea^nour towar^ her husban^*
if he were heavy or passionate, she would endeavor to make him glad: if he
were angry, she would quickly please him, so wisely she demeaned her self
toward him. She would never contrary him in any thing, but by wise counsel,
and sage advice, with all humility, and submission, seek to persuade him. And
so little given was she to this world, that some of her neighbors maruailing
why she was no more careful of it, would ask her sometimes saying: Mistres
Stubbes, why are you no more careful for the things of this life, but sit
always poaring upon a Book, and reading? to whom she would answer: if I
should be a friend unto this world, I should be an enemy to GOD: Her little
(...) of the worl^*
for GOD and the world are two contraries. John bids me, love not the
world, nor any thing in the world: affirming, that if I love the world, the
love of the father is not in me. Again, Christ bids me, first seek the
kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and then all these worldly
things shall be given to me. Godliness is great riches, if a man be content with
that that he has. I have chosen with good Mary in the 10. of Luke, the better
part, which shall never be taken from me. Gods treasure (she would say) is
never drawn dry. I have enough in this life, God make me thankeful, and I
know I have but a short time to live here, and it stands me upon to have
regard to my salvation in the life to come. Thus, the godly young Gentlewoman
held on her course three or four years after she was married: at which time it
pleased God that she conceived with a man Child: after which conception she
would say to her husband, and many other her good neighbors and friends yet
living, ^er prophecy (...) her death.
not once, nor twice but many times, that she should never bear more Children:
that, that child should be her death, and that she should live but to bring
that child into the world. Which thing (no doubt) was revealed unto her by the
spirit of God, for according to her prophecy so it came to pass.

The time of her account being come, she was delivered of a goodly man child,
with as much speed, and as safely in all women's judgments, as any could be.
And after her delivery, she grew so strong, that she was able within four or
five days to sit up in her bed, and to walk up and down her chamber, and
within a fortnight to go abroad in the house, ^er delivery of ^^ilde.
being thoroughly well, and past all danger as every one thought. But
presently upon this so sudden recovery, it pleased God to visit her again,
with an extreme hot and burning quotidian Ague, in which sickness she
languished for the space of six weeks, or there abouts. During all which
time, she was never seen, nor perceived to sleep one hour together, neither
night nor day, and yet the Lord kept her (which was miraculous) in her perfect
understanding, sense, and memory, to the last breath, praised be his holy name
therefore. In all her sickness, ^er sickness.
which was both long and grievous, she never showed any sign of
coffeehouse, or of impatiencie: neither was there ever heard one word come
forth of her mouth, sou^ding either of desperation, or infidelity: of
mistrust, or distrust, or of any doubting or wavering, but always remained
faithful and resolute in her God. And so desirous was she to be with the Lord,
that these golden sentences were never out of her mouth. I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. And, Her desire to be with God*
oh miserable wretch that I am, who shall deliver me from this body subject
to sin? Come quickly Lord Jesus, come quickly. Like as the heart desires the
water springs, so does my soul thirst after thee, O God. I had rather be a
doorekeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of the wicked:
with many other heavenly sentences, which (least I should seem tedious) I
willingly omit. She would always pray in her sickness absolutely, that God
would take her out of this miserable world: and when her husband and others
would desire her to pray for health, if it were the will of God: She would
answer, I beseech you pray not that I should live, for I think it long to be
with my God. Christ is to me life, and death is to me advantage. I cannot enter
into life but by death, and therefore is death the door or entrance into
everlasting life to me. Her absolute prayer for death.
I know and am certainly persuaded by the spirit of God, that the sentence of
my death is given already, by the great Judge, in the court or parliament of
heaven, that I shall now depart out of this life: and therefore pray not for me,
that I might live here, but pray to God to give me strength and patience, to
persevere to the end, and to close up mine eyes in a justifying faith in the
blood of my Christ. Sometimes she would speak very softly to her self, and
sometimes very audibly these words, doubling the^ an hundred times together. Oh
my good God, why not now? Why not now, oh my good God? I am ready for theee, I
am prepared, oh receive me now for thy Christ's sake. Oh send thy messenger
death to fetch me, send thy sergeant to arrest me, thy purseuant to attach me,
thy herald to summon me, oh send thy Iaylour to deliver my soul out of
prison, for my body is nothing else but a stinking prison to my soul. Oh send
thy holy Angels to conduct my soul unto the everlasting kingdom of heaven.
Her godly meditation.
Other sometimes she would lie as it were in a slumber, her eyes closed, and
her lips uttering these words very softly to her self: oh my sweet Jesus, oh
my love Jesus, why not now? sweet Jesus why not now? Oh sweet Jesus, pray for
me, pray for me, sweet Jesus, repeating them many times together. These and
infinite the like were her daily speeches, and continual meditations: and
never worser word was there heard to come forth of her mouth during all the
time of her sickness. She was accustomed many times as she lay, very
suddenly to fall into a sweet smiling, and sometimes into a most hearty
laughter, her face appearing right fair, read, amiable and lovely: and her
countenance seemed as though she greatly rejoiced at some glorious sight. Her
glorious (...).
And when her husband would ask her why she smiled and laughed so: she would
say: if you saw such glorious visions, and heavenly sightes as I see, you
would rejoice and laugh with me: for I see a vision of the joys of heaven, and
the glory that I shall go too: and I see infinite millions of Angels attendant
upon me, and watching over me, ready to carry my soul into the kingdom of
heaven. In regard whereof, she was willing to forsake her self, her husband,
her child and all the world besides. And so calling for her child, which the
Nurse brought unto her, she took it in her arms, and kissing it, said: God
bless thee my sweet babe, and make thee an heir of the kingdom of heaven:
and kissing it again, delivered it to the nurse, with these words to her
husband standing by. Beloved husband, I bequeath this my child unto you, he is
no longer mine, Her request to her husbad for the bringing up of his child.
he is the Lords and yours, I forsake him, you, and all the world, yea and
mine own self, and esteem al things dung, that I may win Jesus Christ. And I
pray you sweet husband bring up this child in good letters, in learning and
discipline, and above all things, see that he be brought up and instructed in
the exercise of true religion.

The child being taken away, she espied a little Puppie or Bitch, (which in
her life time she loved well) lying upon her bed: she had no sooner espied her,
but she beat her away, and calling her husband to her, Her hatred to worthly
said: Good husband, you and I have offended God grievously in receiving this
bitch many a time into our bed, we would have been loath to have received a
Christian soul, purchased with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, into our
bed, and to have nourished him in our bosoms, and fed him at our table, as we
have done this filthy our many a time: the lord give us grace to repent for it
and al other vanities. And afterward could she never abide to look upon the
Bitch any more. Having thus godly disposed of all things, Her ecstasy or swound.
she fell into an ecstasy, or into a trance, or swound, for the space almost
of a quarter of an hour, so as every one thought she had been dead. But
afterward she coming to her self spoke to the^ that were present (as there
were many both worshipful and others) saying. Right worshipful and my good
neighbors and friends, I thank you all for the great pains you have taken
with me, in this bed of my sickness: and whereas I am not able to requite you, I
beseech the Lord to reward you in the kingdom of heaven. And for that my
houre-glasse is run out, and that my time of departure hence is at hand, I am
persuaded for three causes to make a confession of my faith, before you all.
The first cause that moves me hereto is, The causes moving he^ to make
co^^fession of (...) faith.
for that those (if there be any such here) that are not thoroughly resolved in
the truth of God, may hear and learn what the spirit of God has taught me
out of his blessed and al saving word. The second cause that moves me is, for
that none of you should judge that I died not a perfect christian and a lively
member of the mystical body of Jesus christ, and so by your rash judgment
might incur the displeasure of God. The third and last cause, is for that, as
you have been witnesses of part of my life: so you might be witnesses of my
faith and believe also. And in this my confession, I would not have you to
think, that it is I that speak unto you, but the spirit of God which dwells
in me, and in all the elect of God, unless they be reprobates: for Paul says,
To. 8. If any one have not the spirit of Christ dwelling in him, he is none of
his. This blessed spirit has knocked at ye door of my heart, and God has
given me grace to open the door unto him, and he dwells in me plentifully.
And therefore I pray you give me patience a little, and imprint my words in
your hearts, for they are not the words of flesh and blood, but of the spirit
of God, by whom we are sealed to the day of redemption.

A most heavenly confession of the Christian faith, made by this blessed
servant of God Mistress Katherine Stubbes, a little before she died.
ALthough the Majesty of God, be both infinite and unspeakable, and therefore
according to his excellent dignity, can neither be conceived in heart, nor
expressed in words: yet to the end you may know what that God is, in whom I
believe, as far as he has revealed himself unto us in his holy word, I will
define him unto you, as the spirit of God shall illuminate my heart. I believe
therefore with my heart, and freely confess with my mouth, here before you all,
that this God in whom I believe, ^otable (...) the (...) trinity.
is a most glorious spirit, or spiritual substance, a divine essence, or
essential being, without beginning or ending, of infinite glory, power, might
and Majesty, invisible, inaccessible, incomprehensible, and altogether
unspeakable. I believe and confess that this glorious Godhead, this blessed
substance, essence, or being, this divine power which we call God, is diuid^d
into a trinity of persons, the father, the son, and the holy spirit, distant
only in names and offices, but all one, and the same, in nature, in essence,
substance, deity* majesty* glory, power might and eternity, (...) God is.
I believe and confess that God the father, the first person in this blessed
Trinity, is from everlasting, before and beyond all times, not made, nor
created nor begotten of any, but the only maker, creator and begetter of all
things whatsoever. I believe and confess, that Christ Jesus the son of God, is
the second person in this glorious Trinity, not created or made of any, but
begotten of his father before all Eternity, time or worlds. I believe the holy
spirit to be the third person in this sacred Trinity, not made of any, nor
begotten, but proceeding both from the father and the son, as the very wisdom
and inspiration of the^ both. I do believe and confess that this most glorious
Trinity is co^substantial, and coessential together, none before or after
other, none greater or lesser then another, of equal power, of equal majesty,
of equal glory and eternity (as before.) I believe and confess, that this God,
(...) created (...) things (...).
this blessed Trinity, not only created all things both visible and invisible,
spiritual and corporal, where or whatsoever, but also that he vpholdeth,
continues, and maintains them by his almighty power, and unsearchable
wisdom, through the secret wisdom of his spirit. I believe and confess, that
this God orders and disposes al things according to his good pleasure and
will, and that he also foreseeth all things by his providence and prescience,
so that nothing comes to pass by Fortune chance, (...) fortune or (...).
or casualtie to him, though so it seems fortuna^l, or casual to us, who see
neither the beginnings, the middles, the ends, the causes, or effects of
things, before they come to pass. I believe and confess, that the Lord our
God, having created the universal engine and frame of this world, with all
things contained therein, for the benefit and use of man only, the last of
all other creatures even the sixth day created man, after his own similitude
and likeness, holy, pure, good, innocent, and in every part perfect and
absolute: giving him also wisdom, discretion, understanding and knowledge
above all other creatures (the holy Angels set apart.) And which was more, Man's
perfection.
he gave unto him a certain power, strength and faculty (which we call
freewill) by force whereof he might have continued and remained for ever in his
integrity and holiness, if he had would. But he had no sooner received this
inestimable blessing of freewill, Man^f^s^.
of innocence, and integrity, but by hearkening to the poisoned suggestions
of the wicked Serpent, and by obeying his persuasions, he lost his freewill,
his integrity and perfection, and us all his posterity to the end of the
world: and so of a Saint in heaven, he (and we in him) became firebrands of
hell, vassals of Satan, Miscreants, Reprobates, Abiects and Castawaies, before
the face of God for ever. Then, when there was no other way or means for man
to be saved in the justice of God, I constantly believe and confess, that God
the Father in the multitude of his mercies, when the fullness of time was come,
Christ his incarnation.
sent his own Son, Christ Jesus forth of his own bosom into this
miserable world, to take our nature upon him, and that in the womb of a
Uirgine, without spot or blemish of sin, and without the help of man by the
wonderful operation and ouershadowing of the holy ghost.

And as I constan^ly believe that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh (according
to the scriptures) so I unfeignedly believe, that he has offered up his
blessed body upon the altar of the Cross, as a sacrifice propiciatorie,
satisfactorie, and expiatorie, for the sins of ^he whole world, and for me
the chiefest of all sinners: By v^r^ue, power, Christ his sacrifice.
and efficacy of which Sacrifice and oblation only, I trust and believe to be
saved, and by the merits of the sh^ading of the blood of this immaculate lamb,
Christ Jesus, to be set free, and pardoned of all my sins whatsoever. And
whereas the professed enemies of GOD the Papists do brag of their good
works, of their merits, righteousness and deserts, I here before you al, in
the presence of God, and his holy Angels, do utterly ren^unce, abandon and
forsake all my own merits, righteousness, and deserts as filthy dounge,
acknowledging my merits to be the merits of GOD in Christ, who is made unto me
righteousness, holiness, sanctification and redemption. For I am assured that
if the Lord should wey my very righteousness in the balance of his justice,
rewarding me according to the same, I should receive nothing but just
damnation for my deserts. I do further believe and confess, that Jesus Christ
having suffered death upon the Cross for me and all mankind, ^
rose again to life the third day after, by the spiritual power of his
Godhead, conquering thereby sin, death, hell, Satan and al his hellish band.
I do also believe, that the same Jesus Christ, after his most victorious
resurrection, ascended into heaven in the sight of the Apostles and holy
Saints, ^
a cloud receiving him out of their sight, there not only to prepare a place
for us, but also to make continual prayer and intercession for us to God the
Father: at whose right hand he now sits, in equal glory and bliss for
evermore. (...) heavens (...) hold (...) body til the (...) of judge (...).
I do constantly believe, that the Heavens must hold his corporal presence
till the day of judgment: that his blessed body is circumscriptible, and
contained in one local place, and can not be present in every place* at one
and the same time, his Deity and his Godhead notwithstanding being in every
place at once, and fulfilling all places, and yet contained in no place. For it
is against the nature of a true body, to be present in many places at once.
And therefore the Papists in effect deny that body of Christ, to be a true,
essential and natural body, by teaching it to be present in their so many
and sundry Pixes at once.

christ his ^omming to ^^dgement, and of our ^^surrection.
I do believe and confess, that this Jesus Christ shall come at the latter day
of judgment, when the number of Gods elect shall be fulfilled, in the same
likeness that he was seen go up into heaven, and with the same natural body,
to judge both the quick and the dead, and to reward every man according to
his works. At which day I do constantly believe, that all flesh, (I mean of
mankind only) shall rise again by the omnipotent power of God, whereby he is
able to subdue all things to himself, not one hair of our heads lacking. Then
death shall yield up his dead, the grave his dead, the sea his dead, and hell
his dead. And then shall the souls of the godly, of the elect and chosen of
God enter into their own bodies again, and be reunited together, their bodies
now being renewed, altered and changed: for being before corruptible bodies, now
they shall be made incorruptible: being before mortal bodies, now they shall
be made immortal: being before filthy and unclean, now they shall be made
clean and pure, like to the glorious body of Christ Jesus, shining as the
Sun for ever in the kingdom of heaven, where they shall dwell for ever, in
such joy as no heart can think, no tongue express, nor pen is able to write.
Upon the other side, the souls of the wicked and reprobate, shall be united
to their proper bodies, and both together be cast into hell fire, where is
nothing but weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth for evermore.

Further, I believe and confess, that my soul, and the souls of all the elect
children of God, Whither the souls of the faithful do go after their departure
out o^ their bodies.
immediately after their departure out of their bodies, do go into the
kingdom of heaven, into the hands of God, being guided and conducted thither
by the ministry of the Angels of God, and not into Purgatory, Lymbo patrum,
or any other place whatsoever. For whither the soul of Christ was received
when he cried, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit: thither are all the
souls of the children of God, that die in the true faith of Jesus Christ,
received immediately after their departure hence. In the Gospel after saint
Luke, we read that the soul of poor Lazarus, of blessed Lazarus, straight
after his death was carried into heaven by the Angels of God, and not into
popish Purgatory, which was not hatched almost in 200. years after. The soul
of the penitent and faithful thief, was carried straightway into Paradise: for
so Christ told him: this day shall thou be with me in Paradise: that is in the
kingdom of heaven, and not in Purgatory. Salomo says, cap. 3. The souls of
the righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torments come nigh
them. Christ says, he went into heaven to prepare a place for us, then not
into Purgatory, except they will have their Purgatory to be in heaven. He
says further: that where he is, there shall his servants be also. Purgatory
of the Papists blasphemou^*
But I hope they will not say that Christ is in Purgatory, but in Heaven, and
thither shall all the souls of the faithful ascend immediately. And therefore
is the opinion of popish Purgatory, both blasphemous, and sacrilegious. But the
true Purgatory in deed is this, the blood of Jesus Christ which cleanses us
from all sin, no other Purgatory do I know of by the word of God, nor
acknowledge. I believe also and confess, that man is justified, that is,
pronounced just before God, freed from sin, and al punishments due for sin,
by^r true and lively ^aith in the blood of Christ only, (...) justified ^y
faith only.
and not by his works, merits, righteousness, or deserts: neither yet by any
inherent righteousness in himself, as the blasphemous Papists teach, nor by
any other means whatsoeu^r. And therefore the Apostle to the Romans 4. was (...)
to say, that if Abraham were justified by works, then had he wherein to
rejoice, but not with God: for he says afterward in the fifth chapter: Being
justified by faith we have peace tow^rds God, through Jesus Chrst. And
therefore do I constantly believe, that we are justified by faith only, and
not by the works of the law: for if good works could ^aue us then had Christ
died in vain. And if they could sa^e us, why should they not be called by the
name of Savior? But when I say that Faith only justifies, I mean not a
barren faith, or a dead Faith without good works, such as the devils have, but
I speak of such a Faith as brings forth good works in great plenty: and can
no more be without good works, than the Sun without light, the fire without
heat or the water without his natural moisture. Why we should do ^ood works.
If you would know why we should do good works, if we cannot be saved by them,
I will tell you: we must do good works for four causes, chiefly. First, to
show our obedience to him that commands us: secondly, to glorify him that
created us and ordained good works also that we should walk in them. Thirdly,
for the mutual lou^ and charity which we bear toward the brethren.
Fourthly, to make our salvation sure and certain unto us, as the Apostle
speaks. For these and other causes must we do good works, and yet must we not
trust to be saved by them: for there is no other name given under heaven,
whereby man can be saved, but only the name of Jesus Christ. I do also
constantly believe and con^esse, ^he canoni^al scriptures ^he infallible lord
of God.
that all the canonical scriptures are the in^allible word of God* and that the
holy spirit of God, was, and is the only author of them and that holy men of
God, spoke and writ them, as they were taught and inspired by the spirit of
God, as blessed Peter bears record. I also believe that the holy scriptures
do contain all things necessary to sa^uation, without all popish trash of
unwritten verities* or rather unwritten berie lies. I do further also believe
and confess, that God the father has from everlasting and before all worlds,
in his secret counsel, Her faith in the predestination of Go^ and what it is*
and in his everlasting purpose and decree, elected, chosen and predestinate in
Christ Jesus, certain of the lost sons of Adam, to be members of his body*
and coheir^s with him of his heavenly kingdom. And othersome has he
pr^destinated to everlasting destruction, leaving them in their natural sin
and corruption still. Now if ye ask me what predestination and reprobation is:
I answer, it is the everlasting purpose or decree of God, whereby he does choose
some to salvation and some to damnation. If you demand why he chooses some to
salu^tion, and not all, finding them all in like state and condition: I answer
In choosing of some to salvation, he shows his unspeakable mercy, grace,
favor, and love: and in choosing other some to damnation, he shows his power,
his justice, and his iudgem^nt to all the world. For as by the one, the mercy
of God appears, so by the other, we may see what we have all deserved. And
if you ask me why he chooses some, and rejects othersome. I tell you he may
do it at his blessed will and pleasure: for if I have two debtors that owe me
a thousand pound, it is in me to release the one of the whole debt, and to
exact the whole of the other: for to the one I show but mercy, and to the
other but justice. Our vocation or calling.
Now those that the Lord has predestinate in Christ Jesus to everlasting
salvation, them does he call in his good time to the knowledge of his truth, to
repentan^e to integrity of life, and to all perfection, and those whom he does
call them does he justify, and who^ he does justify, them will he glorify.
And that this doctrine of predestination and reprobatio^ stands thus, the
Apostle Ephesians. 1.11. shows evidently, saying: we are chosen in Christ, when we
were p^edestinate according to the purpose of him that works all things after
the counsel of his will. And in the 4 and 5 ver. of the same chapter, he ^aith:
we are chosen in him meaning Christ, before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy and blameless before him in love. Read Romans 9. and many
other places of holy scriptures and you shall fin^ this doctrine to be very
clear. I do further believe and confess, that God has his several churches
as namely his Church triumphant in the kingdom of heaven, and his Church
militant, dispersed upon the face of the earth:

I do also believe, that this militant Church is two fold, visible and
invisible. ^he Church ^wo fold, and (...).
The visible Church is known and discerned by these marks: the word of God
preached, the Sacraments sincerely ministered, Ecclesiastical discipline and
other censures of the Church duly executed. The other Church I call the
invisible Church, not for that men are invisible, but for that it always
appears not to the eye of the world, but is known to God only, who alone
knows who are his. I believe that this Church, How and when (...) Church
cannot (...).
this spouse of Christ cannot err, finally in matters of salvation, and
damnation, so long as she holds her head Christ Jesus aright. And I
constantly believe, that Jesus Christ is the only head, ruler and governor of
his Church, and not Antichrist the Pope, nor any of his shauelings: as Paul
testifies, Ephesians. 4.15. saying: Let us grow up in all things in him, who is
the head, Christ is the ^^ole head of ^he Church.
Christ Jesus. Again in another place he says. As Christ is the head of the
Church, so is the husband head over his wife. I believe and confess, that
Jesus Christ has left, not only the holy Scriptures to instruct and teach his
Church, but also Sacraments, in number two: to wit, Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, as seals of his grace toward it to confirm it in his truth, and as
conduits of his mercy, to convey his grace and goodness to it also.

These Sacraments (I say) are Seals and signs of holy things, Two
Sacraments, and what they are, whereof they do consist, and what they represent
unto ^s.
and therefore cannot be the things themselves. For it is against the nature of
a Sacrament, to be the thing signified thereby. Baptism consists of two
natures, the visible Element, and the invisible grace. The visible Element is
water, the invisible grace is the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, conferred
in baptism. The water signifies unto us, that our whole nature is corrupted,
and had need to be purged and cleansed. It signifies also unto us, our
regeneration, sanctification and new birth. And it represents also unto us
the blood of Jesus Christ, which cleanses us from all sins. And I faithfully
believe, that it is no more lawful for a woman to minister this Sacrament,
then it is lawful for her to preach, or to minister the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.

And as concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I believe and confess,
that it consists of two natures also, an earthly, and an heavenly nature or
quality. The visible element or earthly nature is bread and wine: the heavenly
nature or quality, the body and blood of Christ signified thereby. The wine
does represent unto us the blood of Christ which was shed for us: and the bread
does signify unto us also, the body of Christ, which was given for us. And as
many as do receive this Sacrament worthily in remembrance of the death and
passion of Jesus Christ, do eat and drink Jesus Christ (spiritually) to their
everlasting salvation.

And I do verily believe, that in this Sacrament, Neither the bread nor wine
chang^ in the Lord Supper.
neither the bread nor the wine, neither before, nor after the words of
consecration (as they term them) are changed, altered, or transubstantiate,
into the real, essential, or material body of Christ, but do remain the
same still in nature and substance that they were before. And therefore Paul
feared not to call it bread still many times in his epistle to the Corinthians.
And our Savior Christ in the 6. of John says: that they should see him ascend
into heaven with the same body that he sat in with them at Supper, whole and
uneaten: adding further, that the words that he spoke, were spirit and truth,
and that it is the spirit that gives life, the flesh profits little. And he
bids us to celebrate this Supper in remembrance of him: and to preach his
death therein till he come again. If Christ were in the Sacrament, flesh,
blood, and bone, then the wicked might eat him, and so should there never any
wicked be condemned: for Christ says, he that eats his flesh and drinks
his blood shall never die: yea Rattes, Cattes and Mice, might eat his body,
which were blasphemous, and sacrilegious once to imagine, though the Papists
are not ashamed to teach it openly. And albeit that these Sacraments do
represent unto us most excellent things, Sacraments d^ not confer grace.
yet do they not confer grace of themselves: neither is the grace of God so
tied to the material Elements, that he cannot save without them. And
therefore are the Papists more then cruel, that teach all children to be
damned that die before baptism. For we read of certain in the Acts of the
Apostles, that were baptized, and yet they had not so much as heard whether
there were any holy Ghost or not. Simon Magus was baptized, yet he received not
the holy Ghost tho. And again, Cornelius had received the holy Ghost before
his Baptism. John the Baptist received the holy Ghost in his mothers womb,
and the like. But yet notwithstanding, although the grace of God be not tied to
the Sacraments, yet he that may receive them, and will not, or else sets
light by them, or contemns them, shall never receive the gifts and graces
signified by them.

^
I do also most constantly believe, that as Jesus Christ is the undoubted
Savior of the world: so is he our only Mediator, advocate, and intercessour
to God the Father, and none but he alone, who is ascended into the Heavens,
sits on the right hand of God, and makes continual prayers to God for us.
And John says. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. And to the same
effect Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, (...) only to (...) called
upon, (...) not Saints.
and one mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus. And as
I believe that Jesus Christ is our only mediator and advocate: so I
constantly believe, that he only is to be called upon, inuocated and prayed
unto, and neither Saint nor Angel, Patriarch nor Father, Martyr nor Confessor,
Peter nor Paul, Apostle nor Evangelist, James nor John, no not Marie herself,
nor any other creature, how excellent soever they seemed to be in the eye of
the world. For we are assured by the word of god, that the saints can neither
hear our prayers, nor grant our requests. And therefore Christ says: Call
upon me in the day of thy troubles, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
praise me. And again, the Apostle says: how shall they call upon him, in whom
they have not believed: Then as it is not lawful to believe in any other save
in God alone: so is it not lawful to pray to any other but to God alone, in
the name and mediation of Christ Jesus only.

(...) belief ^hither her ^oule should (...) after her ^eparture.
I do also most constantly believe, that my soul, so soon as ever it shall
depart forth of my body, shall be carried by the ministry of the holy Angels
of God, into the kingdom of Heaven: where I shall see, and certainly know,
Adam, Euah, Noah Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Samuel, David, and all other
Prophets* Patriarchs and Fathers, together, with Marie the mother of Christ,
Peter, Paul, James and John, and all other Martyrs, Confessors, and holy
Saints of God, which have dyed since the beginning of the world, or which
shall die to the end of the same. Oh what a comfortable thing is this, that we
shall know one another in the life to come? Talk one with another? love one
another? and praise God one with another, and all together world without end?
And because some of you peradventure will hardly believe this doctrine to be
so, I pray you give me leave to prove it by the word of God, and then will I
make an end.

When God had cast Adam into a dead sleep, and made woman of a ribbe of his
side, he brought her unto him, We shall kn^^ one an other the life to come.
and he knew her straight way, and called her by her name. Could Adam in the
state of innocence know his wife, he being in a dead sleep, whilst she was in
making? And shall not we being restored to a far more excellent dignity and
perfection, then ever was Adam in, not know one another? Shall our knowledge be
less in heaven, then it is in earth? Do we know one another in this life,
where we know but in part, and see but in part, yea as it were in a Glass,
and shall we not know one another in the life to come, where all ignorance
shall be done away.

In the 16. of Luke we read, how that the rich man lying in hell, knew Abraham
and Lazarus in heaven a far off. Then I reason thus: If the wicked that be in
hell in torments do know those that be in heaven so far above them: how
much more shall the godly know one another, being altogether in one place, and
fellow Citizens in the kingdom of heaven? We read also in the 17. of Matt:
how our Savior Christ meaning to show unto his Disciples Peter, James and John
as it were a shadow, or glimmering of the joys of heaven (and therefore he
is said to be transfigured before them, and his face did shine as the Sun,
and his apparel was like the light:) there appeared unto them Moses and Elias,
says the text. Then it follows, that if the Disciples being in their natural
corruption, and but in a shadow and glimmering of the joys of heaven, did
know Moses and Elias, the one whereof died almost two thousand years before,
the other not much less, how much more shall we know one another in the life
to come, all corruption being taken away, and we in the full fruition and
possession of all the joys and glory of heaven? This is my faith, this is my
hope and this is my trust this has the spirit of God taught me, and this have
I learned out of the book of God. And (good Lord) that have begun this good
work in me, finish it, I beseech thee: and strengthen me that I may persevere
therein to the end, and in the end, through Jesus Christ my only Lord and
Savior.

She had no sooner made an end of this most heavenly confession of her faith
but Satan was ready to bid her the combat, whom she mightily repulsed, ^
and vanquished by the power of our Lord Jesus, on whom she constantly
believed. And whereas before she looked with a sweet, lovely and amiable
countenance, red as the Rose, and most beautiful to behold, now upon the
sudden, she bent the brows, she frowned, and looking (as it were) with an
angry, stern, and fierce countenance, as though she saw some filthy,
vgglesome and displeasant thing: she burst forth into these speeches
following, pronouncing her words (as it were) scornefully, and disdainfully,
in contempt of him to whom she spoke.

A most wonderful conflict betwixt Satan and her soul, and of her valiant
conquest in the same, by the power of Christ.
HOw now Satan? what make thou here? Art thou come to tempt the Lords
servant? (...) wonderful ^emptation* and (...) in the ^ame.
I tell thee, thou hell-hound, thou have no part nor portion in me: nor by the
grace of God never shall have. I was, now am, and shall be the Lords for ever
Yea Satan, I was chosen and elected in Christ to everlasting salvation before
the foundations of the world were laid: and therefore thou may get thee
packing, thou damned Dog, and go s^ake thine ears, for in me thou have
naught. But what do thou lay to my charge, thou soul fiend? Oh that I am a
sinner, and therefore shall be damned: I confess in deed that I am a sinner,
and a grievous sinner, both by original sin, and actual sin, and that I
may thank thee for. And therefore Satan I bequeath my sin to thee, from who^
it first came, and I appeal to the mercy of God in Christ Jesus Christ came to
save sinners (as he says himself) and not the righteous: behold the Lamb of
God (says John) that takes away the sins of the world. And in another place
he cries out, the blood of Jesus Christ, does cleanse us from all sin. And
therefore Satan, I constantly believe that my sins are washed away in the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, and shall never be imputed unto me any more.

But what say thou more, Satan? Do thou ask me how I dare come to him
for mercy, he being a righteous God, and I a miserable sinner? I tell thee
Satan, I am bold through Christ, to come unto him, being assured and certain
of pardon and remission of all my sins for his names sake. For, does not the
Lord bid all that be heavy laden with the burden of sin, to come unto
him, and he will ease them? Her dispu^^ on with (...)
Christ's arms were spread wide open (Satan) upon the Cross (with that she
spread her own arms) to embrace me, and all penitent sinners: and therefore
(Satan) I will not fear to present my self before his footestoole, in full
assurance of his mercy for Christ his sake. What more, Satan? Do thou say,
it is written, that God will reward every one according to his works, or
according to his deserts? But it is written again (thou deceiptfull devil)
that Christ's righteousness, is my righteousness, his works, my works, his
deserts my deserts, his merits, my merits, and his precious blood a full
satisfaction for all my sins. Oh, but God is a just God, thou say, and
therefore must needs in justice condemn me. I grant (Satan) that he is a just
God, and therefore he cannot in justice punish me for my sins, which he has
punished already in his son. It is against the law of justice, to punish one
fault twice. I was, and am, a great debtor unto God the Father, but Christ
Jesus has paid the debt for me: and therefore it stands not with the justice
of God to require it again. And therefore avoid Satan, avoid thou firebrand of
hell, avoid thou damned dog, and tempt me no more, for he that is with me, is
mightier then thou, Her victory over Satan.
even the mighty and victorious Lion of the tribe of Judah, who has bruzed thy
head, and has promised to be with his children to the end of the world. Avoid
therefore thou dastard, avoid thou cowardly soldier, remove thy siege, and
yield the field won, and get thee packing, or else I will call upon my
grand-captaine Christ Jesus, that valiant Michael, who beat thee in Heaven, and
threw thee down to hell, with all thy hellish train: and devilish crew She
had scarcely pronounced these last words but she fell suddenly into a sweet
smiling laughter, saying: Now is he gone, now is he gone: do ye not see him
fly like a coward, and run away like a beaten cock? He has lost the field,
and I have won the victory, even the garland and crown of everlasting life:
and that not by my own power and strength, but by the power and might of Jesus
Christ, who has sent his holy Angels to keep me. And speaking to the^ that
were by, she said, oh would God you saw but what I see: For do you not see
infinite millions of most glorious Angels stand about me, with fiery charets
ready to defend me, as they did the good Prophet Elizeus? These holy Angels,
(...) guard of ^ngels
these ministering spirits, are appointed by God to carry my soul into the
kingdom of heaven, where I shall behold the Lord face to face, and shall see
him, not with other, but with these same eyes. Now am I happy and blessed for
ever, for I have fought the good sight, and by the might of Christ have won the
victory. Now from henceforth shall I never taste neither of hunger nor cold,
pain nor woe: misery nor affliction: vexation or trouble: fear nor dread: nor
of any other calamity, or adversity whatsoever. (...) sweet ^editations.
From henceforth is laid up for me a crown of life, which Christ shall give to
those that love him. And as I am now in possession thereof by hope, so shall I
be anon in full fruition thereof by presence of my soul, and hereafter of my
body also, when the Lord shall please. Then she spoke softly to her self as
follows. Come Lord Jesus, come my love Jesus, oh send thy Purseuant (sweet
Jesus) to fetch me. Oh (sweet Jesus) strengthen thy servant, and keep thy
promise. Then sang she certain Psalms most sweetly, and with a cheerful
voice: which done, the desired her husband that the 133. Psalm might he sung
before her to the Church. And further, she desired him that he would not
mourn for her, alleging the Apostle Paul, where he says: Brethren I would
not have you to mourn, as men without hope, (...) request (...) her hus^^nd not
to ^ourne f^r (...)
for them that die in the Lord: affirming that she was not in case to be
mourned for, but rather to be reioiced of: for that she should pass (she
said) from earth to heaven: from men to holy Angels: to Cherubins and
Seraphins, to holy Saints, Patriarckes and Fathers: yea to God himself. After
which words, very suddenly she seemed as it were greatly to rejoice, and look
very cheerfully, as though she had seen some glorious sight: and lifting up
her whole body, and stretching forth both her arms, as though she would
embrace some glorious and pleasant thing, said: I thank my God, through Jesus
Christ, he is come, he is come, my good Iayler is come to let my soul out of
prison. Oh sweet death thou art welcome, welcome sweet death, Her talk with
death, and he^ friendly welcomming of him.
never was there any guest so welcome to me as thou art. Welcome, the messenger
of everlasting life: welcome the door and entrance into everlasting glory:
Welcome, I say, and thrice welcome, my good Iayler, do thy office quickly, and
set my soul at liberty. Strike (sweet death) strike my heart, I fear not thy
stroke. Now it is done. Father into thy blessed hands I commit my spirit. Sweet
Jesus into thy blessed hands I commend my spirit. Her last words
Blessed spirit of God, I commit my soul into thy hands. Oh most holy,
blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one true and everlasting God,
into thy blessed hands I commit both my soul and my body, at which words her
breath stayed, and so neither moving hand nor foot, she slept sweetly in the
Lord. Her death.


Thus have thou heard (gentle Reader) the discourse of the virtuous life, and
christian death of this blessed and faithful servant of God, Mistress
Katherine Stubs: which is so much the more wonderful, in that she was but
young and tender of years, not half a year above the number of xix. when she
departed this life. The Lord give us grace to follow her good example, that we
may come to those unspeakable joys wherein she now rests, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor,
glory, praise, dominion, and thanksgiving, both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
P. S. Gent.


