A THIRD PROCEEDING IN THE HARMONY OF KING DAVID'S HARP: That is to say, A
godly and learned Exposition upon 17. Psalms more of the Princely Prophet
DAVID, beginning with the 45. and ending with the 61. Psalm: Done in Latin by
the learned Reverend Doctor VICTORINVS STRIGELIVS, Professor of Divinity in
the University of Lypsia in Germany, Anno Christi, 1562.

Translated into English, by RICHARD ROBINSON Citizen of London. An. Christi,
1595.

Seen, perused, and allowed.

Judith, cap. 16. verse. 2. Begin unto my God with tymbrels; Sing to my Lord
with cymbals; Tune unto him a Psalm; exalt his praise, and call upon his name.

AT LONDON, Printed by Valentine Sims. Anno Dom. 1595.

SEMPER EADEM.


Gallia victa dedit Flores, Inuicta Leones
Anglia; Ius belli, in Flore, Leone suum:
O sic, o semper ferat ELIZABETHA triumphos,
Inclita Gallorum Flore, Leone suo.
Brief contents of the said xvij. Psalms in this Book expounded.
Of Doctrine as Psalm 45. 49, 50. Of Doctrine, and prophecy 47 Of Prayer, as
Psalm 51, 54, 55, 56, 57, and 59. Of Consolation, as Psalm 58. Of Victories
or Triumphs. 46, and 48. Of David's inuectiue to the detection of Doeg. 52. Of
Slander convinced, Of Truth advanced 53 Of Humiliation and exaltation 60 Of
Prayer and thanks giving. 61
Humilium Deus Auxilium. Judith 9. verse. ^^
To the right high and mighty Princess, most gracious QVEENE, and Elect
nursing Mother of Gods Israel, ELIZABETH by the grace of God, Queen of
England, France and Ireland, defender of the faith: and (next under God) of the
Churches of England and Ireland, on earth the Supreme head and Goueruour.
Your Majesty's most humble and loyal subject R. R. prays unto God to grant
your Highness a long, gracious and blessed reign over us, to the advancement
of Christ's everlasting kingdom, the comfort of the faithful, and either to
the conversion, or subversion of all inward and outward enemies to the same: by
and through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior Everlasting.
MOST Christian Princess, most Gracious QVEENE, and my most sacred Sovereign
Lady; if Cicero the most learned eloquent Orator, being desired to say his
mind in matters of importance, answered, (excusing himself) that he had read
nothing the day before: and if the Centurion a man of valor and authority
disabled himself as Matthew. 8. 8.
one unworthy to receive Christ the King of kings under his roof: much more
may I being long since a simple poor scholar from seven to fourteen years
of age enfranchised in a free Grammar schole, (whereof was Founder and Patron
that learned worthy subject M. John Magnus, an officer of good account to the
most noble King Henry the eight, your Majesty's dear father of blessed
memory) after that other seven years discontinuing from the same in this
franchised City of London, and for these 31. years here laboring (as God
vouchsafed me ability) to renew and increase my poor and simple talent, not
yet atteining to perfection of learning, nor maintenance of living; much more,
I say, may I seem so simple a scholar to excuse my self as altogether
insufficient to present or prefer my mind, or any my so slender labors unto
your so learned and excellent Majesty. And much more may I seem to disable my
self (a subject of such inferior estate) as unworthy to crave or receive for
protection of my undeserving industry, the gracious favor of so sacred a
QVEENE, the peerless Peragon of all earthly Princes at this day. But because
(as Christ the God of Gods, and Kings of kings only knows, whose image and
authority shines in your royal Majesty, and in whom and for whom according
to all duty I honor your most excellent Highness) I come not with Cicero,
uttering eloquence plausible to any Roman Caesar, nor with Demosthenes to
admire at profane King Philip the son of Amyntas, but (by your sacred
Majesty's most Gracious pardon, and godly Princely favor, here with all
submission, craved) I come dutifully addressing, dedicating, and presenting
this my poor unpolished travel, and translation of these few Psalms mo into
English: yielding them also for a devoted pledge of my loyal duty and
duetifull allegiance unto your most excellent Majesty, as to the elect nursing
mother of Christ's Apostolic Church, a Royal fosterer of the right, true,
and Evangelical faith, and a magnificent defender of the true Christian
professors of the same, Even so, (my most Gracious, Natural, and dread
sovereign Lady) in all loyal and dutiful obedience, I humbly crave and
beseech your most excellent Highness, albeit with aged Barzillai I have herein
brought my imperfect 2. Sam. 19. 35.
sense and skill in this musical melody and heavenly harmony of the Harp
sounding in King David's Court. And though I serve in here at the Bridegromes
feast (where Christ our Savior is present) meare water with clear wine, that
it would please your most gracious Majesty, John 2. 7.
of your sacred censure and Princely benevolence to conceive and receive in
good part my true intent, dutiful zeal, and painful poor travel herein:
even as our Savior Christ couceiued and received The John 5. 9.
petition of that person 38. years grieved with a disease, and in his mercy
cured him. Also, As one awaking up last of al, Ecclus 33.
gathering after others in the vintage, etc. And finally, as John 2. 10.
the Lord Jesus accepted in good part the seruitors best wine kept until the
last service. Which my present poor travel, as I beseech the only Almighty,
true and eternal God to frame adapt and coapt to the perpetual advancement of
his glorious name and everlasting kingdom: So I humbly crave and heartily
beseech his divine Majesty, long, graciously, victoriously and blessedly to
protect and prolong the days of your Royal Majesty's reign over us, to defend
you kingdom and true subjects, with the happy increase of your faithful
friends, either to the speedy conversion or utter subversion of all inward and
outward enemies to the premises, by and through Christ Jesus our Lord and
Savior everlasting. Amen. Sept. 29.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient poor subject Richard Robinson

To the courteous Reader.
THis book has many and great recommendations; The text is warranted by God
himself; The pen is king David's, as great a Prophet as a Prince. The origiuall
Latin Commentary made by a man of great learning and judgment, Victorinus
Strigellius, in the University of Lypsia in Germany, which you see; what
account is to be made of M. Robinsons great pains in the translating of such a
work so well warranted, and thereby of most assured profit to the Christian
and advised Reader.

Richard Mulsaster.

CAn I declare, or any else,
what they deserve to have,
That labor much, and pains do take,
men's souls to feed and save?
But whatsoever is their hire,
at man's unthankful hand,
They shall be sure for to enjoy,
at length the quiet land.
Which God will give unto each one,
that virtue does attend.
And also here it shall appear,
that he will be their friend.
Work on therefore o Robinson,
cease not thy skill to show.
For well it will be with the good,
when wicked are in woe.
Tho. Buckminster.
PSALM. XLV. Eructauit cor meum
To him that excels on This was a certain tune or an instrument.
Shoshannim, a Song of love to give instruction: committed to the sons of
Korah.


The Title.
TO him that overcomes, a learned song touching Roses, full of love: sung by
the sons of Chora.

IN this title, we must first speak of the Author, next of the kind Three
things handled in the title.
of song, and lastly of the Subject, as they call it: The Authors of this most
sweet song were the sons of Chora, whose father (with the opening of the
earth being swallowed up) died so wretchedly, as the 16. Chapter of the book
of Numbers mentions. But as in punishing the father, Gods wrath appeared
against those heinous offenses, so in the gifts of his children is manifested
an example of Gods mercy which must be referred unto Ezechiels sermon in his
18. Chapter, The 1 The Author of the Psalm.
son shall not bear the iniquity of the father ^er. 20. For, that the
posterity of Chora was endued and adorned with excellent gifts of the holy
ghost, and especially with the gifts of prophecy, the Psalms do well witness,
which are entitled to the sons of Chora Very well then touching this progeny
prophetical may that be said, which Prometheus (as AEschilus recites) speaks
of his deliverer. (...) Inuisi patris hoc mihi dulce est pignus. In english, A
sweet pledge is this truly of my father hated before me.

And the kind of song is (...) a song of mirth, 2 The kind of song.
iolity and love, or it is (...) a marriage song, wherein the holy Ghost is a
maker up of the marriage between Christ and his Church: For in this kind of
matter here is handled an usual commendation of the Bridgrome, spouse, or
husband, which is borrowed from the excellency of his wisdom and virtue, yea,
from the sweetness of his humanity, from his eloquence, his riches, dignity or
comeliness of personage, or other things which are (...) the leading causes
of love. For every love is stirred up by manifestation of some good thing given.

But, why is mention made of Roses? Roses do minister matter of joy and
gladness in garlandes made at marriages: therefore they betoken the celebrating
of 3 The subject of the matter.
marriages with joy, and that sweet surpassing savor of the heavenly doctrine
which does chiefly make up or accomplish this marriage: for with the word, as
with a sweet smelling Rose the mutual love between Christ and his church is
confirmed. And certes let these seem to be sufficiently enough spoken touching
the Title, now let us come to the Argument of the Psalm.

THE ARGUMENT.
THose things which are said in this Song, The argument borrowed of a
comparison of Marriage, and between Christ and his Church.
as touching the Bridegroom and the Bride, the Spouse, and his Spousesse, the
Husband and the Wife, do properly appertain unto the Messiah and unto the
true Church: This ground of purpose in the Psalm, S. Paul's epistle to the
Hebrews, cap, I. does not only confirm, but the confession of the Rabines
also: For the better learned and sounder sort of the Rabines, (being utterly
vanquished with the circumstance of the phrase and comparison of the parts
thereof) do confess indeed, that this Psalm was written as touching the
Messiah. Now then this ground of purpose in the Psalm being thus confirmed
(that it speaks expressly of the Messiah and of the true Church) let us
compare, if it please you, the Marriage together with the league that is
between Christ and his Church: for there are five special properties or
tokens of sincere Matrimony: namely, the first, mutual love: the Five special
signs of sincere matrimony.
second faith: the third society or partaking in weal and in woe: the fourth
procreation of issue: and the fifth defense from the husband to the wife. And
first of all indeed, the love of man and wife ought to be fervent, without
dissimulation and compulsion, sincere without suspicions, and finally, sweetly
delightful without bitterness The first mutual love between the husband and
the wife.
and disdain. That such kind of love was in the son of God, toward his
spouses the church, his taking of humane nature upon him does well witness: for,
seeing by that secret and marvelous league he joined unto himself this
nature, let us most firmly believe, that in Christ there is not a fained, but
a true and fervent love toward us: and here has that sentence of the poet
Theocritus his effect: Quae minime sunt pulchra, ea pulchra videntur amanti.
Those things indeed which base do seem,
The lover beautiful does deem.


For although the Church by reason of persecution is the more deformed, and
also in that she carries about her the remnants of sin; yet is she
unfeignedly loved of Christ, as this Psalm says, ver. 12. So shall the king
have pleasure in thy beuty. Secondly comes faith in place, The second* Faith
united of the one to the other.
Christ loves the Church only embracing the gofpell, he loves none other
sects, either Mahometicall or Heretical: so again, the Church acknowledges
only Christ for her Mediator, and embraces his doctrine only, and will not be
an harlot, she polluteth not her self with the opinions and worshippings which
other sects do The third. Consociation or partaking of weal and woe.
use. Thirdly, there is ordained a Society or partaking of them both in weal
and woe: Christ bestows his benefits, righteousness, and life upon his church,
and returns unto himself the calamities of the church, and was made a
sacrifice for our sins; so again the Church bestows her benefits upon her
husband, namely her confession wherewith she worshippeth and honors her
husband, and becomes a partaker of the cross of her husband: and like as
touching matrimonial fidelity this Psalm says in the 11. ver. Harken O
daughter and consider, incline thineeares: forget also thine own people and
thy fathers house; even so, touching society or partaking of prosperity and
adversity these verses do make mention. ver. 14. The kings daughter is all
glorious within, etc. also in the 9 ver. All thy garments smell of Myrh Aloes
and Cassia out of the Iuery palaces, whereby they have made thee glad* For
although these smells or savors* are pertinent unto the royal estate of any
king or Queen, yet rightly do they signify the afflictions, which Christ and
his Church do suffer. Fourthly, there is a generation or offspring in the
Church, so as Christ gives The fourth. Generation or procreation of Issen.
his word and holy spirit, whereby daily new members are borne in the Church,
but this comes to pass by the ministry of the gospel in the church, as it
were a mother nourishing and bringing up her child: unto this property of love,
let that little verse be referred ver. 17. Instead of thy fathers, thou shall
have children, whom thou may make princes in all lands, Fifthly, like as it is
the spouse The fifth, The Husbands protection or defense of his wife.
or husbands part to defend or maintain his Spouses and wife, so Christ
evermore defends his church, subduing devils, Tyrants and heretics; and
although he will have her a partaker with him of his cross and affliction,
yet he mitigateth those afflictions, preserves the body of his Church, and in
midst of death gives life to those that are put to death. The comparison of
the Marriage, and the league that is between Christ and his Church, does
greatly adorn the reading of the 45. Psalm.

Psalm. XLV. And exposition thereof.
Verse. 1. My heart is inditing of a good matter; I speak of the things which
I have made unto the king. Verse. 2. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
LIKE as Orators are placed next unto Kings, so unto the heart of man are added
the instruments of utterance and speech, that if nature be sound and upright of
her self, there should be an excellent consent or agreement of heart and
tongue: namely, man's heart enflamed with the light and love of God should
manifest divine motions with the tongue honoring God, and in speaking things
just and upright toward men the heart and tongue should agree in one: Now in
this corruption of man's nature, the heart oftentimes disagreeth from the tongue
as Cicero says, Frons, vultus, oculi persaepe mentiuntur, oration vero
saepissime. The face, the countenance, and the eyes very often deceive men: but
the speech of tongue most often deceive them. But yet in those that are new
borne of the holy ghost the consent of heart and tongue is restored, as in this
place the S^nnes of Chora do say, My heart is inditing of a sweet song, and
that the tongue is the interpreter of godly cogitations. This providence of the
almighty worke-master in knitting the heart and tongue together let us first of
all consider, so often as we read the beginning of the 45. Psalm: Next of
all, let us embrace and extol this Psalm, seeing the holy ghost affirms
that he sets down unto us a certain excellent The circumstance of this
Psalm, is a substantial marriage between Christ and his Church.
kind of song. Also the thing it self shows, that this verse was largely
and plentifully written, and both replenished and adorned with all the most
choice words and most grave sentences of Rhetoric. Lastly, the subject of the
matter (as we in schools do argue) does allure us much unto the reading of
this Psalm. For he says profoundly that he sings this song concerning the
King, the Messiah, and the marriage which he makes up with the true Church.

Verse. 3. Thou art fairer then the children of men: full of grace are thy
lips, because God has blessed thee for ever.
First, here is praised the person of the Messiah, and is The praise of the
Messiah or spous.
preferred before the beauty or comeliness of all men, because in very deed,
neither is the wisdom nor virtue of any man like unto the wisdom and virtue
of Christ, of which things, the beauty or excellency is sincere and special
above all other: for in him clearly shines a most firm acknowledgement of
his eternal father, and in him is inflamed a special love toward the eternal
father, and other most excellent virtues. Wherefore when we think upon the
Messiah, let us think upon this sincere excellency of personage, that is, of
the wisdom shining forth in him, and all other virtues wherewith he is most
specially adorned: and as the Husband bestows not only his body, but also al
his worldly substance upon his Wife: So Christ the husband endoweth his wife
the Church withal his benefits or blessings, namely wisdom, which is the
acknowledgement of the mercy of God, for his sake in the gospel promised, and
also righteousness and life everlasting. Although therefore we are by nature,
deformed and without all favor, that is in very deed defiled with sins, and
therefore guilty before God, and worthy of all miseries and calamities, yet by
reason Christ imparteth unto us his beauty or excellency, we are received by
God, as if we were without any blemish, as in the 2. Cor. 5. cap. it is said.
For he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we should
be made the righteousness of God in him. verse. 21. Christ knew no sin, for as
the Prophet Isay says, cap. 53. verse. 9. He did no sin, neither was any
guile found in his mouth. And what say you to that, where he was not only
conceived and borne without sin, but also lived and died without sin? And
yet was he made sin, that is, a certain guilty thing and a castaway into
most grievous punishments. For God powered forth his displeasure upon the Son,
who was made our Mediator and sacrifice for sin, and therefore suffered
judgment and punishment, that we might become righteousness of God, by his
means, that is, just and acceptable unto God for the Mediator sake, Last of
all the eloquence of this King is praised, Full of grace is thy lips, as if he
said. Thou art not only of an excellent mind, but unto thy eloquent speech
there is a special grace also annexed: And we were went to behold him whom God
had adorned with eloquence, as the verse says in Homer. Attentique ^udire
omnes cum dulcia fundit
Verba ver^cunde, ciues verisque gubernat
Consiliis, long quos inter hic eminet vnus
In dubiis rebus cum concio magna coacta est.
When he should speak they all were bent to hear,
Sweet modest words unto them forth he gives
His citizens, and with counsels sinceare
He rules, as one in honor high which lives
In doubtful matters he is the only man,
To speak for him and his constrained than.


What honey sweet eloquence is that in Christ the^? Certes I believe there is no
man of so base a mind, but (when he hears these words. Come unto me all ye
which labor and are laden, and I will refresh you. Math. 11. 28: also. So God
loved the world etc. John. 3. 16.) that they are Christ's royal wisdom and
power incomparable.
sweeter then the honey or honey comb, he will easily confess: For no Mother can
with more sweet persuading words call unto her, her only and most dearest
child, then Christ does use in calling sinners unto him. Touching this
eloquence of Christ, speaks Io. Baptist where he says, Ioh. 3. He that has
the Bride is the Bridegroom, but the friend of the Bridegroom which stands
and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the Bridegromes voice, This my
joy therefore is fulfilled. verse. 29.

But although Wisdom, Virtue and Eloquence are singular ornaments: yet
notwithstanding without power and strength in doing things they are not much
worth: For, often time Wisdom is driven away, and Might rules the matter,
and as the verse says, Spernitur Orator bonus, horridus Miles amatur.
Men do despise the speaker good,
And love the soldier fierce of mood,
Non doctis dictis certatur, sed maledictis,
Some, not with learned speech contend:
But with evil terms their cause defend:


As the Poet Ennius says in those verses. Therefore, the Psalm not only
attributes these things unto Christ, which I have spoken of, but also armeth
as it were this king with divine power or might, in these words: Therefore has
God blessed thee for ever. He expressly calls the Messiah a blessed king, that
is, acceptable or pleasing to God, and so furnished with divine power, as that
he is able both to destroy sin and death, and to give righteousness and life
everlasting unto all believers: al these things does the only word of blessing
there comprehend.

Verse. 4. Gird thee with thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty:
according to thy worship and renown. Verse. 5. Good luck have thou with thine
honor, ride on, because of the word of truth, of meeknes and righteousness; and
thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. Verse. 6. Thy arrows are very
sharp, and the people shall be subdued unto thee: even in the midst, among the
kings enemies.
The sword and arrows here do not signify carnal weapons of warfare, but,
the effectual preaching of the gospel, Christ an invincible warrior, and what
his weapons are.
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. 2. Cor. 10.
5. For Christ fights not with weapons, but with the word: which is the power
of God unto salvation, to all that believe. I. Romans 16. And because good
success very much avails to do notable exploits, the Psalm adds unto
those forenamed ornaments, good success. Good luck have thou (says he) with
thine honor, that is, All things shall submit themselves unto this King, and
all things are ready to obey him. He shall take nathing in hand, but with most
special speed, and with wonderful success he shall fully accomplish the
same: for, he is Schilo, that is, happy and fortunate, and he is Porek, that
is, a Breaker up, as Cap. 2. 13.
Micheas the prophet calls him, For he so bursteth open the kingdom of the
Devil, that as the Latin verse says, Vt aggeribus ruptis cum spumeus amnis
Exit, oppositasque euicit gurgite moles,
Fer^ur in arua furens tumulo camposque per omnes,
Cum stabulis armenta trahit.


As when a surging foming flood the broken banks ouer^onnes, And so contrary
mighty stoppes by great increase ouercomes, Of vehement force is carried forth
through all the field, even there, With fold or cotage quite away the cattle so
does bear.

Verse 7 Thy seat (O God) endures for ever: the scepter of thy kingdom is a
right scepter. Verse 8 Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity:
therefore God (even thy God) has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows.
Hitherto has the Psa. described the king armed and fighting the greatest
battles: now does he paint out as it were the lively por^rature of a peaceable
ruler or governor. For, Christ is, both a most gracious king and an invincible
warrior: Christ the only Prince of peace.
sithence then justice or righteousness in domestical government is a chief
virtue, it affirms, that The scepter of Christ is a right scepter: neither
let righteousness be understood of us in that sense, as if it were meant in
Christ himself, but, as touching the same to be bestowed upon others, like as
the promise says, Genesis 18. 18. In thy seed shall all nations be blessed. Al
other persons are accursed, that is, guilty before God, and oppressed with
sin and death: but this our king is not only blessed, because he pleseth God,
and is endued with divine wisdom, righteousness, and life; but therefore also,
because he destr^yeth sin and death and restores unto his people
righteousness and life: and the virtue very near unto righteousness is that
Nemesis or Zeal, that is, a just displeasure against sins: with this godly
zeal ought all good Princes and rulers to be inflamed: wherefore even this
also does he pronounce to be in the Messiah, in the 8. verse. Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity. So, in the 69. Psa. it is said. For the zeal
of thy house has even eaten me, ver. 9. That is, I bring my life in danger for
the deliverance of thy church, which I love, and to suppress those reproaches
wherewith God is dishonored, which bring me great grief and sorrow, and do
thoroughly move my displeasure against this blasphemy. Last of al, this our King
is anointed, that is, ordained from the eternal father, unto this kingdom,
and endued with the holy ghost for acco^plishing of this marvelous
deliverance of the Church, which shall be gathered out of all mankind, and
rewarded with righteousness and life everlasting.

But, why says he in the same verse, [aboue thy fellows? Uerily, because he
may discern the Messiah from the prophets, and from al men whose virtue was
excellent. As, Moses had a glorious calling, he brought the people Exodus 14.
13.
out of Egypt, and ruled them in the wilderness: But yet this calling did not
deliver the people from everlasting death. Also the same Moses had in him a
light or acknowledgement of God, and a righteousenesse only new begun, and
as then he was troubled with a doubting or mistrust, which showed it self,
when he smoate the rock, twice. So may it in like manner be said touching
Exodus 17. 6.
the vocation, light, and righteousness of each other of the Prophets: but
Christ is far above all other Prophets, in fulness of the holy ghost, and in
calling: for as John Baptist says, cap. 3. God gives not the spirit by
measure unto his son Christ, ver. 34. Therefore he abounds in the
knowledge and righteousness of God, and has a greater calling, he delivers
from sin and death, and gives righteousness and life everlasting: and that
he may effect this, he so abounds with the holy ghost, that he may therewith
sanctify and quicken others, inflaming this light in them, namely the
knowledge of God, righteousness, and life everlasting. Let us therefore hiss
out of doors those dreams imagined of the political kingdom of the holy
Messiah, and let us think upon the things everlasting. Our Messiah has
ordained a kingdom everlasting, abolishing sin, destroying death, and
restoring everlasting righteousness and life. These benefits let us crave and
look for from him.

Verse. 9. All thy garments smell of mirh, aloes, and Cassia, out of the Iuory
palaces, whereby they have made thee glad. Verse. 10. Kings daughters were
among thy houourable women: upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in a
vesture of gold, wrought about with diverse colors.
Although these verses do describe a royal excellent state, The churches
excellent vocation feeling both cross and consolation.
yet signify they somewhat, secretly, as touching both the cross and the
consolations in the same: Myrh purges and is more sharp in taste and scent,
therefore it signifies cross and sorrows, but such as are wholesome. Aloe,
though it be of a grievous savor, and a bitter taste, yet it comfort the
stomach, stancheth blood, and wonderfully heals up wounds: therefore it
signifies consolation, and the preaching of the gospel, wherewith the wounds
of the heart are healed, and in the heart is thereby joy and life everlasting
enlightened. Cassia is much like unto Cinnamon, and with her savor does comfort
the brain: I know there are diverse and differing opinions which the best
learned men have touching the proper names which are used in this place. But in
so great variety of opinions, I do follow the usual translation, until
skillful interpreters in the Hebrew language do deliver us more certain
knowledge.

Verse. 11. Harken (O daughter) and consider, incline thine ear; forget also
thine own people, and thy fathers house.
This apostrophe (or turning speech to the party absent) is diligently to be
marked, wherein the holy ghost speaks of the Church which is to be gathered
from among the Jews: because it instructs the reader of the greatest
matters; namely of the kingdom of the Messiah, of faith, of the abrogation of
the Leuitical ceremony, and extinction of Moses law. For inasmuch as to hear,
and to teach, are two correlatiues, it follows, that the Messiah shall not be
a king like unto Alexander, who by art of war and corporal Christ's kingdom
not like worldly kingdoms.
strength keeps his subjects in their duty, but one which shall govern his
church with his word, and shall incline or frame their minds unto most willing
obedience. Furthermore (seeing* Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word. Romans 10. 17.) let us not seek for revelations besides or without the
word of God, but let us know that we must not seek God any other ways, then
by the word and testimonies from him delivered, neither that we must call upon
any other God, but even upon the very same God, who sending his son and
giving his gospel into the world so often times, has manifested himself, by
assured testimonies. This doctrine touching faith (settling her self in Gods
word) does this psalm deliver, where it says in this verse. Harken O
daughter and consider, incline thine ear, etc. And the phrase of the psalm
agrees with the eternal and immutable commandment of the father crying, of
his some. Mat. 17. This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear
ye him, verse. 5. Moreover because that people in the nation of the Jews were
not wild by nature, but as kind and courteous people loved their cuntry
especially, and reverenced the temple wherein God so often manifested himself,
and loved the whole order of the Jewish policy (then which they knew there was
not a more excellent policy in all mankind) more than their life, therefore the
Psalm persuades Moses policy extinguished.
the Church gathered of the seed of Abraham to forget his people, and to
prefer the Messiah before the ancient temple and policy, and all other
things which men in their order do desire, as life, possessions, and peace: It
signifies then, that the policy of Moses must be extinguished, Ceremonial
^ites abolished.
and the Ceremonies in the Temple used, must be abrogated or abolished.

Verse 12 So shall the King have pleasure in thy beutie: for he is thy Lord
(God,) and worship thou him.
There are many parts in this Psalm, the conference or comparison whereof
vanquisheth the godly ones, that they cannot but acknowledge the Messiah to be
both Man and God, and yet that the person of this Messiah must be discerned
from the person of the eternal Father. The first part is, the worthy praise of
the excellenty of the Messiah his person, in the third verse, Thou art fairer
than Five special points of glory which the church has by Christ.
the children of men. Herehence is borrowed a manifest consequence: All men
sprung of the carnal seed of Abraham are deformed and polluted with much
^^hinesse, as in the third book of Kings, cap. 8. Solomon says, There is no
man living, but he sins, verse 46. and The first part.
as in the foureteenth psalm it is said, They are al gone out of the way,
they are altogether become abominable, there is none that does good, no not
one, verse. 4. In this king and husband of the church, there is neither any
sin, deformity, nor filthiness: Therefore Christ is not only man, but God,
who is only good and harmless. The second part is, that which confirms the
article touching The second part.
the divine nature of the Messiah, Therefore has thy god blessed thee. In this
saying he interprets that promise given unto Abraham. In thy seed shall all
nations be blessed, Genes. 12. 3. 17. 8. 22. 17. as if he had said, All men are
accursed, that is, guilty before God, and worthy of all miseries and
calamities, because God is unfeignedly and horribly angry with sins: The
greatness of this displeasure can no power alone created take away, no nor yet
endure. Needeful then it is that the Messiah be God, because he takes away the
curse, that is, Gods wrath, sin and death, and gives the blessing, that is,
righteousness and life everlasting. The third part confirming The third part
that same sentence is this, Thy seat (O God) endures for ever. The psalm
affirms evidently, that the kingdom of the Messiah is everlasting: for it is
most apparently seen, that no worldly policy is perpetual, and the thing
shows, that the complaint extant in Ouids verse is true, where he says: Sic
omnia verti cernimus, atque
Alias assumere pondera gentes:
Item, summisque negatum starediu.
So all things turned plainly we do see,
And other Nations bear another sway:
And mightiest states often times denied be,
For to endure with any longer day.


Seeing then no gouernements are perpetual, it is a thing very clear, that
neither this king the Messiah is only man, nor that his kingdom is a policy
which shall perish, such a one as the Jews do look for. The fourth The
fourth part.
part of this confirmation is where this psalm says, Thy God has anointed
thee with oil of gladness above thy fellows. In the 34. and last chapter of
Deuteronomie it is written of Moses thus: But there arose not a prophet since
in Israel like unto Moses, etc. verse 10. Therefore this psalm places and
prefers the Messiah far above Moses: Then is there not only humane, but
also divine nature in the Messiah. The fifth and last part of The fifth and last
part.
this glory is recited in this verse, For he is thy Lord god, and worship
theu him. But the Jews do go about to trifle out so notable a testimony with
this cauillation: They say by the word Worship is signified the gesture of the
body which is made before the presence of Kings: But this sophistical trifling
may be refuted by conference of other testimonies, as in the 72. psalm it is
said: All kings shall fall down before him: All nations shall do him service
verse 11. In these words the psalm evidently affirms, that this Messiah
shall always be called upon, or prayed unto, yea, when he shall not be seen
with eyes: Therefore it speaks not of any bodily gesture the which is made
before the presence of Kings, but it speaks of the mind, which craves of
the Messiah, that he would have mercy upon us, and be a Mediator for us, would
forgive us our sins, would give us his holy spirit and life everlasting, and
would be our helper and defender, yea, even in the dangers of this life
against the outrages of the Devil, and of ungodly persons, like as he
himself says, John 10. My sheep hear my voice: No man shall take them out
of my hand, verse 27. and 28. Such a worship does truly attribute omnipotency
unto the Messiah, and does witness that he is God. And that the person of the
Messiah is to be discerned from the person of the eternal Father, these words
do teach manifestly* Therefore has thy God anointed thee with oil of gladness
above thy fellows. For the Father annointeth this king with the oil of
gladness, that is, with the holy ghost: which saint John in his first epistle,
and second chapter, and twentieth verse calls Chrisma, that is, Ointment; The
Messiah ^s Christ, that is, your anointed king of the church. But there is a
sweet consolation set forth in this saying, And the King shall have pleasure
in thy beauty. The psalm praises the beuty of the church, which seems (by
reason of the Cross) unto the judgment of the world to be foul and filthy,
but also in very truth is yet still languishing, and bears about her many
blemishes, ignorance, and vi^ious affects: Although therefore we are indeed
weaklings, and defiled with much filthiness, yet let us believe, that for, and
through, his great mercy we shall be acceptable unto this our King, and we shall
have our reputed and published beauty, that is, some virtues acceptable unto
God, as true invocation, advancement of true doctrine, and the remaining new
begun obedience.

Verse 13 And the daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift: like as the
rich also among the people shall make their supplication before thee.
The daughter of Tire signifies the Church gathered A description of the
church gathered from out of the nations in three points.
of the nations: And I have often said, touching what, and how great things
the calling of the Nations admonishes us. For, first it witnesses that grace
abounds above sin: For who can either comprehend in thought, the greatness
of Gods mercy, or express the same in words: In which mercy, persons (polluted
with manifold mad worshipping of Images, bloody sacrifysing of men filthy
Confusion of lusts, and finally with other mast horrible mischefes) are called
unto the society of the blessed congregations, andre made as Paul says. 2.
Ephesians. 19. Citizens in the City of God and of the common wealth of the
heavenly Citizens. Secondly, The calling of the Nations is a notable testimony,
that the promise touching the gospel is universal and free: For if the
promise, were a privilege for certain persons, it should not be translated
unto the nations which are horribly polluted with wickedness: And that this
promise consists not upon our worthiness, but is freely promised, and
bestows eternal benefits upon true believers, that does the calling of the
nations most evidently witness. For what do the Nations bring unto God, but
filthy and horrible confusions of opinions of worshippings and of manners? Such
Cast-awayes seeing God receives and chooses them out, to place them in the
fellowship of eternal blessedness, may we any thing doubt, but rather affirm
that the promise of the gospel parteineth freely? Lastly, this gathering of
the Church out of the Nations refuteth the Pharisaicall opinions touching
righteousness of the law. For if men were righteous by the law, the Nations
could not without the law be made Citizens and members of the people of God:
Seeing then the nations without the law, of enemies are made friends, and of
strangers are made the most beloved Church of God, it is a thing very clear
that by faith only, that is, by acknowledgement and confidence in the
Mediator, all the elect ones are saved.

Verse 14 The Kings daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of
wrought gold. Verse 15 She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of
needle work: the Virgins that be her fellows shall bear her company and shall
be brought unto thee. Verse 16 With joy and gladness shall they be brought, and
shall enter into the Kings palace.
Albeit the Prophets describing the kingdom of Christ, do use figures taken
from the glorious estate of Kings Courts: yet notwithstanding, because we
do know that the Church by Gods assured providence is in this life subject
unto the Cross, let us understand these descriptions, not as touching the
external pomp, but concerning the inward glory, whereof there are seven
degrees. The first is, the possession of Gods word and the acknowledgement
Seven degrees of excellence proper unto the true church of God.
of the true God, as in Psalm. 147. and in Deuter. 4. Psa. 50. 15. Psa. 55. 18.
The Second, is true calling upon God, and his Divine hearing us, as in Deuter.
4. The Third, is his perpetual preservation of the body of this Church, though
she be persecuted in some of her members as in Math. 16. Psalm 129. The Fourth
contains Gods only Deliverances as the preservation of Noah in the Deluge
Gene. 8. 16. Exodus 12. 2. Luke. 9. 56. The fifth, contains prophecies proper
to the Church, and miracles accomplished in the prophecies, as in Micah. 3. 8
and. 2 Kings 5. 8. 2. Peter. 1. 19. 1. Pet. 1. 10 1 Cor. 12. 10. and 1. Cor.
14. 3 The Sixth is the ornament of many virtues in the suffering members as in
Stephen Acts. 7. 58 others as in Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38, 39. Laurence. Eutrop
lib. 9. The Seventh, and last is the inheritance of life everlasting as in
John. 17. 3. Tit. 3. 7. Galath. 3. 18. 22. 1. Pet. 1. 4. Touching these 7
degrees of glory which the true Church has, I have spoken more largely in a
certain oration made by me at Iena on the 28* day of May in the year of
Christ 1562.

Verse 17. In stead of thy fathers thou shall have children: whom thou may
make Princes in all lands.
Notably says Plato in lib. 6. de legibus, as touching marriage. Let this
consolation be proposed in marriage that man and wife ought to be careful for
the perpetuity or continuation of humane nature: that Platos rule as touching
parents.
they leaving behind them their childrens children, may evermore have some
worshippers of God left to succeed them. Parents ought to beget and bring up
children, which may deliver a direct order of life, as it were a Lamp of
light, unto their posterity, so as there may always be some worshipping God,
according to his law. These has he spoken (touching matrimony, for the man
and the wife) holily and religiously. For, therefore gives the son of God
his word and holy spirit unto the Church, that he may regenerate many unto
life everlasting, and that there might always be some even in this life truly
calling upon God and worshipping him. For he not only wonderfully rejoices
and delights in the saints or holy ones which are in heaven, but even in
these which are upon earth, as the 16. Psalm witnesses, verse. 3. Al my
delight is upon the Saints that are in earth. etc. And he calls Saints, the
kings and princes of the earth, not in that they govern by politic order, but
when they vanquish the snares of the Devil, the threatenings and inticements of
the world, and the wandering lusts of our nature, and do gather unto God an
eternal Church.

Verse 18. I will remember thy name from one generation unto an other: Therefore
shall the people give thanks unto thee world without end.
The last verse preaches most sweetly as touching the stability of the
Church, which shall remain ever among the Downefalles of Kingdoms and it
mentions here also of the life everlasting: For if the Church should be
oppressed and extinguished with the Downfall of kingdoms, she should not for
ever be able to remember her Spouse or husband: Always therefore shall there
in this life remain a Congregation reteyning the profession of the true
doctrine, and shall after the raising up of the dead remain in the eternal
society with God, where it shall enjoy his wisdom and goodness without. end. So
be it.

PSALM. XLVI. Deus noster refugium.
To him that excels upon ( Which was either a musical instrument, or a
solemn tune unto which this Psalm was sung,
Alamoth) a song of triumph or thanksgiving for deliverance, committed to the
sons of Korah.


THE ARGUMENT.
Here is set down in this Psalm, a most sweet consolation touching the
stability of the church: For it affirms, that there has always remained,
and for ever shall remain hereafter, a Church or Congregation which shall
embrace the gospel of the son of God, yea, though kingdoms practice the
destruction thereof: For albeit the calamities of the Church be great, yet
amongst these is she not forsaken of god, who saves her in the midst of the
raging floods, and so being troubled restores and heals her: But other
kingdoms and other religions are utterly destroyed. Therefore let us also
apply this psalm unto us, and let us render unto him thanks, that the
congregation of his elect ones is amongst us: which most truly is only in the
congregation of them that are called, whereas God will have the preaching of
the Gospel to sound forth amongst us; wherewith he does call and does
gather unto him a Church, and that he governs, preserves, and defends the
same. Yea, let us celebrate or have in honor even this same benefit of his
also, that he vouchsafes to give some mean harbors at this day, for the
advancement of the true doctrine. And though the enemies thereof do threaten,
that they will confusedly scatter the congregation of the Teachers and
Scholars; yet let us hope, that God will defend some places of godly studies,
and let us so pray, that he would defend them.

Psalm. XLVI. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 God is our hope and strength; a very present help in trouble. Verse 2
Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be moved: and though the hills
be carried into the mids of the sea. Verse 3 Though the waters thereof rage
and swell, and though the mountains shake at the tempest of the same.
WE all by natures persuasion do so reason: there is no congregation durable
except it have some certain resting place and governments ordained for defense
thereof. The church has neither any certain abiding place nor is defended by
the amity of kings, but is rather oppressed, and dismembered. Moreover she is a
miserable congregation, like as the Apostles calamities in times past, and our
daily miseries do declare. In these spectacles or shows what other thing may
man's reason conceue, but that within a while both the true doctrine, and
studies of this same doctrine should utterly be extinguished*

But against this human reason, this Psalm comfort us, saying verse. 1.
God is our hope and strength, etc. For although kingdoms do not defend us, yet
notwithstanding God himself protecteth and preserves us. Of tais consolation
the church of God stands in need, that we may know she shall yet remain
and be, though she have no certain abiding place, or defense of kingdoms.
Therefore often is this consolation repeated, as in Esaias the 51. verse. 16. I
have put my words in thy Christ the King only protecting the church.
mouth, and have defended thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant
the heavens, etc. That is, I ordain the ministry of the Gospel, that shall
not be defended of kingdoms, but shall rather be cruelly assaulted or
oppugned; therefore do I my self promise defense thereof, I will protect the
ministers of the gospel, the churches schools, and godly studies, yea though
the whole world in a rage should bend it self to destroy the gospel.
Although then we have not any humane helps or safegards at all, as in that
Psalm. 27. 10. ver. is written, My father and mother have forsaken me: yet let
us set before us these sayings, wherewith if we shall stir up our faith we
shall unfeignedly feel that God will be with us, and that we shall be by him
helped governed and defended.

Verse 4 The rivers of the flood thereof shall make glad the city of God, the
holy place of the tabernacle of the most Highest. Verse 5 God is in the midst
of her, therefore shall she not be removed, God shall help her, and that right
early. Verse 6 The heathen make much ado, and the kingdoms are moved, but
god has showed his voice, and the earth shall melt away. Verse 7 The Lord of
Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge.
Wise men suppose, that in so great confusion of kingdoms the state of
religion can never long endure in one and the ^ame safety, but are eft soones
otherwhiles extinguished, and otherwhiles springing up. What time the Caldeans
held the ^oueraignety of Babylon, then, and Number. 25. 3. ^^ut. 4. 3. An. mun.
3628 secund. Dau. Chyt. Henric. Pantaleon. Anno Christi. 6^6.
there was Baa^ worshipped. Afterward Alexanders conquest brought in thither
Jupiter Olympus. And the thing it self shows, that the destructions of
kingdoms draw down with them changes of religions; as when in Asia and Africa
the doctrine of Christ was extinguished, then every where raged the furies of
Mahomet: with these examples many are moved, that they suppose Christ's
doctrine even much alike, and to be extinguished with the very dreams of the
Gentiles. And it is out of al doubt, that the Devil fights fier^ely, and
disquieteth whole kingdoms especially for this determinate end, even to destroy
the whole church of God: unto this so great danger this psalm opposes a most
sweet consolation in the 4. verse, The rivers of the flood thereof shall make
glad the cities of God, etc. That is, the ministry of the gospel in the
church shall remain for ever, because God dwells in her as in his holy
Temple, and has limited the sea within his bounds, beyond which it shall not
possibly pass: That is, though kingdoms envying the church, greatly storm
and rage, yet notwithstanding the power of the world shall not destroy the
church, which shall still remain, yea though the whole world frushed together
fall down, as elsewhere it is said, Math. 16. The gates of hell shall not
prevail against her, verse 18. Let us therefore hold firmly fired in our
minds this consolation, and now set the same before us in our present dangers.

Verse 8 O come hither and behold the works of the Lord, what destruction he
has brought upon the earth. Verse 9 He makes wars to cease in all the
world: he breaks the bow, and knappeth the spear insunder, and burns the
chariots in the fire.
He adioyneth unto the Consolation an exhortation, wherewith he persuades the
universal Church to consider the wonderful works of God, namely the
Downefalles of Kingdoms, the chaunges of other religions, and the perpetual
preservation of the doctrine delivered from God, and the safety of his silly
flock which reteineth this doctrine and endeavors to advance the same. For
although the four kingdoms are dispersed, and horrible The churches
stabilitie even amids the ruins of kingdoms.
confusions and verations of all things in mankind have been seen, as the
whole history of the world witnesses: yet amiddes so great downefalles and
desolations of kingdoms, some congregation of God has remained, otherwhiles
greater, otherwhiles lesser, and the doctrine is eftsoons purified and
published by apt teachers: which the son of God sitting at his right hand
has stirred up, and given as it were notable gifts unto his Church. Doubtless,
god suffers for a season, tyrants, fanaticall teachers, and their Champions to
rage with cruelty against the Church, and yet in mean time, the Confession of
many, and other signs are evident witnesses of the gospel: And afterward
the furyes of ungodly persons in notable examples are punished, like as Pharao,
the Cananites, Jews, and Ethnickes, were destroyed, whose cruelty was very
great.

Verse 10 Be still then, and know that I am God, I will be exalted among the
heathen, and I will be exalted in the earth.
This is a precept wonderful and unknown unto philosophy, but it agrees with
that saying of Isay. cap. 30, verse 15 In rest and quietness shall ye be saved,
in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength etc. what is that rest and
quietness then, what is that to be still? Primum tollerare impositas aerumnas,
Deinde non accersere negotia sine vocatione,
Tertio, non vt solet humana diffidentia
Discur^ere ad varia praesidia, etc.


First to bear patiently calamities laid upon us. Next of all, not to deal
in any business beyond our vocation, Thirdly, not (as man's distrust was wont)
to run, hither and thither to seek diverse safegardes: Like as the kings of
Judah one while leaned upon the Egiptians, an other while upon the Syrian
kings, and an other Roboam 3. Reg. 14. 15. Iosphat 1. Paralip. 19. Ioas 2.
Chro. 24. 17, 18.
while upon others: and being entangled with foolish confederacies were
compelled to follow other furies. Against this impatience, unnecessary
business, and distrust of such as seek helps without a right order, are these
words opposed. Be still then and know, etc. that is, be silent, look for
help from God, run not hither and thither into Egypt, into Syria, to the
Turks, nor to the Afrikes. In a good cause be ye of quiet minds, and look
for defense from God: and if any thing happen otherwise, it is yet better to
endure calamities, than with indirect enterprises to blemish a good cause.

Verse 11 The Lord of Hosts is with us: The god of Jacob is our refuge.
The last verse is a conclusion, containing a testimony of Gods presence in his
church: and of deliverances in calamities, which are not to be overcome or
vanquished by man's enterprise.

PSALM. XLVII. Omnes gentes plaudite manibus.
To him that excels, a Psalm (exhortatory) committed to the sons of Korah.


THE ARGUMENT.
THis is a notable prophecy touching the calling of the Gentiles, which saint
Paul in his Epistle the second and third chapters to the Epesians does greatly
manifest, where he teaches, verse eleven, The Gentiles were in times past
without God, without Christ, without his holy Spirit, without promise of the
Gospel, and without hope of eternal life. Then the which misery none could
be conceived greater. For what is man, ignorant of God and of Christ, but the
enemy of God? the dwelling place of the Devil, and a Castaway from God? not
yet in truth seeing the wrath of God, but within a while after shall feel it:
and when he would escape beyond all course of nature, yea and would be utterly
brought to nothing, and yet cannot, but shall be tormented with sorrow
everlasting. This horrible figure must we think upon, that we may learn to
extol the gathering of the Church from amongst the Gentiles. For at this day,
the Gentiles which are called unto the society of Gods people, are Citizens
with the Saints, and of the householde of God, 2. Ephesians. 19. And again,
Coheires of one body, and coparteners of the promise touching Christ. Let
others therefore be in love with frail and momentany benefits, let them thirst
after vain honors, let them seek after corrupt pleasures, and their
instruments: Let us meruel at, and magnify this benefit, that we are cooptate
into the City of God, and Common wealth of the heavenly Citizens, where,
together with the blessed Angels we shall live for ever and ever, and shall
be filled full of lights and righteousness in God.

Psalm. XLVII. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 O clappe your hands together (al ye people) O sing unto god with the
voice of melody. Verse 2 For the Lord is high and to be feared: he is the great
king upon all the earth. Verse 3 He shall subdew the people under us, and the
nations under our feet. Verse 4 He shall choose out an heritage for us, even
the worship of Jacob whom he loved. Verse 5 God is gone up with a merry noise:
and the Lord with the sound of the trumpe.
THe kingdom of god (says Paul) is not meat and drink, but righteousness and
peace, and joy, in the holy ghost. Romans 14. 17. This Psalm describing this
kingdom of God, and Christ, is an exhorter unto all people to clappe their
hands together and to sing with the voice of melody, that is, let them show
with gesture and speech their ioyfulnesse illumined by the holy ghost: For
seeing ioyfulnesse is a motion wherewith the heart contenteth himself in some
good thing, that good thing theweth what is the object or contrary unto this
ioyfulnesse. Because Jehovah the high, fearful and great king above all the
earth, that is, because the Messiah God and man is the conqueror of sin and
death, and bestows this victory upon all that believe, according to this
saying. 1 Cor. 5. 57. But thanks be unto God, which has given us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Again Ioh. 16. Be ye of good comfort, I have
overcome the world. verse. 33. Moreover, I live and you shall live also. John.
14. 19. Namely, through my merit and effectual power: For I by my passion
have destroyed sin and death, and by my resurrection I am so effectual, that
I will restore unto you righteousness and life everlasting. This victory and
effectual ^power of Christ reigning does Paul freely confess that he had not
as yet comprehended at all, and says further, his strength strives that he
may by some means comprehend the same. The same confession let every one of us
have in mouth and mind, and crave, that with a face uncovered, we beholding the
glory of God, may be transformed as it were into the same image from brightness
to brightness as it were of the spirit of the Lord. 2. Cor. 3. 18.

But, although this be the sum of the verses, which I have recited; yet
notwithstanding let us (if it please you) weigh and consider all the words: the
Messiah is expressly called Jehovah: wherefore seeing this name discerns God
from creatures and from all idols, no ^^ (...) there is divine nature in the
Messiah. Again unto the Messiah is attributed highness, or greatness, which may
be understood two ways, absolutely and relatiuely: for absolutely he is so
exalted, that he sits at the right hand of God, and is God of the living
and of the dead; like as he himself says. Math. 28. Unto me is given all
power in heaven and in earth, verse. 18. But, relatiuely, he is exalted in true
acknowledgement, and invocation, wherein we crave and look for from him
necessary benefits for our body and our soul: and with a constant confession,
wherein we prefer this Lord before all other things of our life, possessions
and peace.

But, why is the epithet or word (Terrible) added? Not vainly nor unadvisedly
is our King adorned with this title: for as he is prosperous and wishfull unto
us, so he strikes our enemies with fear, which no creature is able to
express at full. As for example, the devils do horribly tremble, because they
know assuredly that the son of God will judge them: and they see before hand
their punishments wherewith they shall be tormented world without end. The
fourth particle, (The great king above all the earth) discerns the king
Christ from all gouernements. For, no Monarchy ever yet contained all the whole
earth. For, it is manifest, that the utmost bounds of the Roman monarchy (I will
not say of others) reached not beyond Euphrates; neither did the Persians,
Parthians nor the other East people at any time come in subjection under the
Romans. But this king gathers his Church from out of al mankind, though the
kingdoms of the world spite and repugue at the same. For, He is the king of
glory, as in the 24. psalm. and 10. verse. it is said, whose vassals and
court-keepers are all the kings and Princes of the earth. Let us therefore
fear this king, and let us prefer his commandments before the ungodly
decrees of all other kings, according to the rule, Acts. 5. (...) ^^st obey God
more then men.

But where it follows, (He shall subdue the people The Jews false and
fabulous dreams of the kingdom of Christ
under us) that do the Jews falsely wrest to the dream of the political
kingdom of the Messiah. For they imagine that the Messiah having conquered the
gentiles, shall only reign in this world and shall with a just and peaceable
government rule the nations of the world according to the law of Moses: but
this imagination do, both many other things refute, which here I omit for
vreuity sake, and also the very first verse of this psalm. 7. O clappe your
hands together all ye people, etc. For no man oppressed with thraldom, and
cast under other men's feet has been seen to take any great pleasure by that
estate of life. If therefore the Israelits only should rule in the world, having
enthralled the gentiles, surely I understand not what cause should possibly
stir up other people to so great ioyfulnes. Wherefore casting away the
dreams of Jewish dotages, let us understand this verse touching obedience due
to the ministry according to the gospel. For as S. Paul says, 2* Cor. 10. 4.
and 5. verse. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God,
to cast down ^oldes. Casting down the imaginations and every high thing, that
is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ. Furthermore, though it be most true, that
the people of Israel were in time past peculiarly beloved of God: yet, after
the Jewish policy or government was destroyed* let us know that there was no
difference between the Jew and the Grecian, but that the heritage of the son
of God, is in all believers, whether they be called Jews or Gentiles: like as
S. Peter spoke in the house of Cornelius: Acts. 10. verse. 34. Of a truth I
perceive there is no respect of persons with God. verse. 35. But in every
nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted with him. Let
therefore the vain bragging of the Jews be quite driven away, wherein they
strive* or contend, that they only are the heritage and peculiar people of God:
because as S. Paul says, To. 9. ver. 8. They which are the children of the
flesh are not the children of God; but the children of the promise, are counted
for the seed.

Verse. 5. God is gone up with a merry noise: and the Lord with the sound of a
trumpe.
It is a thing manifest, that the psalm alludeth unto the representation of a
triumph wherein a multitude of soldiers and people carried from place to place
does gratulate and rejoice in the victory of their chief Captain, partly with
their voices, and partly with the sound of trumpets, extolling his wonderful
and divine felicity. But where it is said, that our king is gone up on high, it
must needs be, that he first descended, or went down: for so saint Paul
reasons in the 4. cap. Ephesians. 9. 10. verses. Now in that he ascended, what is
it but that he also had descended first into the lower parts of the earth? He
that descended is even the same that ascended, far above all heavens that he
might fill all things? That is, he which suffered the horrible feeling of Gods
wrath against our sins, etc. But of this ascending and descending shall more
hereafter be spoken in the 68. Psalm.

Verse. 6. O sing praises, sing praises unto our God; O sing praises, sing
praises, unto our King. Verse. 7. For, god is the King of all the earth: sing
ye praises with understanding.
By the word (Singing) so often repeated, he clearly declares, and not
obscurely, what manner worshippings this king requires specially: for he is not
worshipped with gorgious ornaments, nor with tragedies made upon silly
captives, but he that will seek to please this king, must sing, yea, and sing
with understanding, that is, he must embrace true doctrine, with faith and good
conscience, and must profess, and propagate or advance the same. Theu do not
the enemies or contemners of true doctrine sing with understanding, but they
call upon him with a contradiction or gainsaying. Neither do Hipocrites
(which break the commandments of God, even against their conscience) sing
with understanding, no, though they profess the doctrine, because The kingdom
of God consists not in word, but in power. 1 Cor. 4. 20. Therefore as Saint
Paul says. Let us fight the good 1. Tim. 6. 12.
fight, keeping faith and good conscience, that is, let us not yield our selves
to error, striving with the foundation of articles of faith, neither let us
fall away against conscience.

Verse 8 God reigns over the heathen: God sits upon his holy seat.
Although the son of God has always even from the very beginning governed
the nations of the earth with a general action: namely, with such wherein he is
present with all creatures, so as he preserves them so long as he will
preserve them, and he destroys whom he will destroy: yet by an other means
he is at this day present with the Gentiles called unto the society of the
church; namely, whereby he not only preserves the lives of them, but also
works motions in them acceptable unto him, and begins new light and
righteousness. Touching this government of Christ, seeing I have elsewhere
oftentime spoken, I come now to the next verse.

Verse 9 The Princes of the people are joined unto the people of the God of
Abraham: for God (which is very high exalted) does defend the earth as it were
with a shield.
In all ages from the beginning of mankind there have bin, and are, and shall be
some Magistrates or rulers chosen of God unto eternal salvation, and called
unto the society Kings and Princes are shieldes of the earth.
of the true church: Touching this calling of Princes, this last verse makes
most sweet mention. For first, it calls them Shieldes of the earth, that is,
defenders of good men and good manners, and reputing their countries benefits to
be their special and chief commodities. For, good Princes are the preseruers
of peace and discipline, defending the bodies and goods of their subjects
against unjust violence: thrusting away robberies and enemies. Therefore
Alfonsus king of Naples had this proper crest to his Arms, A Pelican sucking
out her own blood for to feed her young ones with. And he put thereunto this
his posie or sentence, Pro lege, and pro grege, that is, for the law, and the
people. And Achilles in the 9. book of Homers Ilyades says: Sicut Auis, quae
pro pullis implumibus ipsa
Euolat, and pastum miseris parat, haud secus ipse
Pro Danais mala multa ferens quot saepe peregi
Peruigiles noctes, quot luces mart cruentas
Assiduo, dum bella gero, dum praelior ipsis:
Proque viris and coniugibus Dan^umque salute.
Like as the bird which for her young ones flies
Forth, meat to get, and there with them to fee de,
So for my Graecians suffering harms likewise
How many nights have I watched for their need?
How many days with martial cruel might
Have I made wars, whiles for all these indeed
Both men, and wives, and Greeks welfare I fight.


Furthermore, it says, that they are joined unto the people of the god of
Abraham, as Noah faith in Genesis 9. 27. They dwell in the Tabernacles of Sem,
that is, they are the companions of the true church of God, and do support and
cherish the same with godly duties. Truly it is a great glory to be accounted
and called a Shield of the earth, and a Tree, under which subjects are fed.
But it is a farce greater honor to be seen in that society, whose governor
and head is the Son of God, and which is sanctified with the holy spirit
unto life everlasting.

Although then there have been mighty men and profitable persons to their
country, as Fabius and Scipio was: yet, by right we do prefer before these
governors, David, Josias, Constantine, Theodosius, John Frederike Duke of
Saxony, and such other like, who were not only members of the true church, but
also with their godly duties furthered the advancement of the doctrine of God,
of invocation, and of life everlasting. Last of all, this verse affirms, that
God is very high exalted of the shieldes of the earth: Let this particle be
applied unto the persons and duties of Magistrates and Rulers: For Kings and
princes wherein they exalt the Lord.
then do the personages of Princes exalt the Lord, when they submit and yield
themselves and all theirs which they have in possession, unto Christ: and do
prefer the gospel before their tranquillity, life, and al worldly goods
whatsoever: Such do rightly spread their clothes before Christ. But as to
duty appertains, the Lord is exalted by them in the ordinance of churches
and schools, wherein the word of God dwells plentifully with all wisdom.
Let godly princes therefore use this verse as a cognusance or arms, and let
them think that they are Shieldes of the earth: and not that indeed only, but
also that they are members of Gods people, and verily even the chief and head
members, whose race and course of life makes most to the glory of Almighty
God, and the salvation of many men.

PSALM. XLVIII. Magnus Dominus and laudabilis valde.
A Song or Psalm of deliverance, committed to the sons of Korah.


THE ARGUMENT.
THis Psalm is a most sweet Sermon as touching the Church, containing
doctrine, consolation, and precepts: For, first it describes the church, and
discerns her from other sects. For all The Church discerned from other sects.
other sects do only teach the particle of the law touching external
discipline, and others devise other worshippings of Idolles: but they are
utterly ignorant of the Son of God and of the gospel, that is, the promise
of the free remission of sins, of reconciliation, and of the inheritance of
everlasting life to be given by faith in the son our mediator. But in the
church is retained an upright and scund doctrine of the Law and the gospel, and
the knowledge of the Son of God for us crucified and raised from death to
life. And that alone congregation (wherein the son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ is acknowledged, who was crucified and raised from death to life) is the
church indeed, praising and worshipping God with true invocation. This
difference is needeful to be holden by us against Thammerus, Latomus the
Louanist, Stenchus Heretics of our time.
and such other like, which do work infinite confusion, and imagine that the
members of the church are in all places whether they be Ethnicks or others
whose lives or manners are honest. After this, the Psalm proponeth here a
Consolation very necessary touching the stabilitie of the Church: which as a
Rock immovable stands fast in the sea, according to those verses. Vt pelagi
rupes magno veniente fragore,
Quae sese multis circumlatrantibus vndis
Mule tenet, scopuli nequicquam and spumea circum
Saxa fremunt, laterique illisa refunditur alga.
As rock or huge sea bancke, (which sowsing tide
With roaring waves rush-on) does firm abide:
Nor rock nor foaming stone do fret or fume,
But flagge or reed ytoste to the shore consume.


For although, Turks, tyrannical Kings, and Bishops prepare and practice all
their force and endeavor to the destruction of the Church: yet the gates of hell
shall not prevail against her. Math. 16. 18. neither shall the power of this
world destroy her utterly: Finally this psalm delivers us a precept, which
bids us to love help, and adorn the true Church. This precept, O that
every man would in his place or An admonition to love, help, and adorn the
true church.
calling observe, and would not rend the Church with discordes, nor would not
suffer the Cruelty of those Tyranes to rage: But because many men are little
moved at this exhortation, it is therefore not to be merueiled at, that in
every place there are so many offenders which bleu^^^ the beuty of the Church:
But woe be unto them, by whom offenses come. Matthew 18. 7.

Psalm. XLVIII. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Great is the Lord, and highly to be praised: in the city of our God,
even upon his holy hill. Verse 2 The hill of Sion is a fair place, and the joy
of the whole earth: upon the north side heth the City of the great King, God
is well known in her palaces as a sure refuge.
THe Churches proper glory (as I have often elsewhere The churches proper glory.
said) is true knowledge of God with true invocation and worshipping of him:
this glory does this psalm with great exielle^^y of words describe. For it
compares the Church to a City and a hi^ wherein God is praised, and
worshipped, partly with doctrine delivered from himself, partly with obedience
which he requires. Furthermore he compares the church unto a far place
bringing forth most wholesome balm, which heals wounds without sorrow. For
the preaching of the gospel which the Church sounds in the world is a remedy
effectual, taking away sin, and death: But why makes he so often mention of
the hill Sion? Because the Sone of God was in Jerusalem crucified and raise^
from death to life, and after that disperfed his gla^ tidings of the gospel
throughout the whole world: Like as Isayias in his 2. chap. 3 verse. and
Micheas. in his 4. chap. 2 verse. did forshew the same, Out of Sion shall the
law go and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem. Unto this hill shall all the
nations run, that is, they shall embrace the do^^rme published out of Sion.
They their which altogether either refuse and despise this word, (the
preaching where of is begun in Sion) as the Mahometisis and blasphemous Jews
do, or they which ungodly and filthily corrupt the same, as the heritikes of
all ages, and the stubberne Papists do: Let us know, that these are not the
Church, but the enemies of the son of God and the chafe ordained unto the
eternal fire.

But some man will object, what difference is there between the Church of God
and other Sects seeing all men do acknowledge there is a God the creator and
ruler of the world, and that we must obey him, according as there is difference
between good and bad: Truly this is somewhat to purpose, but in this thing
consists not all things. For although other sects do affirm that there is one
divine essence: yet not with standing they are ignorant of the three persons,
the Father, Son, and Holyghost, eternal. For Christ says expressly in John.
5. 23. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father. Again.
John. 14. 6. No man comes unto the Father but by me Furthermore, although
they know in some part the will of God manifested in the law or decalogue,
yet the knowledge of the first table touching the true worshipping of our God,
and the understanding of the sixth commandment touching Chastity is almost
utterly extingushe with people of other Sects: as the horrible Confusion in
their worshipings and lusts does show. Thirdly, they are altogether ignorant
of Gods will in the gospel manifested, touching remission of sines and life
everlasting freely to be given unto believers for the Soune of God our Lord
Jesus Christ sake. Therefore they cannot persuade themselves that God is a
deliverer and helper in their miseries, but they do remain in doubting, and at
length fall headlong into desperation. These differences between the true
Church and other sects let every one of us imprint as seals in our minds, ^est
that we straying from that Congregation, which is, and is called the true
Church, should be entangled with other Se^ts which are condemned by God.

Verse 3 For, lo, the Kings of the earth are gatherred: and gone by together.
Verse 4 They marueiled to see such things: they were astonished, and suddenly
cast down. Verse 5 Fear came upon them, and sorrow: As upon a woman in her
travel. Verse 6 Thou shall break the Ships of the se a, through the cast
wind. Verse 7 Like as we have hard, so have we seen, in the city of the
Lord of hoasts, in the City of our God, God vpholdeth the same for ever.
Hitherto has he described the true Church. Now adds he unto her a
consolation touching her perpetual A consolation touching perpetual
stabilitie of the church.
stability: And all men understand that the Church had great need of this
Consolation against Her^tilies, Tyrants, and their champions, yea, against
Deui^^^s, which rage more cruelly, because they know within a while their
judgment is at hand, where in their filthiness shall be plainly manifested or
laid open before all Angels and men. But to the end the meaning of these verses
may be more apparent, I will breefely rehearce out of the fourth book of
Theodoretus, the history of Valence, the Emperor, whom God not only
resirained with fearful famine, but also with a tragical death de^^r^ied:
that he should not be able to use cruelty against the Church after the lust of
his own heart.

When Valens would needs confirm with his subscription letters containing a
Commandment to banish quyte Basilius, the bishop of Casaria, he was not able
to make one letter (no when as God would he had worn Vide Polyd. Vi^g. invent.
cap. 6.
his pen to the utmost) which when it happened the second time, and yet he
would needs enforce the confirmatiou of an ungodly decree, even then did his
right hand shake and tremble with fear. There he at length being fearful
troubled straitway cut in pieces the paper, which he had taken between both
his hands, and he is a moderator of all his affects though he had so done
well, and found that others had tasted like vexation by his sufferance, and
that Basilius was proved a better man then that he was worthy of any such
injury* Afterward the Goths Gods just judgment ^t^ destroying Valence the
tyrannical Emperor.
having taken the street wherein Valence purposed to hide him self (being
known by the vproare made by his own men) they both set fire upon the place,
and with all, burned to death the very same enemy to christian Religion: This
punishment suffered Valence for his mischefes, and that even in this life. But
the verse which follows last of these (Like as we have heard, so have we seen
in the City of our God, etc.) admonishes the Reader of two chief things,
first, touching the efficacy of Gods word, next of the difference between
philosophical and Christian assenting. For the word of God is not a vain
sound, and as the Graetians say, No vain prating or langling, but is approved
in purpose and event. For seeing God is true, he shows with horrible examples
of punishments, that his threatenings are sure and certain. Moreover the
promises of God are not vain delectations, after a sort pleasing men's minds,
but are consolations in very deed, the efficacy whereof al such as truly
repent and believe the gospel have sure trial of. For as we do hear, that
they which are justified by faith have peace of conscience: So in true
conversion we feel peace and tranquillity of heart to rise from confidence or
sure trusting in the Mediator. Again, like as the promises are published
touching stabilitie of the Church, so the thing shows that the Church cannot
be destroyed by the furies of tyrants and heretics. Let us therefore put great
difference between the word of God, and the word of creatures, For he spoke,
and it was done, he commanded, and it stood fast, verse 9. Also this place
(as I said) admonishes us touching difference between philosophical
assenting and christian faith: For in philosophy, assent follows experience,
as the ^^hysitian having approved that ginger does warm the stomach,
afterward affirms the same. But in divine consolation, we must assent or
grant unto the external word, and then follows consolation. These things
must we learn in the true exercises of repentance and invocation.

Verse 8 We wait for thy loving kindness (O God) in the mids of thy Temple.
Verse 9 O God, according unto thy name, so is thy praise unto the worlds end:
thy right hand is full of righteousness. Verse 10 Let the mount Sion rejoice,
and the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy judgments.
For So Much as thy promises are not fabulous and vain, but true, ratified and
effectual, we look for mercy, according to thy promises, that is, benefits
necessary for the body and soul (for mercy is oftentime taken for well-doing)
and that indeed in the midst of thy Temple, that is, in the society of the
true church, without the which there is neither any salvation nor life. Unto
this acknowledgement does spiritual worship and joy appertain: for rightly
and learnedly said Augustine touching the blessed ones: Tantum gaudebunt,
quantum amabunt, tantum Augustines saying touching the blessed ones.
amabunt, quantum cognoscent. They shall rejoice so much as they shalloue, they
shall love so much as they shall know. For every affect or motion rises from
the knowledge showing the object, as it is said, Ignoti nulla cupido, Men
desire not that they know not. To this intent or meaning the Psalm says
here, O God, according unto thy name, that is, thy acknowledgement, so is thy
praise, that is, the worship following that acknowledgement. For joy
unspeakable is the companion both of acknowledgement and worshipping of God,
which he describing says; Let the mount Sion rejoice, and the daughter of
Judah be glad, that is, the universal church, and all the godly ones, because
of thy judgments, or because thou art Judge. For even as God sharply punishes
his enemies, the epicures and blasphemous persons: so he exercises lenity or
mercy toward the godly ones, and always in his anger thinks upon mercy. This
great mercy of God mitigating punishementes which we have deserved, all minds
and tongues ought to have in reverence, like as Jeremy says Lament. 3. 22. It
is the mercies of the Lord that we are not destroyed.

Verse 11 Walk about Sion, and go round about her, and tell the towers
thereof. Verse 12 Mark well her bulwarks, set up her houses, that ye may tell
them that come after. Verse 13 For this God is our God for ever and ever, he
shall be our guide unto death.
Plato says, Magis amandam esse Patriam quam Matrem, Platoes saying touching
the love of our country.
quia paetria sit diuinum quiddam; We must love our country more than our
mother, because our country is a divine benefit. But our true country ought
to be the church, and this is divine indeed: for it is the temple of God and
the congregation of Christ's members. Wherefore, to love, adorn, help, and
preserve this, ought every man to bestow the addition of their duties: Let the
teachers teach aright, and with good conversation adorn the doctrine, and let
them be studious of public concord, and let them suffer and bear with some
inconveniences, lest they troble the public peace of the church: let the
Magistrates maintain peace and discipline, and show themselves nursing fathers
of the church, and of the schools. Let scholars learn the doctrine
necessary touching God, and other good effects needful for mankind, lest
the knowledge of God be extinguished amongst men, but let the church be
preserved, and many be made heirs of eternal life, and let discipline be
kept in ure. Finally, let every one pray for those things which concern the
peace of Jerusalem, as in the 122. psalm and sixth verse it is said: which
thing* who shall so do, the hoped for harvest shall not disappoint their good
expectation: for that psalm promises much peace to them that love the church.

PSALM. XLIX. Audite haec omnes Gentes.
To him that excels, a Psalm exhortatory committed to the sons of Korah.


THE ARGUMENT.
THe whole Psalm is an antithesis or contrary A contrary description of the
Church and the ungodly ones.
description of the Church, and ungodly ones agreeing with the history of the
rich Glutton, and Lazarus full of ulcers, as in the sixeteenth of saint Lukes
gospel. The thing shows, that the church is in this life subject unto
persecution, and is oppressed with the kingdoms of this world: But
contrariwise the ungodly ones rule all at their will and carry stately
countenances of credit. This inequality of events so troubles many, that they
deem the doctrine of the Church to be like a Cypres tree, which though she be
thick in show, yet is void and barren of fruit. But the Psalm opposes
against this objection an answer most chiefly agreeing thereto, which is
borrowed of the issue or event, as if he said: Exitus acta probat, careat
successibus opto, etc.
Ovid. epist. 3.
The end approoues that's done before,
A wisher may want welfare the more.


Every man thinks the deeds are to be marked by their events. I acknowledge,
that the Church, and all the godly ones for many causes are not opressed with a
light burden of calamities, and that the ungodly ones do (by Gods sufferance)
now and then flourish for a time: but at the time of death there is a great
difference between the godly and ungodly ones: For as the dead which die in
the Lord (that is, in true acknowledgement and calling upon him) are blessed,
Apoc. 14. 13. Because they enjoy the eternal company of God: So the death of
the ungodly ones is the passage unto eternal misery. For as touching the godly
ones it is said expressly, God shall deliver my soul from the power of hell,
because he shall receive me, verse 15. that is, he shall not leave me in death
and destruction. But contrariwise, of the ungodly ones it is said, They shall
never see light any more, verse 19. That is, they shall not feel consolation
and gladness reposed in God, but they shall remain in torments for ever.
Seeing therefore all things are in this life short and momentany, this Psalm
calls us from the love of brittle fading things, and carries us to the
consideration of death and of the future indgement, wherein the chafe shall be
separated from the wheat, and the wheat corns shall for certain be gathered
into the barn of everlasting life, but the vain chafe shall be burned with
never quenched fire. If we will regard this judgment, let us with mighty
courage suffer discommodities here momentany, because while we look and turn
us about, as they say, behold immortality shall strait be here.

Psalm. XLIX. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 O hear ye this all ye people: ponder it with your ears, all ye
that dwell in the world. Verse 2 High and low, rich and pore one with another.
Verse 3 My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and my heart shall muse of
understanding. Verse 4 I will incline mine ear unto the parable, and show my
dark speech upon the harp.
THe Psalm purposing to speak of a special Of the difference betwixt the
godly and the ungodly ones at the later judgment
matter, uses a stately beginning: I exhort all persons without exception to
draw near and take knowledge, what is to be thought of the difference between
the godly and ungodly ones, and of the future judgment. For so it shall come to
pass, that they shall not only provide for this mortal life, but shall with a
true fear and faith, and other duties pleasing God prepare themselves unto
that judgment which is to come. Beasts frame themselves fit unto that thing
only which is present, and as the time serves, very little regarding either
that is past, or that which is to come: But men, because they are partakers of
reason and are created to the judgment of God, let them so order the course of
their whole life, that they go not astray from the Commandment of God.
Whatsoever thou do do it wisely, and regard the Eccles. 7. 36
end. And surely the end of our life is either eternal society with God, or
otherwise eternal misery: Let us therefore choose the mean ways leading unto
the haven of everlasting beatitude, and withal endeavor (as they use to say)
let us eschew perpetual and most miserable death. Cheled is derived of the
word Chadal, that is, cessauit, has ceased. For, it is a familiar
transposition of the Metathesis.
letters used in the hebrew tongue. This phrase of speech then signifies, that
the world within a while after shall have his end, as in the I. Corin. 7. it is
said The fashion of this world goes away, verse 31. Neither in deed is The
difference betwixt Homo and Vir in signification
it hupostasis a Form, not Substance, as the Philosophers speak, but
Emphasis, that is, a banishing away. Furthermore the difference known between
Homo, and Vir, which is oftentimes used by the Prophets and Apostles, as in
John. I. verse. 13. Not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man; For
as Homo signifies a base and obscure person: So Uir signifies a great and
noble personage, excelling others in wisdom, power, Justice and authority.
Like as then Saint Paul says, Romans I and 14. verse. That he is debtor both to
the wise man, and to the unwise: So this Psalm calls unto this sermon, both
high and low, learned and unlearned persons. Doctrine of future judgment.


Finaly, it calls the doctrine of future judgment, and of life and death
everlasting, wisdom, understanding, a parable and dark speech, because this
secret wisdom placed far beyond the sight of man's reason, must be discerned
from Philosophy. For the alone doctrine of the church affirms, there is a
life remaining after that we shall depart from hence, she alone preaches unto
us touching the judgment that shall be upon all mankind, and names certain
witnesses, which shall be the beholders of many that being dead, shall live
again.

Verse 5 Wherefore should I fear in the evil day, and when the wickedness of
my heels compasses me round about? Verse 6 There be some that put their trust
in their goods, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches.
Unto the beginning is annexed a Proposition, which sets down a consolation
to be applied from the example of one member, unto the whole body of the
church, as is here said: Like as Lazarus being all full of soars straied not
away from God, because he saw the rich man A resembla^ce of the Church in
Lazarus, and her enemies, such as Dives. Luke 16. 19, 20
abound with wealth and pleasures, and himself placed in an extreme state of
miserable perplexity. So let not any the other Godly ones be overcome with the
threatenings and inticements of the world, that they thereby cast away the
gospel, or do any thing against the other Commandments of God. This is the
effect of the Proposition.

Verse 7 But no man may deliver his Brother: nor make agreement unto God for
him. Verse 8 For it cost more to redeem then souls: so that he must let that
alone for ever.
There follows a Reason which appears in the Antithesis or contrariety, as
in the argument it is said: For these verses agree with that saying of Christ
Math. 16. verse 26 What shall it profit a man if he gain all the whole
world, and lose his own soul. That is, the whole world is not a sacrifice for
sin, nor for death eternal, no nor yet for the death of the body. Why then
are men so greatly careful for things appertaining unto this life? or why with
such disquietnes seek they after those benefits, which can neither take away
sin nor death? But this preposterous care and grief which the poet
describing cries out upon thus ( O Ciues, Ciues, quaerend a pecunia est virtus
post nummos) rises of a blindness and security neglecting or contemning the
judgment of God, which every one of us after this death shall abide and
suffer. Whereas if our whole life should look well upon that Judgment, truly
ambitious honor, wealth, and filthy pleasure should less trouble us, which
three the world does esteem as three gods. But seeing this disease is far
more furious, then that it may by our own abillityes be healed, or remedied,
let us flee unto the Son of God: and crave that he would illuminate our
hearts with his holy spirit, so as unto that judgment we may bring but the
beginnings of righteousness.

Verse 9 Yea, though he live long, and see not the grave. Verse 10 For, he
sees that wise men also die, and perish together, as well as the ignorant and
foolish, and leave their riches for other.
In the full polishing of the former verses he repeateth the same meaning:
that, riches, power, and pleasure are the fading benefits of this mortal life,
and can neither drive away death, nor yet profit those that are dead. For as
we came naked out of our mothers womb, so surely shall we return into the
earth either naked, or very thinly clothed. And here the Reader may repeat
that saying in the 39. Psalm 7. verse. For man walks in a vain shadow, and
disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall
gather them. That is, as Cicero in his dialog of Friendship says, Catera cum
parantur, cui parantur nesciunt, nec cuius causa laborent. Other things when
they are provided, or for whom they may be provided, they know not, nor for
whose sake they take all that pains.

Verse 11 And yet they think, that their house shall continue for ever: And
that their dwelling places shall endure from one generation to another, and
call the land after their own names. Verse 12 Nevertheless man will not abide in
honor: seeing he may be compared unto the beasts that perish.
This is a pattern of the ungodly men's lives which dwell in goodly and
gorgeous buildings, which are garnished with scutchions and pictures, and
furnished with A pattern of epicurial pompous persons such as king Alexander.
things wherein they abound, that are reputed for blessed: Such a life we all
do desire, which exceeds in pleasure and other instruments. But the end
shows how much vainitie there is in this trifling or britle bravery, when
one seely hour may bring all topsituruy. All men will know what power and
riches Alexander the great was of, who consumed the huge treasures almost
incredible of the Anno mundi 3640.
Persian Kings, after his conquest obtained, and upon Ephestions funeral
lauished out twelve thousand talents, that is, Threescore and twelve tons of
gold, as we call them. But this so mighty a personage when he had drunk too
too much wine at the funeral feast of Ephestion, and got himself thereby a
most grievous burning fever, died the 28. of June in the xxxii. year of his
age, twelfth year of his reign, and in the 323. year before the birth of
Christ. This example admonishes us touching the incanstancy of humane
affairs, and sets out this verse of this Psalm. Man will not abide in
honor, etc.

Verse. 13. This is the way of them, and this is their foolishnes* and their
posterity praise their saying.
That the chief felicity of man consists in the pleasures of the body, not
only the epicure but the greatest multitude of men does so think. But this
persuasion does this Psalm expressly call foolishnes: because the object of man's
will is not a benefit having end, that is, being short and momentany, but a
benefit without end and everlasting* as elsewhere more largely is said in
refutation of the epicure, and in the doctrine touching the object of man's will.

Verse 14 They lie like sheep, in the hell, death gnaweth upon them and the
righteous shall have domination over them in the morning: their beutie shall
consume in the sepulcher out of their dwelling.
This verse discribes the last degree of punishment allotted for the ungodly
ones, namely eternal misery which is a worm for ever gnawing the conscience
of man, and a fire never ceasing, but without end tormenting them, as Isayas
says in his 66. and last chapter 24. verse. Their The last degree of
punishments allotted for the ungodly ones.
worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched. But as Neither the
eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor man's heart has conceived those good
things, which God has prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor. 2. 9. So no man
can express either in thinking or speaking the greatness of the everlasting
punishment ordained for the wicked ones. But here some man would object, I see
not by what reason Saint Paul being put to death by Nero, should be lord over
Nero: I answer, though Paul was slain of a most cruel Tirant, yet was he not
utterly destroyed, neither was he left in destruction and death, as Nero is;
but he is adorned with everlasting reward and in the last day of the world he
shall with Christ judge Nero and all the ungodly ones. Now indeed our life (as
in the 3. Coloss. verse. 3. is written) is hid with Christ in God. When
Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in
glory. verse 4. Then shall the ungodly ones have in their mind and mouth the
words extant in the 5. chapter of the book of Wisdom: verse 3. These are
they whom we sometime had in de^^^ion, and in a parable of reproof. We fools
thought their lives madness, and their end without honor, verse. 4. Behold how
they are counted among the children of God, and their portion is among the
saints. verse. 5. Therefore we have erred from the truth, etc. verse 6.

Verse. 15. But God has delivered my soul from hell: For he shall receive
me.
Hitherto at large he handled the first part of the Antithesis, touching the
vanity and punishment of the ungodly ones which put all their full hope and
confidence in their riches: Now does he hereunto adioyne the other party, as
touching the godly ones, whose hearts are inclined unto the testimony of the
Lord, And not unto death as in 119. Psalm. is said. And it promises plainly
unto the Godly ones deliverance from everlasting death most miserable, and
restitution unto life everlasting, for because God in the very lawful act of
adoption receives and takes us for his children, it cannot be that he will
leave his dearest children in death. Like as therefore in this life he gives
his holy spirit as a pledge and token of our inheritance: So when he has
raised us from death to life, he will doubtless give us the full and perfect
inheritance, and he shall then be all in all. He then that has this hope
sanctifies himself like as he is holy, says Saint John. 1. epist. 3.
chapter. 3. verse.

Verse. 16 Be not thou afraid though one be made rich: or if the glory of his
house be incresed. Verse 17 For he shall carry nothing away with him when he
dies: Neither shall his pomp follow him.
He repeateth a principal proposition which comfort the godly ones, lest
they taking offense at the felicity and passing prosperity of the ungodly
ones, do slide away from God, but that they would prefer the true and
permanent good things before the shadows of frail and vanishing benefits.
But seeing it is needelesse here with perspicuous words to make any long
interpretation, I will recite two histories worthy of memory: which examples
propone unto the sentence of the affirmative part, that the glory of exploits
done, and other great benefits nothing avail them that be dead: which things
the blind nature of man coueteth especially. Saled* nus king of Asia, Syria
Saladine lived about the year of Christ. 1176.
and Egypt said, he was not less wise in his death, then when in his life
time before, he had done any notable act: for he commanded that his very linen
garment next to his shert (which he used to wear) should be borne upon a long
spears point throughout all his tents, and he that carried it should cry with
a loud voice and say, Saladine the conqueror of Asia, of so great wealth which
he had gotten, carried away with him at his death but only this linen garment.
For wisely, though lately being admonished of man's misery would he also in
such sort admonish others thereof. There is extant an history in the seventh
book and second chapter of Baptista Fulgosus, touching wise sayings and
doings: and as Dion writes, these words are read of Seuerus the emperor:
Seuerus died at York in anno Christ 212. Anno regni. 18.
When as he lying at York in Britain near the point of death, deploring man's
miseries said, I have been all things, and nothing avails me.

Verse 18 For while he lived, he counted himself an happy man, and so long as
thou do well unto thy self, men will speak good of thee. Verse 19 He shall
follow the generation of his fathers, and shall never see light. Verse 20 Man
being in honor has none understanding, but is compared unto the beasts that
perish.
Although (says he) the ungodly superabound in pleasures: yet within a while
after they shall depart into the country of condemned persons where is weeping
and gnashing of teethe: for indeed damned persons shall never see light, that
is, consolation, joy and life, which the godly ones shall possess. But, as he
said before, Man will not abide in honor; so now he says here, man is blind
in prosperity and does not acknowledge even the Author of all goodness, or
the lawful use thereof, no, nor yet thinks of his own infirmity, which is
sooner changed then the swiftest fly that flies. But let us out of saint
Paul's sayings learn these three things: first, from what fountain good
things come unto us: next, unto what use good things granted by God are to be
bestowed: and last of all, how great our infirmity is. Touching the first
cause, let the saying be holden, 1. Corint. 4. 7. What have thou O man that
thou have not received: or if thou have received it, why do thou boast as
though thou had not received it? Touching the second cause Saint Paul in 1.
Cor. 12. 7. says, All these things are given to the profit of the church.
Touching the last cause there is extant a memorable sentence 2. Cor, 4. verse
7. We carry about us this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency
of that power might be of God* and not of us. And here I conclude this
exposition upon this forty nine Psalm.

PSALM. L. Deus deorum Dominus loquutus est.
Of the Title; A Psalm of Asaph.


THe Title admonishes the Reader touching that society of the Prophets,
which in the reign of David advanced the law and promises with speech and
writing: for, think with your self what conflicts and what conferences those
great personages David, Nathan, the sons of Chore, Asaph, Heman, The praise
of David and his Musicians*
Ethan and Idithun had, whose Psalms lightsomely written by them are extant
unto us. And in this place that I may say nothing of the rest, who is ignorant
what honorable mention is made of Asaph so oftentimes in the Books of
Paralipomenon or Chronicles lib. 2. cap. 29. verse. 25, 26, 27.

And Ezechias commanded the chief of the Levites to praise the Lord with the
words of David, and of Asaph the Seer: whereby it appears that Asaph the
Author of this Psalm was in great honor and reputation, and retained the very
next place unto David in the School of those Prophets at that time.

And in the second Book of Paralipomenon 35. chapter, And the Singers the sons
of Asaph stood in their standing according to the commandment of David and
Asaph, and Heman and I dithun King David's Seers, verse 15. Let us therefore
give thanks unto the Son of God sitting at the right hand of the Father, and
giving such gifts unto his church: and let us earnestly desire the society of
these persons in the life everlasting, and in the mean time let us thankefully
receive those crummes which fall from their table.

THE ARGUMENT.
THe fiftieth Psalm is a notable doctrine touching faith, true invocation, and
true worshipping of God, and a refutation of the Ethnickes opinion in heaping up
sacrifices. For this error is straggled abroad in all ages amongst all nations
and people, That sacrifices and other ceremonies are works pacifying Gods
wrath, and merits remission of sin by the deed done, as they now say. This
opinion moves men's minds that they heap up such ceremonies without end, it
reprehendeth therefore this error deeply fixed in men's minds, and shows the
true worshipings of gods, repentance, fear of God, faith which acknowledges
the Mediator, and knows that we are for his sake received, and yet it
observes ceremonies because they are the testimonies of promises, and are
signs of confession and do inuit others thereunto.

So the prophet Jeremy in his 2. cap. reprehending the same error, says verse
22. For I spoke not unto your fathers nor commanded them when I brought them
out of the land of Egypt concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices: But this
thing commanded I them saying, obey my voice. etc. verse 23. And Christ says
in the fourth of John, verse 23. True worshippers shall worship the father in
spirit and truth, that is, in true spiritual motions of the heart, such as are
repentance, fear of God, and faith, or confidence lively beholding Christ.

Finally, the divine scripture is full of such sermons which must be
considered, to the end hipocrisy may be reprehended, and true worshipping of God
may be illuminated or enlightened in us. Thus much for the argument, and now to
the exposition of the Psalm.

Psalm. L. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 The Lord even the most mighty God has spoken, and called the world
from the rising up of the Sun to the going down thereof. Verse 2 Out of Sion
has God appeared in perfect beuty. Verse 3 Our God shall come, and shall not
keep silence, there shall go before him a consuming fire: and a mighty
tempest shall be stirred round about him. Verse 4 He shall call the heaven
from above, and the earth, that he may judge his people. Verse 5 Gather my
Saints together unto me: those that have made a covenant with me with
sacrifice. Verse 6 And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is
judge himself.
THe Exordium or beginning of the Psalm A first and second coming of the
Messiah.
is very great, wherein this is not only signified, That God will have his
voice to be heard of all mankind, but also, a Sermon is set down touching the
two fold coming of the Messiah. For because it makes mention of the hill
Sion, which is the storehouse of the gospel published throughout all the
world, no doubt, but the kingdom of Christ is described, as he first came in
the flesh. So therefore I understand the words of the Psalm Iehou^h, the
son of God, which is the lord of of all creatures, and Logos the word, by
whom the father has made himself known unto us; by his voice has dispersed
the gospel in lury, and as Paul says, Was a minister of circumcision. Heb. 8.
2. and being raised from death to life, gave commandment unto the Apostles,
to gather a church out of all nations by the ministry of the gospel, which
thing shows the glory of God, and of his son our Lord Jesus Christ. And it
is that glory of Christ that he of himself having made a purgation or
clensing of our sins, sits on the right hand of majesty, in the heavens,
being made heir over all, and lord above all principality, power, strength,
and dominion, is made of God for us justification, sanctification, and
redemption, as in Hebr. 1. 1. Col. 1. 1. Cor. 1. This glory of Christ does
the gospel preach unto us. But for as much as the greatest multitude of
mankind does with horrible impiety contemn the acceptable coming of Christ
full of loving kindness and mercy, he adds a sermon touching the second
coming of Christ, which Saint Paul excellently describes in 1. Thessal. 4.
16. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a showt, and with the
voice of the Archangell and with the trumpet of God, etc. This coming or
coming again of Christ, although it be prosperous and wishfull unto the godly
ones according to that saying. Luke. 21. 28. Then lift up your heads, because
your redemption is nighe. Yet notwithstanding it strikes the ungodly ones with
horrible fear, who shall then behold him whom they have crucified, as Zacharias
says cap. 12. verse 12. For then when all men shall be raised up from death
unto judgment, all diuilles shall be cast away (yea, and all men which do not
first in this life turn unto God) into everlasting torments.

And although it has been diversely disputed upon touching the interpretation
of the 5. verse, Gather my Saints together, etc: yet I deem this to be a most
simple plain meaning: There is a great multitude of hipocrits which boast
themselves to be the church, by reason of their profession and ceremonies, when
as their hearts are without true fear of God, and true faith. From this
multitude will I discern mine own people, that is, the right holy ones, which
prefer the promise touching the mediator before sacrifices, and do know in
what order ceremonies are to be observed, and how they please me namely by
laying a foundation, that is, by acknowledging the mediator, and for his sake
in receiving remission of sins, and beginning a new obedience moral in their
heart, which the commandment of God requires. Such holy ones are the
faithful keepers of the testament or promise from me delivered, and they are
the publishers of righteousness which is made manifest without the law, whereof
the Lord and the Prophets do bear witness as in Romans the 3. chapter.

Verse. 7 Hear, O my people, and I will speak: I my self will testify
against thee O Israel, for I am God, even thy God.
This apostrophe or turning speech, appertains unto the whole church, wherein
there are not only newborn members, but also many not newborn, but yet
having a good opinion touching the true doctrine. Therefore it speaks unto
them both, and truly it exhorts those newborn, to go forwards in the race
of godliness, but others to correct their opinions and affects, hear O my
people (says he) a sermon of the first commandment, which is the fountain
and foundation of all other commandments: I am the Lord thy God, that is, I
have made Exodus ^0.
my self known unto thee, not only by a law given, but also by a promise
published touching the mediator. Thou shall therefore hear both kinds of
doctrine, as well when the law preaches unto thee, thou shall fear me
unfeignedly without hypocrisy: and again, when the promise preaches unto
thee, thou shall believe that I am thy God, that is, merciful for the
mediators sake, looking upon thee, hearing and saving thee, also giving thee
good things necessary for thy body and thy soul. When thou have this faith
first shining forth in thee, then use the ceremonies which are signs of the
promises and testimonies of thy confession, and do thou then ^uite other
persons to come into the society of the church.

Verse 8 I will not reprove thee because of thy sacrifices, or for thy burnt
offerings: because they were not always before me. Verse 9 I will take no
bullock out of thine house: Nor he goats out of thy foldes, Verse 10 For all
the beasts of the forest are mine: and so are the cattelles upon a thousand
hills. Verse 11 I know all the fowls upon the mountains: and the wild
beasts of the field, are in my sight. Verse 12 If I be hungry I will not tell
thee: for the whole world is mine and all that is therein. Verse 13 Think
thou that I will eat Bulls flesh, and drink the blood of Goats?
God affirms plainly, that he takes no delight in any work done without
acknowledgement and confidence in the mediator: But then does the use of
cermonies please him, when the person is by faith embraced, and in the heart a
moral obedience is begun agreeable with the commandment of God.

But as we have elsewhere often times used to compare Philosophy with the
doctrine of the church, because the comparison shows the doctrine of the
church to be the more perfect: So even in this place also let us conferr the
sayings of Philosophers (which discern moral virtues from ceremonies) with
the divine prophecy of the Psalm.

Plato says, Non gestibus art compositis demulcentes Philosophical rules
showing how God is to be worshipped
Deum, sed vera virtute colentes; which may thus be englished: We must not
regard those that flatter God with sly and subtle framed gestures, but such
as worship him with true virtue. And Zaleucus the Lawgiver of the Locrenses
delivered this law unto his citizens; God is not worshipped with pomp, nor
tragedies over captiued persons, as an evil man or tyrants, but he that will
please God, ought to be good, not only in action, but also in the purpose of
good and houest works.

These sayings, although they discern learnedly the gestures of ceremonies
from the proper points of virtues, yet they speak nothing touching faith and
true calling upon God, which are the Ladies and Queens of other virtues. For
other virtues are neither rightly governed, nor yet do please God, except faith
and true prayer first do shine forth. But this our Psalm, not only
prefers moral obedience before ceremonies, but also shows by what rule
God is to be acknowledged, called upon and worshipped. For it affirms, that
God has delivered a commandment touching true prayer, and that he has
promised to hear them that call upon him, for the Mediator sake: whereby it
appears most manifest in what manner, even in this point, the doctrine of the
church is able to excel the doctrine of Philosophy. Let us therefore love the
wisdom of the Church, and let us esteem this to be better than all the
sayings and writings of men.

Verse 14 Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most Highest.
Verse 15 And call upon me in the time of trouble: so will I hear thee, and
thou shall praise me.
These two verses bear themselves correlatiuely with the first commandment,
that there is a mutual league A mutual league or covenant between God and
his church
or covenant between God and his church. God for his sons sake embraces
thee, and blotteth out thy sins, and sanctifies thee unto life everlasting:
Thou again know, that this is God indeed, who sending his son, and giving
his holy Spirit, has made himself known, and this true God do thou call
upon in confidence of his son. So is there made a mutual covenant betwixt
God and his church which are all they that truly believe in him. Offer unto
God (says he) thanksgiving: that is, as the epistle of saint Paul cap. 13.
15. does interpret it, The fruits of our lips. And as he here says, Pay thy
vows unto the most Highest, that is, exercise those virtues, whereunto the
promise of the first commandment binds thee: which then are the virtues of
this commandment: Touching this question, this psalm answers; Call upon me
in the day of trouble, so will I hear thee, and thou shall praise me: As if he
had said, prayer in time of trouble, and Thanksgiving for deliverance are the
chiefest and greatest virtues of all others, touching which the first table
enioyneth us. For So Much then as the verse of the Psalm contains a precept ^
and promise to be considered in time of prayer, and in all the dangers of our
life, I do exhort the godly Reader diligently to consider with himself the
doctrine touching prayer and thanksgiving, which is uprightly and plentifully
expounded in places theological.

For there is a sixe-fold consideration of things necessary A sixefolde order
to be considered in Prayer.
in Prayer; first, we must consider what we call upon, what manner of God, and
where he made himself known, to the end thou may discern thy prayer from
the prayer of the heathen: so in this place it is said, Call What God we call
upon.
upon, not creatures, but me, the Creator and preserver of all things, made
known by bringing the people out of Egypt, publishing the law, and sending my
only begotten Son into the world. Secondly, we must consider The
commandment of God unto us.
the commandment which is recited in these words, Call upon me in the day of
trouble: For, God will be worshipped with craving of his grace, or favor, and
other gifts; to the end he may be discerned from evil natures, and that this
honor may be given him, that he is wise, good, liberal, giver of life,
wisdom, and other good gifts, and that he vouchsafes to communicate his
benefits unto us. And like as the breaking of that commandment, Thou shall
not kill displeases God: so also the breaking of the second commandment,
which is the neglecting of prayer, displeases him, where it is said Ioh. 14.
13. and 16. 23. Ask and ye shall receive. The third consideration Conversion
of him that prays.
concerns our conversion: for some man would say, what shall I ask, seeing
it is written, God hears not sinners, Matthew. 9. 31. Here we must take hold
upon the voice of the other Ezech. 33. 11. I live (says the Lord) I will not
the death of a sinner, but that he be converted and live. Let not him that
calls upon God persevere and go forward in mischiefs against conscience, but
let him be truly converted unto God. And in every true prayer, conversion or
repentance unto God is made or increases. The fourth consideration is of the
promise Promise to him that prays.
of grace, and confidence of the Mediator, that we may come unto God according
to the saying, Ephesians. 3. 12. By him we dare boldly come by faith in him.
Needful it is then that we first by faith receive forgiveness of sins, or
reconciliation, and believe that prayer pleases God, and is not frustrate.
Furthermore also other promises touching other benefits and the mitigation of
calamities, must be looked upon, as is here said, Call upon me in the day of
tribulation, and I will deliver thee. The fifth consideration of faith, here we
must know, that faith Asking in faith: Believing God.
which craves forgiveness, reconciliation, life everlasting, and government
of the soul, ought in form to crave these self same benefits, and look for
them without condition; because God will have these to be craved for by name;
and not to have these gifts, is, to remain an enemy of God, and to reproach
God, or to iniure him according to the saying, He that believes not in the
Son, the wrath of God remains upon him. Again, he reproves God of lying.
But faith which craves corporal good things, as David craving of God, that he
might be brought again into his kingdom, required it with a condition; if it
pleased God: because both things must be known of us, that we must ask these
benefits, and yet, that the church must be subject unto the cross, and owes
obedience unto God, according to the saying 1. Pet. 5. 6. Humble your selves
under the mighty hand of God: and yet the prayer is not frustrated: for either
the punishment is taken quite away, or else mitigated. Finally, needful it
is, that we most firmly keep this rule: yea even when we have lost our
corporal benefits, and when we must assuredly forgo the life of the body, yet
must we needs retain the promise of grace and life everlasting, like as Job
says cap. 13. 15. Yea thoug he shall kill me, yet will I trust in him, and he
shall be my Savior. The fixed consideration of things to be craved, is, as
saint John says in his first epistle chapter 5. 14, 15. Whatsoever thing Asking
according to Gods will obtains all.
you shall ask according to his will he shall give it you: that is, you may not
ask things forbidden by God, but such as the manner of asking them may agree
with the table of the commandments, and with Gods promises, touching
spiritual and corporal benefits. And God will have Prayer and Faith to be
exercised of us, in craving, not only spiritual, but corporal benefits,
according to the saying in Matthew 6. 11. Give us this day our daily bread.

For we must always hold fast the rule; In craving of corporal benefits,
faith ought to shine forth, which receives the promise of grace: and we must
add hereunto an admonition touching circumstances; namely, of the time, and of
the manner of our deliverance: God will have his presence in the church to be
acknowledged, and his help to be craved and looked for: he will have our faith,
prayer and hope to be exercised, and will not have men's counsels or men's
devises to bear any sway in government of our life; but he will have it
known, that the church is governed by God above. He does not then give
success by and by, and by such manner of means, as man's reason conceiueth:
like as Joseph, Jonas, and very many others in all ages were delivered, far
otherwise than they themselves could devise. Let these seem to be sufficiently
well enough spoken touching Prayer, because there are exercised theological
places in all men's hands, and other Books containing a longer explication or
opening at full of this virtue.

But like as God requires of us a petition in our prayer, to the end we should
acknowledge that there is a God, and that he is almighty, present, and a
helper, that he might communicate himself in such acknowledgement unto us: So
he requires a giving of thanks, that this acknowledgement may go forward in
us. For when the acknowledgement of God is extinguished in unthankful persons,
God then cease any longer to communicate himself unto them: like as most
part of secure persons after benefits received, do trifle it out with such
like cogitations: perhaps thou art delivered by chance, etc. so they lose
quite the acknowledgement and presence of God, when with the following
commemoration and profession they ought to nourish and confirm the
acknowledgement of God and faith in him.

Seeing therefore Thanksgiving is a necessary worshipping, there are for the
most part, precepts joined together with Prayer and Thanksgiving; because both
of them are necessary unto the acknowledgement of God, as in this Psalm it is
thus said, Call upon me in the time of trouble and I will deliver thee, and thou
shall praise me, Psalm. 50. 15. verse.

To what purpose then is this particle, In the day of trouble? first it
signifies that the glory of prayer (the chefest of all others) shines in
adversity or calamities: for all men in time of prosperity become more
negligent then at other times, as in that verse it is said, Ovid de art Am.
Luxuriant animi rebus plaerumque fecundis.
Men's minds most licentious be,
In time of their prosperity.


But in adversities and calamities prayer is fervent, and not only craves, but
seeks and knocks. Furthermore, this little clause admonishes us, that we
should earnestly think upon the public and private perilles, wherein the
church waxing old, and all the godly ones are exercised and distressed: for the
nearer the day of the latter judgment is at hand, so much more outrageous
wrathful stirs the devil against Christ: namely now fearing the sentence
wherein the exceeding filthiness of the most proud spirit shall be manifested
unto all creatures, and the horrible torments due unto him shall be increased.
Therefore in hatred toward Christ, he stirs up the Turks, Bishops, ungodly
kings; finally, all his instruments against the church.

In so great dangers let us not then be careless and negligent or drunken with
pleasures, but let us obey the commandment of Christ, Matthew. 26. 41. Watch and
pray, that ye enter not into temptation.

Verse 16 But unto the ungodly, said God, why do thou preach my laws and
take my covenant in thy mouth? Verse 17 When as thou hate to be reformed:
and have cast my words behind thee. Verse 18 When thou saw a thief, thou
consentedst unto him; and have bin partaker with the adulterers. Verse 19 Thou
have let thy mouth speak wickedness: and with thy tongue thou have set forth
deceit. Verse 20 Thou satest and spakest against thy brother: yea, and have
slaundered thine own mothers son.
Hitherto has he rebuked the people heaping up sacrifices, and has showed the
true and chief worshippings of God, namely, true calling upon God, and
thanksgiving: Now does he severely rebuke those teachers in the church, which
do either corrupt the doctrine, or defile their profession with evil kind of
life. And here, to the end, that we being warned by example might be more
circumspect, and eschew and abhor that boldness of men which forge and
invent opinions, and of them which cauil at true opinions. I will recite an
history of Origin, who when he should begin his reading in the church of
Cesarea, he sat a long time sorrowing and weeping, and at the length cried out
thus, vt supra, But unto the ungodly said God, why do thou preach my laws?
ver. 16 He often repeating this speech, bewailed that he had disputed many
things inconsiderately and rashly, and craved pardon, not only of God, but
also even of the church, for his errors; which church ^itting hard by the old
man, ^eclared with tears, that she was moved with his lamentation: for there
can no other fury nor sorrow appear in a good mind more sharp or bitter,
than that rising out of a conscience which has corrupted the heavenly
doctrine. But to the end a consonancie of life and doctrine may be necessary
both together, these sayings witness 1. Cor. 9. 27 But I beat down my body and
bring it into subjection, lest by any means after that I have preached to
other, I my self should be reproved. Again, in 2. Timot. 2. The husbandman
must labor before he receive ehe fruits. Consider what I say, verse. 6. And
because examples have in them great force thoroughly to move men's minds, I will
adioyne unto these sayings a new or fresh example which declares what a
mischief the dissonancie of doctrine and life is. I knew a pastor of the
church, who for the sin of adultery was beheaded; he, when he was carried to
execution had always in mind and mouth this sentence of this Psalm, When thou
saw a thief, thou rannest with him, and have bin partaker with the
adulterers, ver. 18. But although he was vehemently tormented with thinking
upon his offense, yet he rendered unto God praise for his mercy, and in this
consolation at length so ended his life Romans 5. 15. grace abounds abone
sin. These do I recite, to the end, that all men may understand with how
great study and care offenses are to be eschewed which defile the profession of
the gospel. The same Sermon appertains unto the ungodly, high Bishops and
other Bishops, who when they profess themselves to be the very chiefest lights
of the church, are notwithstanding filthily stained with mad worshipping of
Images, wandering lusts, and murdering of the holy ones. But in vain do we
preach to these deaf Adders. Therefore let us turn our tongue to our
churches, and let us exhort the curable persons, that they would spread their
names before God and men, that is, not only say, that is holy, but, do that is
holy: for (as saint Augustine says) To teach well, and live ill, is no other
Been dieere and male viuere, nihil aliud est quam sua se voce damnare.
thing, but a man to condemn himself by his own speech. Finally, we must
here refute the opinion of the Donatists, which faineth, that the ministry of
the gospel is not effectual, except the person of the minister be holy and
just: for the person must needs be discerned from the office, and we must most
firmly believe, that God is effectual by his word and sacraments: yea, though
the ministers life maruelously disagree with the profession: for^ neither does
the efficacy of the ministry depend upon the worthiness of the person, but
upon the providence of God* wherefore let us so understand the sermon of this
psalm, that nothing be derogated from the dignity and efficacy of the
ministry, by reason of the persons infirmity.

Verse 21 These things have thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou
thoughtest wickedly, that I am even such a one as thy self: But I will
reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done. Verse 22 O
consider this, ye that forget God, lest I pluck you away, and there be none to
deliver you.
This is a heavy threatening, denouncing unto hypocrites inextricable
punishments: for, the servant knowing his master will and doing it not* shall be
beaten with double stripes, Luke 12. 47, 48. And there is a fearful figure of
the punishment of hypocrites set down in the figgetree, which Christ did
accurse, Math. 21. 19.

Verse 23 Whosoever offers me thanks and praise, honors me: and to him that
orders his conversation right will I show the salvation of God.
In conclusion, he repeateth a principal proposition touching true
worshippings of God: and promises them that perform this obedience, both
government and help.

PSALM. LI. Miserere mei Deus.
To him that excels, a Psalm of David, when 2. Sam. 12. 1.
the Prophet Nathan came unto him: after he had gone in to Ba^hsheba.


THE ARGUMENT.
THis Psalm shines most brightly (as it were a notable precious stone) in the
whole book of Psalms. For first of all it contains most ample doctrine,
which neither the eloquence of angel nor of man can conceive touching sin,
touching grace, touching the gift by grace, difference of worshipings, cr
touching the Cross: After that it disposes and charge great matters in most
excellent order. For seeing the first and cheifest promise is, the promise of
grace and life everlasting to be given freely for the Mediators sake, who will
deny this prayer is wisely ordained, wherein before all things he craves
forgiveness of sin, reconcilation and life everlasting? And because without
acknowledgment and confession of sin, forgiveness or absolution of sin
cannot be received according to that saying of I. Ioh. I. 9. If we confess
our sins, God is faithful and just, that he will forgive us our sins, and
cleanse us from all our i niquity: he franckly and openly confesses his sins,
and points his finger unto the ground of mischief, namely original sin:
But as Saint Paul joins together grace, and the Gifts of grace, so David
vn'o the petition the remission of sins, next adioineth a petition of
sanctification, which is wrought by the holy ghost, the governor of the mind,
will, and heart: finally because it is an usual manner, in craving any thing,
to grant thankfulness for the same, he promises that he will give some
recompenses, which does make for the glory of God, and welfare of the church:
And unto his covenant wisely he ioineth between both, the place, and
difference of sacrifices, whereof some are figurative, and others are moral,
and the doctrine touching the cross. These secret and greatest matters he so
adorneth with lights of words and sentences, that therein nothing wants
touching most profound eloquence. Seeing therefore this Psalm abounds not
only with store of most excellent matters, but is also notably disposed and
adorned no doubt there is, but it may and ought to be learned every word
thereof, and daily repeated when we do pray. And let him know that he has
profited much, whom this right golden psalm shall greatly delight.

Psalm. LI. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Have mercy upon me (O God) after thy great goodness: according unto
the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses. Verse 2 Wash me throwly
from my wickedness: and cleanse me from mine sin.
IN the two and thirtieth Psalm, before, he has recited a definition of
beatitude or chief felicity, in these words: Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man unto
whom the Lord imputes no sin. verse 1. 2. For nothing is more wishfull in
true sorrows rising from the wrath of God against sins, then reconciliation
with God. This benefit therefore with most fervent prayers, and with all his
heart craneth he of God, saying. verse 1. Have mercy upon me O God, according
to thy mercy, as if he said; I confess unto thee, that I have sinned horribly,
as a most wretched sinner, and I am sorry with all my heart, that I have
offended thee, forgive me my sins, and cover my filthiness, and for thy
sons sake our Lord Jesus Christ, (whom thou would have to be a sacrifice,
mediator and intercessor for us) do not thou impute unto me my manifold
disobedience. For so often as in the Psalm mention is made of the mercy of God,
we must straight way cousider of the promises touching grace, and of the
mediator, for whose sake the promise is ratified: Also let there be a
difference in thy sight between the law and the gospel. (...) law truly
has large and great promises, yet consisting upon condition of full
obedience: But the promises of the gospel is universal and free, offering
forgiveness of sins, for the mediator the son of God his sake, our Lord
Jesus Christ God and man, not for our own worthiness, nor for our own virtues,
nor for our own works, or merits. This promise ought to be embraced by faith,
because it is the everlasting and immutable commandment of God, that, in our
conversion, (that is, in our unfeigned sorrows and fears) we should believe,
we are received for his sons sake, according to that saying, I live (says
the Lord) I will not the death of a sinner, but that he would Ezech. 33. 11
repent and live. But to the end this true faith may be rightly understood, it
is needful we always have in our sight that admonition of Barnerd, wherein he
says: Thou must, and ought to believe, that thy sins are forgiven thee.
The devil knows that sins are forgiven some men, and many men, as Saul
and Judas believe that sins are forgiven others. Wherefore let this
necessary admonition be fast fixed in our minds. Believe that thine own
sins are forgiven thee. Touching this faith speaks Paul where he teaches,
that the promise is to be received by faith. They receive not the promise which
believe that the same is offered unto others, and not to themselves, like as in
the epistles of Saint John it is written. He that believes not the Son
accuses him oflying. When therefore thou recitest this article of the creed, I
believe in the forgiveness of sins, understand thou, that sins are not
forgiven others, but thee also. Touching this faith it is said, Being justified
by faith we have peace. Romans 5. 1. Neither must we seek for other consolation,
but we must settle our selves satisfied with this faith in God, for the
mediator sake. But seeing the doctrine touching justification is in another
place fully handled, I am now more brief and I exhort the Reader that he
should diligently consider the weightinesse of the words. He says not in
vain nor rashly, According to the multitude of thy mercy do away mine
offenses. But this necessary consolation of the immense mercy of god does he
set before the greatness and multitude of our sins. And this form of words
agrees with the most sweet saying of Paul. Romans 5. 15. Grace ever abounds
above sin, that is, how great so ever our sins be, yet is it assured that
the son of God is mightier. Therefore let us not unto other offenses add
desperation, but let us believe that grace is more abundant then sin, and
that the son of God is more mighty then all the kingdom of the devil: Like
as in the first promise it is said, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the woman shall
b^use the Serpents head. Also let us consider what sweet resemblences of
forgiveness of sins are set down in the words Do away and Wash. Saint Paul
in 2. Coloss. describing the benefits of Christ uses the same metaphore,
Christ (says he) has cancelled the handwriting which was written against
us, which was contrary to us: he even took it out of the way, and fastened it
to the cross. verse 14. He alludeth this saying unto trophies or pillars which
were wont to be set up, wherein things done were written for memorial: For he
says, upon the cross, as it were upon a pillar, the hand writing was hung up,
that is, the accusation, whereby our conscience (as touching the law) accuses
us. This accusation as it were done away, he says does hang upon the cross
of Christ, who has for us paid the ransom. Let us look upon that trophey or
pillar with faith, so often as we call upon God: For our unworthiness
murmureth against us, thus: why come thou unto God? why dare thou crave
good things, when as for thy so many sins thou have deserved great
punishment, wrath, and destruction, whilst as yet thou feel many vile
motions in thee* Against this distrust of mind fleeing away from God, does he
set us down this trophey: Here (says he) behold thou the accusation hanging
and blotted out, come thou unto God in confidence of the mediator, and crave
his holy spirit, and other benefits. The metaphor of Washing away, may be^
understood out of the history extant in the 13. John. verse. 8. If I wash thee
not thou shall have no part with me Again ibidem verse 10, He that is washed
needs not, to wash his feet, but is clean every whit. These sayings without
doubting do describe justification: Except he himself wash us, that is, except
he with his own blood do redeem us, and except we believe that we are
redeemed by the blood of Christ, we shall not be heirs of eternal life. He
that is washed needs not to wash his seete: that is, he that is just by
faith and is sanctified, is clean, that is, altogether pleasing God. But yet
in this life, our feet must be washed continually, that is, our motions. Weak
nature in this life begets many wandering motions. These filthy spots
ought continually to be washed: and the interpretations are known. The
believing person is clean altogether, that is to say, by imputation. But in
this life is begun a newness not yet altogether fulfilled. These things are
elsewhere largely spoken of. Now let the Reader gather the paraphrasticall
parts of the first proposition, thus: Eternal God, father of our Lord Jesus
Christ forgive me my sins past, wherein I am wicked and filthily defiled: By
the mercy which is promised for thy sons sake our mediator, do away both the
most sorrowful accusation of my conscience, as it were a handwriting against
me, and in the blood of thy son, wash away the remnants of sin sticking in
my weak nature, like as it is written. I John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin. That is, takes away, not only sins formerly
committed, but also covers the remnants of sin, which as yet we seely
souls and weakelings do bear about with us. Let therefore this proposition be
adjoined unto other testimonies which confirm the article of Justification,
and let it always sound in our ears, heart, and tongue: because we have every
moment need of the free forgiveness of our sins.

Verse 3 For I knowledge my faults, and my sin is ^uer before me.
This verse pertains unto confession, wherewith man soroweth in Gods
presence, that he has sins; and by faith craves forgiveness of his
offense, and mitigation of punishments. And there is a great force in the
word, The acknowledgement of sin.
The acknowledgement of sin.] The acknowledgement is not an idle or vain
consideration, such as was in David before his adultery, (when he also knew
that adultery was forbidden) but it is a fear and casting down of man
acknowledging God to be angry; as David did know his sin after the most
grievous rebuke which he had. Furthermore, in the word Sin, we must consider
a relation, namely, that man, by reason of sin, is guilty of Gods everlasting
wrath and punishment, except he have forgiveness for the Mediators sake.
Touching this guiltiness in the Law it is said, Deuter. 27. Cursed be every
one which continues not in all things, which are written in the Law ver. 26.

Verse 4 Against thee only have I finned, and done this evil in thy sight,
that thou might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.
He repeateth a confession amplified with most sorrowful The confessiof sin.
words, as if he should say: I come unto thee, not trusting in mine own
righteousness or worthiness, but only bringing a confession of sin. To
thee only am I a sinner, and do evil in thy sight: for the particle ( only) may
not be referred unto the pronowne, but is a debarring of his own dignity or
worthiness to be referred unto the word following, sinner. So first he
teaches us to bring the confession of our sin unto God. This confession of
sin is more fervent, and more perceived when God encloseth us every where
with signs of guiltiness in punishments, like as when David was driven into
exilement. But it follows in the verse, [That ihou may be justified in thy
sayings, and overcome when thou art judged.] These words comprehend both a
most grave doctrine, that God punishes justly: and a most sweet consolation
touching the promise of mercy which God performs for his truth, or, to
witness that he is true. David going forth in his banishment said, I
acknowledge and confess that I am guilty, and have deserved punishments, and
I pronounce that thou art a just God, seeing thou do manifest thy most just
wrath or displeasure against my sin, and do punish me: And I pronounce
that thou ouercommest, when hypocrites do judge thee. As Saul, Cato, and all
the ungodly ones do think, that they have not deserved so great calamitiess or
surely think, that God is too severe, who has burdened this our weak nature
with such a multitude of miseries; so they accuse and condemn God, and speak
evil of him: But let us render the praise of righteousness unto God, when he
punishes, as Daniel says cap. 9. 7. Unto thee Lord belongs righteousness,
but unto us shame. Furthermore, needeful it is, that an other meaning be added
touching the promise of mercy, because, when this consolation comes not
hereunto, there remains a fretting and grudging of the heart, such as was in
Saul or Cato: we must therefore add this, I acknowledge my self to be
guilty, and to have deserved punishments, I confess, thy wrath is most just,
and I crave mercy, not trusting in my worthiness, but in thy promise. Hear
me, that thou may be justified, that is, to the end thy truth may be
published, that thou keep promises, and, in truth hear, receiuest, and
deliuerest those that call upon thee: show a testimony and example, wherein
it may be seen, that thou art the keeper of promises, when thou hear me an
unworthy person.

Verse 5 Behold, I was shapen in wickedness; and in sin has my mother
conceived me.
He accuses not his parents, nor condemns the self work of generation, but
he bewaileth this mischief, the which with most sorrowful words is of S.
Paul described, where he says, Romans 8. 7. the wisdom of the flesh is
enmity against God. For the substance by God, is one thing, and the disorder
which comes afterward is an other thing, and a deprauing of Gods work,
namely, darkness, and doubtings in mind toward God, the turning of our will
and heart from God, and burning flames of motions diversely wandering in the
heart. But this is a description of original sin no doubt of it, taken out
of Moses, who in the eight chapter of Genesis says, The imagination of man's
heart is evil, even from his youth, ver. 2*1. That is, men are not only
corrupted by evil custom, but in the very heart it self le^^d inclinations
are in children now borne. Let therefore this verse be esteemed amongst the
special testimonies of original sin: that is, of the horrible corruption of
humane nature which is full of blindness, concupiscence and ignorance of her
self and of sin.

Verse 6 But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.
He manifestly witnesses, that God requires of us a confession of sin, and
that it pleases him, as it were a worship glorifing him, and that he hates
hypocrisy which sees not, nor extenuateth the uncleanness of nature, Heither
will be reproved with the word of God, but blasphemeth and persecuteth the true
doctrine. For as Saint Augustine says notably in these words cited by
Prosperus, Melior est in malis factis humilis confessio, quam in bonis superba
gloriatio. Better is an humble confession in evil deeds, then a pro^^d braging
in good works. Also he teaches that this is secret wisdom, namely truly to
accknowledge sin, and to take hald of mercy, and to believe that God will not
cast us away, although we be unworthy and have deserved his wrath, but that he
will have mercy, according to his promises. This secret wisdom is unknown
unto the world, and abhors from the judgment of reason, neither is that
reueiled in the doctrine of the law, but in the gos^el only, and is
understood of them, who in extreme fears do comfort themselves with the
consolation of the gospel,

Verse 7 Thou shall purge me with Isop, and I shall be clean: Thou shall wash
me, and I shall be whiter then snow. Verse 8 Thou shall make me hear of joy
and gladness: that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. Verse 9 Turn
thy face from my sins: and put out all my misdeedes.
He repeateth the first petition; touching remission of sins; and
reconciliation, and adorneth the same with signs borrowed from the ceremony of
the law. For this was the ceremony, wherewith they were cleansed: They were
sprinkled with hisop dipped in blood, whereby was signified the sprinckling of
the blood of Christ, who was to come, the sacrifice for sin. Thou therefore
(says he) shall purge me with hisop, and make me clean, that is, thou shall
pronounce me loosed from sin, and clean, according to thy promises for the
blood of thy son. But he signifies by that Leuiticall ceremony of
sprinckling, that sin is not taken away, but that ceremony of sprinkling and
washing were descriptions and signs of the future sacrifices of Christ,
through whose blood sin should be abolished and cleansed. Wherefore he opposes
this verse against the ^euitical ministry, as if he said: I crave that thou
would purge me, that is, that thou woulde^^ cleanse me with such sprinckling
wherewith sin may truly be taken away, and I may be made clean indeed,
that is, wherewith my conscience may be delivered from guiltiness. But the
Prophet himself interprets those ceremonies without figure, what it is to be
purged, and washed, where he says in the 8. verse Thou shall make me hear of
joy and gladness: by which words he signifies, that he speaks touching the
consolation, which is perceived or felt by the promise: as if he said, bring to
pass, that in me there may be consolation, whereby I may be delivered from
the terrors of sin. And he excellently adds a description of true
repentance or terrors, which the accknowledgement of sin works: That the
bones which thou have broken may rejoice, which trembled for and by reason of
the terrors of sin: To the same sense pertains the little verse following
Turn thy face from my sin. verse 9. For he craves that Gods wrath may be
taken away, that the law may not have any right cause to accuse and condemn
his conscience, yea though as yet he had sin in him. So again these verses
do teach as touching the manner of justification or reconciliation, namely
that we are delivered from terrors, and do obtain forgiveness of sins: so
as sin shall not be imputed unto us, which as yet sticks in nature, yea
even then when we are reconsiled.

Verse 10 Make me a clean heart O God: and renew a right spirit within me.
Verse 11 Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy spirit from
me. Verse 12 O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablish me with
thy free spirit.
Hitherto has he craved grace, that is, remission of sins, and
reconciliation or free acceptance for the Son of God his sake: Now craves he
the gift by grace, as saint Paul speaks, that is, sanctification, as the gift
of the holy ghost, and a beginning of the life everlasting: and Three petitions
of David in these three verses. A clean heart.
he uses diverse means or proper words; first, he craves of God a clean
heart and a right spirit to be given him: a clean heart signifies a heart, by
faith purified from sins, or from guiltiness, and now rightly believing of
God, truly acknowledging God without hypocrisy and false opinions; not
fleeing from God, nor carelessly contenming God, but truly fearing God, and
believing in God. Like unto this is the other also, where he craves a right
spirit, that is, not wavering in the word, not carried about with every wind of
doctrine, nor doubting in the will of God: But a heart striving against
doubting, and surely and firmly settling it self in the promise, and which
surely believes that it has God merciful, and that it is heard of God, and in
this confidence calls upon God, and looks for help from God: secondly, he
craves The holy spirit.
the holy spirit, that is, sanctifying and illumining in our hearts such
motions, as he himself is: for, as the holy ghost is a substantial love, and
coeternall joy betwixt the Father and the Son; so is he sent into the hearts
of believers, that he may inflame in them love and joy settled in God, like as
in 2. Timoth. 1. it is written, For Three notable properties which David
attributes to the holyghost.
God has not given to us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and
of a sound mind. He calls profoundly the holy ghost, the spirit of power,
because it helps our infirmity: the spirit of love, because he is a flame of
mutual love, not only between the father and the Son, but also between
God and the church: the spirit of holiness or chasticement, because it
brideleth wandering assaults of minds, or as saint Paul says, It Romans 8. 13.
mortifieth the deeds of the flesh; and ingrafteth in us better motions
acceptable unto God, and wholesome for us and the whole Church: thirdly, the
psalm names Comfort of the principal spirit.
principal spirit, that is, the willing and obedient spirit, which may rule
and govern us in all our life and actions, and in all our counselles and
dangers; and a spirit which may bring to pass, that we may willingly obey God,
that we may boldly confess the word of God, and that with a mighty courage we
may be able to endure afflictions for the glory of God. These are the effects
of the holyghost in the reconciled ones, or in them which receive forgiveness of
sins. Seeing therefore without this grace there is nothing available in any
man, as the church godlily sings. Absque Dei numine nihil est in homine, etc.
Let us crave from God, this governor of our mind, will, and heart, which gives
witness unto our spirit, that we are the sons of God, and cries unto God
with unspeakable sighings for us, and finally, is a pledge and token of our
inheritance unto the last most joyful day of our redemtion.

Verse 13 Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee. Verse 14 Deliver me from bloodguiltines O God, thou that
art the God of my health: and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness. Verse
15 Thou shall open my lips, O God, and my mouth shall show thy praise.
I said in the Argument, that the latter part of this psalm is a promise of
rendering a due recompense, whereunto we are naturally bound: but seeing we are
not able to give any sufficient recompense unto God, for his benefits most
great, besides the propagation and confession of the gospel, he promises that
he will perform these duties most holily; whereby both the glory of God is
made more excellent, and many men are called back from error and Idolatry,
unto the true acknowledgement of God, and prayer unto him. These worships let
us also perform, that there may be discerned a difference between the true
church of God and other nations. For other nations may have many other virtues,
as there was a great glory of righteousness, chastity, and modesty in
Aristides and Scipio: yet the true calling upon God, and advancement of his
doctrine were wanting in them. But the church alone both understands and
performs worshippings, touching which I have spoken before. Now as the rules
of asking any thing, and of thanksgiving are for the most part joined
together, so in the Psalms these motions are mixed, whereof some crave from
God for the Mediators sake necessary benefits; others give thanks to God or the
Mediator for benefits received. In this place also let there be added unto the
verse Eucharisticall, or that which concerns thanksgiving, two petitions:
one touching mitigation of punishments, the other, touching help in advancing
the doctrine, and touching confession, I acknowledge (says he) that I am
justly punished, and that I have deserved more grievous punishements; But
deliuerme from bloodguiltinesse, O God, that is, O God deliver me from
guiltines or punishment of murder, which is an universal destruction, and
mitigateth thy wrath for thy Mediators sake, that I may be a witness and an
aduancer of thy doctrine. Touching this mitigation of punishments the Prophets
most sweetly preach, as Psa. 77. 9. He will not shut up his loving kindness
in displeasure. And as Joel 2. 13. The Lord is gracious and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. And he makes his
prayer as if he thus said, I beseech thee, O God, to help me in a matter hard
and difficult, namely, in teaching and confessing thy true doctrine: for man's
weak nature is either overcome with inticements, or quailed with threatenings,
or with flatteries of friends is so enfeebled, that with unjust silence she
may dissemble her true opinion. Thou therefore open my lips, thou help my
weakness, that I be not a hireling shepherd, which in the time of peace
does teach meanly; but when as the wolf comes, either runs away, or
holds his tongue.

Verse 16 Because thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but
thou delightest not in burnt offerings.
He frames in order unto Thanksgiving a common place touching degrees of
sacrifices; and moral sacrifices or moral obedience does he prefer before
ceremonies. For, the usual distinction of sacrifice is known, which is
delivered in the predicament of the deed, and in theological places. The only
sacrifice is, ( Ilasticon) propitiatory, that is, the whole obedience of
Christ. The sacrifices of al other the godly ones are Thanksgiuings: and these
are either figurative or moral. But although they seem to be called
co^ntraries: Thou delightest not in burnt offerings. Again, Then shall they
offer young bullockes upon thine altar: yet notwithstanding there is an easy
conjunction or affinity between them. The first saying condemns the
persuasion touching the deed done, as they now use to say: Afterward he
affirms, that ceremonies do please God, when they are rightly used, that is,
when repentance, the fear of God, and faith (which acknowledge the Mediator,
and know that we are for his sake received) do come hereunto also. But he
notes ceremonies thus, because they are testimonies of promises and are signs
of confession, and do inuit others thereunto.

Verse 17 The sacrifice of God, is a troubled spirit: a contrite heart (O God)
shall thou not despise.
A notable doctrine and consolation is set down in this What exercises of
faith calamities are.
verse: for first it teaches, that calamities are not always signs of any
man's reiection, but exercises wholesome for the godly ones, and obedience which
is performed in calamities, he calls expressly sacrifices, that is, a
worshipping or work, wherewith God is honored: After that it comfort us,
lest we should think our selves to be forsaken of God, by reason of
calamities, but that God rather promises help, and mitigation, yea
deliverance of and from our miseries. So in the 57. cap. and 15. verse of Esaias
it is said, I dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive
the spirit of the humble, and to give life to them that are of a contrite
heart. And in the last chapter of Isay. v. 2. To him will I look, even to him
that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and tremb^eth at my words. With this
consolation, Bernard (being brought low by a grievous and deadly sickness)
comforted himself thus saying, Vapulem sane quatenus miseriaris afflicto, qui
non inuenis in me bonum remuneres, tempus meum perdidi, quia perdite vixi, pro
quo quid agam non habeo, nisi quod cor contritum and humiliatum non despicies.
I may well be beaten truly, so far forth as thou have mercy upon the
afflicted person, who find not any good at all in me which thou may
reward: I have lost my time because I have lived graceless, for the which
what I my do I have not in me; but that thou God wilt not despise an humble
and contrite heart.

Verse 18 O be favorable unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem. Verse
19 Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the
burnt offerings, and oblations: then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine
altar.
In conclusion is added a common prayer for the church, as if he had said: Be
favorable O Lord unto thy church, that she may be delivered from corrupt
doctrine, and from offenses, and that true doctrine touching forgiveness of
sins may be made known, and true worshippings be performed. For God will
have us in our prayer to be moved with care for the whole church, and for
others also, like as it is written, Psalm. 122. verse. 6. O pray for the peace
of Jerusalem, etc.

PSALM. LII. Quid gloriaris in malicia?
To him that excels, A Psalm of David to give instruction: when Doeg the
Edomite came and showed Saul, and said to him; David is come to the house of
Ahimelech 1. Sam. 22. 9.


THE ARGUMENT.
THe reading of this psalm is not obscure unto them, which both know the
history of David, and do diligently consider the dangers of these days: Doeg
the conspirator as 1 Samuel 21. and 22. declares, When he was most subtly
aquainted with all harmefull slights, told Saul, that David then banished, was
received into succor by A^imilech the priest: And afterward when the residue
of the Kings ministers fled, and feared the most sorrowful slaughter of the
priests househould: He, this same Doeg, cruelly raged against holy men, no
otherwise then a Lion, which in much slaughter lies as conqueror preying upon
every beast, his jaws al embrewed with blood, driving away hunger, never rests
raging hither and thither casting down bulls, threatens the seely calves, slow
of foot, but weary of tooth: And as Seneca says in Thyeste. Quis Colchus
haec quis c^dis incertae Scythae commisit? aut quae Caspium tangens mare, Gens
iuris expers aus^? In english thus: What Colchian or what wandering Scythian did
ever commit these things? or what lawless nation bordering the Caspian sea
durst ever atempt the like enterprise? For I may well with tragical words
describe such beastly cruelty: So at this day many godly church men, are for
matrimony only cruelly martired, when as never any barbarous nation has
slaughtered men for the like cause. First of all then, in this psalm, he does
exaggerate and amplisie the wicked enterprise of Doeg and such like ^ycophants
which stir up and inflame the displeasures of kings against honest and godly
persons. Next of all he denounces most grievous punishments unto sophisters
and Sycophants which sharpen their tongue, and frame their writings against that
congregation which keeps the true doctrine. Last of al, he sets down a
consolation for the church very necessary: namely, that the whole body of the
church cannot be utterly overthrown with cruel counsels and mischeuous
enterprises of the enemies although by gods assured providence she be
persecuted in some part of her. For whereas David in this psalm. verse 8 thus
speaks of himself, As for me I am like a green olive tree in the house of
God, that is aplyed in the 92. psalm 11, 12, and 13. verse, unto the whole
church and every member thereof, The righteous shall flourish like a palm tree,
and shall spread abroad like a cedar in Libanus. They that be planted in the
house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God. They shall also
bring forth more fruit in their age: and shall be fat and well liking. With
this most sweet consolation let us also then comfort our selves. The state of
our church and schools which by gods been fits or blessing is now ordained,
seems to us, not long so to be settled by the light of the gospel restored:
But yet it shall remain and continue yea though the whole world and all the
devils set themselves against it, Like as Christ in an other place says.
Math. 16. 18. The gates of hell shall not prevail againg the church.

Psalm. LII. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Why boastest thou (thy self O tirant,) thou that can do mischief?
Verse 2 Whereas the goodness of God indureth yet daily. Verse 3 Thy t^ungue
imagines wickedness, and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp rasour. Verse 4
Thou have loved unrighteousness, more then goodness, and to talk of lies more
then righteousness. Verse 5 Thou have loved to speak all words that may do
hurt, O thou false tongue.
Like as Abim^lech that godly and holy man was foully abused by Doeg in this
slander, that he should consult together with David about seditious
enterprises, and practice all means to the destruction of Saul: So the
Prophets, Apostles, and their scholars are always ouercharged with these two
most heinous crimes, namely, blasphemous heresy, and moving sedition. The
consideration whereof more grievously vexes modest persons, then all the
cruel punishments wherewith the bodies are tormented: But as they spared not
(for all their endangered estate by slanders moved against them) to set forth
and advance the true and necessary doctrine of God: So let not us for the
like evil occasion or cauelings cast away from us our confession. And although
we shall want humane helps to support our cause, yet notwithstanding let us
crave and look for defense from God, the everlasting father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has made himself known by publishing so many promises. For as
Isayas most sweetly says, cap. 54. verse 10. The mercy of God endures for
ever: The hills shall be moved, and the little hills shall tremble for fear,
but my mercy shall not depart from me, neither shall the covenant of my peace
fall away says the Lord, that has compassion over thee.

Verse 6 Therefore shall God destroy thee for ever. He shall take thee, and
pull thee out of thy dwelling: and root thee out of the land of the living.
Verse 7 The righteous also shall see this and fear: and shall laugh him to
scorn. Verse 8 Lo this is the man that took not God for his strength: But
trusted unto the multitude of his riches, and strengthened himself in his
wickedness.
Of this most sorrowful threatening here is set down an Judas represents
truly all heretics, reuoulters, and treacherous conspirators.
example in Judas John 13. 27. who horribly condemned himself and wrought his
own death, that with great sorrow he burst asunder in the midst: But seeing
Judas represents the heretics of all ages, also reuoulters from the gospel,
and treacherous conspirators, which with a crafty outward show, estrange the
minds of princes from the gospel, or being estranged, do confirm them and
stir up mightily hatreds in them: thereby considering Judas his punishment,
let al men fear gods indignation and eschew the causes of so horrible a
punishment, Arrius was destroyed with his guts but s^ing out of his belly, as
Judas had; Iulianus the apostata had his chiefest person in office ended his
life with the very excrements of his body coming out at his mouth, and
innumerable others had the like end. Neither lack there examples of our age.
For many ungodly preachers have been in their very sermons suddenly destroyed,
let us therefore fear the judgment of God, and the true opinion of the gospel,
let us be content, neither let us suffer our selves to be corrupt with money, or
with dissembling good wills of princes, or with hope of honors and authority,
that we should stickle on the fury of such as hate the gospel.

Verse 9 As for me I am like a green olive tree in the house of God, my trust
is in the tender mercy of God, for ever and ever. Verse 10 I will always give
thanks unto thee for that thou have done: And I will hope in thy name for thy
Saints like it well.
The description of flourishing Olives most plesantly The Olive lively
representing the church of Christ in three similitudes.
painted out of the church in her lively colors: For as the Olives engrafted
upon the Uine brings forth both Olives and Grapes: and age of the Olive is
longer, which they say is able to endure 200 years. So the true church is both
present in this life, and afterward shall be adorned with everlasting glory.
Again, like as the olive prospers not neither in the coldest nor in the
hotest places: So the church escheweth both extremes, namely epecuriall
contempt of God, and superstitions or idolatry, or as saint Peter faith 1. Pet.
2. 5. She gives her diligence to join virtue with her faith, and with virtue
knowledge. Furthermore like as the Olive is seasoned and refreshed with salt at
the root thereof cast, for avoiding corruption of fatness: So the cross of
afliction reformeth security and many lewd motions in men.

The last verse describes the end, whereunto Thanksgiving must be referred.
For with this confession other men must be invited unto the acknowledgement,
and true calling upon the true God: that they may also assuredly believe, that
the godly ones are cared for and heard by God, and for that cause do with all
their hearts submit themselves unto God, and worship him. But because as
touching this end or purpose, most often I have spoken in the Psalm, I am now
more brief and come to the next psalm.

PSALM. LIII. Dixit insipiens in cord suo.
To him that excels on * Mahalath: a Psalm Which was an instrument or kind
of no^e.
of David to give instruction.


THE ARGUMENT.
IT is the best rule of teaching to speak of the same matters, the same
methods: For it may not be, that the doctrine can take any root in our mind,
except we daily speak our selves, and both hear, and apply our life
thereunto, wherefore it is not to be marueiled that David repeateth in this
place the same sermon which he set down in the 14. Psalm: For nothing ought
to be so sounding in our ears, as the preaching of the law, accusing the
root and fruit of sin, and calling us unto repentance, by showing us the
wrath of God and horrible punishments, which in a most just order do accompany
sin: But that there may be a difference between the church and other sects,
it is needful that unto this sermon there be annexed a promise of the gospel
for the Mediators sake: unto whom they that run for succor are delivered
from sin, death, the law condemning, and from the tirany of the devil, and
are received and rewarded of God with salvation and life everlasting, wherein
being adorned with new light, wisdom, and righteousness, they shall worship God
and enjoy his sight for evermore. Seeing then this psalm instructs us of so
great matters, it is surely worthy to be learned by us every word of it: But I
will not speak any thing more of the Argument because most true is that saying
of Plautus; That which is enough suffices.

Psalm. LIII. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 The foolish body has said in his heart, there is no God. Verse 2
Corrupt are they, and become abominable in their wickedness: There is none that
does good.
LIke as the true acknowlegement of God Knowledge of God the wellspring of all
virtues.
is the wellspring of other virtues, as for example, of the fear of God,
faith, love, and true prayer, etc. so ignorance or contempt of God is the root
of all sins, which rage in the nature of man: for, except the true God be
acknowledged, how can he be called Ignorance and contempt of God the root of
all sin.
upon, feared, or loved. The prophet David therefore accuses the blindness
of man's heart, in that he bears about him either Epicuriall, or Stoicall, or
Academicall opinions touching God. For the minds of all men without heavenly
light, either think al things by chance have their ruin without Gods
government: like as Chorus in Hypolito of Seneca cries out: Res humanas
ordine nullo fortuna regit,
Spargitque manu munera caeca, pe^ora fouens,
Fortune deuoide of order rules
each thing, and blindly serves,
Rewards with hand, maintaining often
him that the worst deserves.


Or else they think, that God is bound unto second causes, and does no
otherwise than as those causes carry him away or move him: either else they
doubt whether God will receive our prayers, and are ignorant why he receives
them, as the barbarous king in Virgil says: Ante Genitor, cum fulmina torques,
Ne quicquam horremus, caecique in nubibus ignes*
Terrificant animos, and inania murmura miscent?


Which is in English thus: O Father, when thou thunderest forth,
do not we quake for fear?
And when the lightnings in the clouds
at randon flash each-where,
Do not they terrify our minds
in murmuring vainly here?


But seeing our mind is full of darkness, and doubtings of God, there
appear in our will and heart manifold* flames of wandering lusts striving
with God, yea, unjust loves, and unjust hatred. By these flames, some Such are
the base people of unbridled sensuality in these days.
are stirred up to confusions of lusts, others unto murders, and some others to
other mischefs: yea the very devils leap into the minds of the ungodly ones,
and moke many to make horrible scattrings in mankind, and infinite spoilings.
These so great mischifs (which the psalm calls abominable corruption) let
us look upon and with unfeigned sighs let us deplore, and seek deliverance
from these evils promised us in the gospel.

Verse 3 God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if
there were any that would understand and seek after God. Verse 4 But they are
al gone out of the way, they are altogether become abominable: there is none
that does good, no not one.
If we were not altogether iron-hearted, and more hard then the rocks of the
mount Sinay, which trembled when Exodus 19. 18.
God sent forth the preaching of his commandment, we would not only
acknowledge our mischefs, but we would also tremble with fear at the sight of
them, and with thinking upon the wrath of God: For what else are the blasing
fires of the whole world, the downefalles of kingdoms, confusion of religions,
and domestical calamities infinite (which with great sorrow we behold) but
testimonial admonishments touching sin and the wrath of God? Let us then
confess our selves to be guilty, and to have deserved great punishments, and
let us crave of God both benefits, namely, forgiveness of sins, and
mitigations of punishments. But I have before spoken more in the exposition of
the 14. psalm against this figure synecdoche, or pars pro toto, wherein some
men have a will to trifle out the whole matter handled in this point, All are
gone out of the way: For the saying of Saint Paul is most true, which no wise
man can gainsay Al men have need of the glory of God: that is, of true
acknowledgement of God, and of obedience agreeable with the decalogue or table
of the commandments of God, which God esteems for glory done unto him, and
wherewith he is glorified and worshipped.

Verse 5 Are not they without understanding that work wickedness, eating up my
people as if they would eat bread? they have not called upon God. Verse 6 They
were afraid where no fear was: for God has broken the bones of them that
besieged thee: thou have put them to confusion, because God has despised them.
Hitherto has he spoken of the note, that is, of the sorrowful The root and
branches of sin in mankind.
and lamentable corruption of mankind: now recites he the fruits of the most
wicked tree: whereof first is universal unrighteousness, which filthily in
diverse and sundry manners breaks the law of God; an other is, tyranny of
governors, who (as Nazianzene says) besides their own rightful revenues,
that is, tributes and taxes, do take with the hands of Briareus what
themselves lift from the possessions of their subjects. The third fruit is,
either neglecting of prayer, or, a false kind of prayer, which is the breach
of the second commandment. The fourth and last fruit superstition, which
fears a fault where no fault is, and makes more account of man's traditions
then of Gods commandments, but lest any man should slide into such opinion,
that he should think tirants and others do sin unpunished, he adds a
threatening touching present and eternal punishment in the sixth verse, he has
broken the bones of them that besieged thee, that is, the Lord scattreth,
confounds, and abhors extortie* tortioners, that is, all sinners which
turn not from grievous sins, but do go forwards in contempt of God and fall
he adlong out of some mischefs into others. And because the punishments of
Tirants are more heinous in sight, I will recite certain tragical ends of some
enemies of the church, that others look well into these examples may learn
righteousness, and not to contemn or despise God. Nero who first practiced
persecution against Christ Anno Christi
procured his own death and destruction. Domitian was 70
slain of his friends conspiring against him, even in his 95
own palace. Maximinus was slain of Pupienus at Aquilia. Daetius was
destroyed in the morish ground of 252
Misia, when he fled from the Goths. Valerian together 257
with his brother, was slain at Insubres. Airelianus was 276
overthrown of his own Notary at Heraclia. and Dioclesian, died poisoned at
Salonia.

Verse 7 O that the salvation were given out of Sion unto Jerusalem! O that
the Lord would deliver his people out of captivity! Verse 8 Then should
Iaacob rejoice, and Israel should be right glad.
All the prayers and all the sighs of the holy ghost have their force and
effects of promises, as elsewhere often I have said: This verse then is a
promise touching the Mediator, whom Simeon in his song Luke 2. 30. calls,
the salvation of God. From him, says he, must we crave and look for true
liberty, that is, deliverance from sin and from everlasting death, and
restitution unto righteousness and life everlasting. This Lord, as Simeon also
says ibid. verse. 32. is a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of the
people of Israel. Therefore as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 10. 17. He that rejoices
let him rejoice in the Lord.

PSALM. LIIII. Deus in nomine tuo saluum me fac.
To him that excels on Neginoth, a Psalm of David to give instruction: when
the Zephims came and said unto Saul, is not David hid among us? 1. Sam. 23. 19.


THE ARGUMENT.
THe histories are known, whose mention is made in the title. For the Ziphims
twice betrayed David, as it is written in lib. 1. reg. 23. 26. But although the
history of David does not admonish us of many things: yet surely in this very
place especially, let us consider two examples, one of a marvelous
deliverance, the other of a rare and unaccustomed patience. For not in all his
histories is there any like example which may be compared with David's
moderation in this place. For other men do both understand, and in effect prove
the saying of Pendaerus which is extant in the second Ode or Song of the
Pithians, Amico volo esse amicus, hosti autem vt hostis
^^u lupus occurram, alias aliunde veniens obliquis viis.
Unto a friend, a friend, I will be,
And an enemy unto an enemy:
Or even as a woolfe will I my self set,
By crooked ways coming elsewhere him to let.


But first let us speak of David's wonderful deliverance, Saules two se^erall
assaults upon David. 1. Sa. 23. 27, 28.
and almost incredible. Saul was by many means let of his purpose that he
could not kill David: For at one time he was called away by the irruption of
the Philistims; at an other time by a heavy and not indeed natural sleep
(but by Gods providence being so overcome) he could not hurt David: for it is
expressly said, The Lord had sent a dead sleep upon them. 1. Sa. 26. 7. 12.
verse. 12. These things though Democritus and the epicure would say they happened
by chance, yet let us know that David's soul was by God preserved, as Abigael
most sweetly said, Like as it were bound in the bundle of life with the Lord
his God 1. Sam. 25. 29. For, according to the saying in 2. of Pet. 2. 9. The
Lord knows to deliver the godly out of temptation; seeing he does that which
is most lawful, and is not tied to second causes. So at this day in diverse
manners the practices of the enemies of the gospel and of the church are
hindered and let, and the seely little flock keeper of the heavenly So in
like manner are the practices of the enemies of the gospel hindered at this day
doctrine is so defended and preserved, that these deliverances may not be
referred but unto God only. There follows an example of David's patience
far exceeding the moderation of philosophers. For reason, after a sort,
moves them unto government of moveable matters, or of external gifts, that
they do not any thing against justice or other virtues. But this David does
the holyghost govern and guide, and as S. Paul says, 5. Galat. 24. 3. Coloss.
5. mortifyeth the deeds of the flesh in him. For though by great right he
might have put Saul to death, and especially in the very best opportunity of all
circumstances, yet he spared his intrapping enemy, and in that point observed
the most grave rule of S. Paul 1. Cor. 10. 23. Al things are lawful for me, but
all things are not expedient: as if he should say, we must not always look
for what we may do with great right, but much more what may be more profitable
by example. For if David using the law of defense had slain Saul, he should
have blemished an excellent cause which he had; and should have been the
author of an evil example, in the people of God. For first, he should by his
deed have confirmed Three cause^ why David (when he might) did spare to kill
Saul.
the slanders of those sycophants which cried out, that David was a seditious
person, and one that with force and arms would invade Saules knigdome, and
should not be unlike to that tyrant, which says in the tragedy: Pro regno
velim patriam, parents, coniugem,
Flammis dare: Imperia pretio quolibet constant been.


In english thus: So I might reign, I would to 'th fire betake
my country, parents, and my wedded mate:
Kingdoms by any means obtained,
do seem to be kingdoms well gained.


Furthermore the Philistims and other enemies of the church taking offense at
this example had cried out in this manner: In vain may the people of Israel
boast, that their kings are given them by or from God when the thing and event
thereof showed, by what sleights or policies some persons had cast others out
of their kingdom.

Last of all, others more with a certain mischeuous practice would have followed
him: even as those which blodely do use to sacrifice men, have excused their
outrage, by Abraham's example in sacrifising his son. To the end therefore he
would refute the slanders of the citizens and enemies, and stopp up and make
void that same welspring of their mischeuous malice he used not the law of
defense whereof man's laws do make mention, but he commended his way unto the
Lord, and expected from him a joyful end of his dangers.

But seeing these are not written for David's sake, but for our sakes, let us
looking into David's example learn both silence and hope, that is, let us
wisely judge what injuries are to be put away, and what are to be suffered for
the tranquillity of the church and common wealth. For that is a wicked
impatience when a man will not suffer sorrow to do the church good: Also as
saint Peter says, Let us join with patience godlynes. 2. Pet. 1. 6. That is,
let us call upon the Lord in the day of tribulation, and let us crave from him
either deliverance or mitigation of evils which ouercharge and exercise us.
Let not our patience be only philosophical moderation, but let it behold the
will of God, and let it be joined with a certain hope of a joyful end: These
exercises of faith. hope, invocation, and patience, in sorrow shall bring more
light to the reading of the Psalms then large commentaries shall do.

Now this Psalm is partly a Prayer, and partly a The effects of the Psalm.
thankesgiuei^g. For the church both craves of God benefits, and gives
thanks for benefits received. Herein David therefore craves defense from God
against the subtle snare of Saul, and he promises that he will celebrate or
reverently commemorate this benefit both with word and writing. Let us in like
manner also crave, that God would restrain the cruel counsels and practices of
the enemies of the gospel, and after our deliverance let us not be unthankful:
but let us acknowledge and celebrate the presence of God in his church, and
with greater zeal let us advance the doctrine of God.

Psalm. LIIII. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Save me, O God, for thy names sake, and avenge me in thy strength.
Verse 2 Hear my prayer, O God, and hearken unto the words of my mouth.
NAme, (as I have often times elsewhere said) comprehends causes impulsive
and ^^all as touching God hearing us. The mpulsiue is the promise of God, the
final ^s the acknowledgment and worshipping of God. He therefore craves that
he may be heard and helped, not for his righteousness, but for Gods promise
sake which is beliuered to the church. Therefore also craves he to be
delivered, that tes^imony of Gods presence might appear in the church, with
consideration whereof many might be stirred up to the acknowledging and
wor^^ipping of God. And let us also when we are Causes mo^uing God to bestow
his benefits.
praying allege these causes, since it is most assured that God is specialy
moved to give his benefits, partly with remembrance and memory of his promise,
and partly in respect of his glory. But where he says [auenge me in thy
strength] let it be understood according to the Hebrew phrase thus, take o^
thee the patronage of my cause, declare thou, that I was called by thy
commandment unto the kingdom, and that I have not sought by ambition to
aspire unto the government of Gods people, as the syccp^a^^s do cry out. But
why adds he, in thy strength? even to give God the glory, not only of
goodness and mercy, but also of immense and infinite power, as if he said. Thou
not only wilt, but also art able to help and save me. For needful it is
that we in our prayer make mention of Gods fatherly will and power, where*
with he created all things, and most freely governs all things.

It follows in the text; Hear my prayer O God, and harken unto the words of
my mouth. I have often A two fold kind of prayer.
advertised the reader, that there is a twofold manner of invocation or prayer:
one of the heart, the other of the mouth: For although prayer may be made with
fervent sighing of the heart, yet the recital of a certain form of praying
conceived without superstition is profitable for many causes. For, first, he
admonishes them that pray, of many things; and it is a certain confession
seperating us from the un godly and profane sects. After that, he stirs up
godly motions in men's hearts according to Saint Paul's saying Romans 10. 17. Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word. Last of all, an express recital
strikes even very deuilles with fear. For deuilles do not with any Gorgon or
shield thrust forth against them more tremble for fear then when they hear
true prayers made unto God. In respect of these commodities, let us inure our
selves unto the express recital of some form of prayer, whether it be
delivered us from Christ, or in the Psalms conceived: and let us not spare for
labors in the reciting of our prayers as many slothful or negligent persons
do.

Verse 3 For strangers are risen against me: And tyrants (which have not God
before their eyes) seek after my soul.
The reason of this prayer is borrowed or taken from a heavy object which
moves God very much unto deliverance: For as the natural tender hearted
father is moved with the misery of his young son or daughter, so God, in
whom is all fatherly love, is moved with our miseries, and feels those
motions of the heart, which are described in the II. of Oseas, My heart is
turned within me, my repentings are rolled together. verse 8. And he
amplifieth Two special points of mischief in the enemy. Pride,
the furies of the enemies of the church with notable words, to whom he
attributes pride and tyranie. For like as devils are most proud spirits, which
are delighted in the destruction of Gods warkes. So the instruments of those
devils are full of tyrannical inselency, which indeed and Tyranny
rises of this spring, that they both neglect and contemn God, and have this
voice of Niobes in their mouth and mind: Mayor sum quam cui possit fortuna
nocere. Greater I am, then whom fortune can hurt or any way consume. For the
original of pride is security, negelecting and contemning Gods judgment: But
let us hold fast that saying of Saint James 4. 6. God resists the proud and
gives grace to the humble. and likewise the sentence by Christ pronounced.
Luke 16. 15. That which is high esteemed among men is abomination in the sight
of God.

Verse 4 Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.
This consideration is an argument which is brought from the things that go
before, as if he said, God has often times before heard and saved me:
therefore no doubt of it he will still help me, because he will accomplish the
benefits he has begun, and will finish the web whereunto he first set his
hand. This argument S. Paul uses in the 2. Phil. 13. For it is God which
works in you both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure: as if
some acceptable things might be done unto him: that is, whereas God has before
helped you in your conversion, and has drawn you out of everlasting death, no
doubt of it, he will govern and help you in your vocation and life, that you
may perform the worshippings which he requires. And in the 2. Cer. 1. 9, 10.
Yea, we received the sentence of death in our selves, because we should not
trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead, who delivered us from
so great a death, and does deliver us, in whom we trust, that yet hereafter he
will deliver us. Let us therefore learn to confirm and comfort our selves
with remembrance of deliverances before past, and by these, conceive a most
sure hope of those that are to come: because God is not only the guide and
giver of his benefits, but also the worker of them in us: as in Phil. 6. He
that has begun this good work in you, will perform it until the day of
lesus Christ.

Verse 5 He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: destroy thou them in thy
truth.
Albeit these prayers seem to be contrary unto the precept Two distinct
prohibitions in praying or cursing for the enemies.
of Christ, where he says, Math. 5. 44. Bless them that curse you, and pray
for them that persecute you: yet if we consider two distinctions, which are
neither fained nor forged, there is an easy conjunction of these places,
having an apparent reason in them: for first, the matter or cause must be
discerned from the persons: therefore we pray that God would utterly destroy and
extirpat the evil cause which our adversaries have taken upon them to defend.
For the enemies counsels and mischievous enterprises with a malignant
countenance, are altogether repugnant unto the sanctifying or glorifying of
Gods name, also do strive against the will and kingdom of God. The remoouing
of these mischiefs, without all doubting, must we crave and pray for unto God.
Afterward we must discern the degrees of the persons: for some are curable or
may be converted, others are blasphemous and incurable. As therefore we must
make our prayers for them that are curable, so persons blasphemous and such as
stubburnly defend idolatry, are to be cursed of all men, even as the very
enemies of God and instruments of the devils. Therefore S. Paul describing the
enemies of the Gospel, uses a grievous word touching those whose minds are
incurable. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Chiist, let him be had in
execration, yea, excommunicate to the death. 1. Cor. 16. 22. He calls the
enemies of Christ not only wicked offenders, but also he prays, that the
judgment of God may light upon them and punish them.

Verse 6 An offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy name, O
Lord, because it is so comfortable. Verse 7 For he has delivered me out of all
my trouble: and mine eye has seen his desire upon mine enemies.
The former part of the Psalm, is a most fervent prayer, wherein he craves
deliverance: the latter part is a song of thanksgiving. For although it be a
thing usual in man's life, as Pindarus says: Vetus gratia dormit, and homines
sunt immemores. The old grace does sleep, and men little in mind keep. yet
notwithstanding, the godly ones in the Church are true and just; for they
acknowledge, and with a thankful heart celebrate the author of benesits, and
confess, that they are bound to perform duties, which are notable
testimonies of thankfulness. So David in this place promises a recompense,
namely, Thanksgiving, and advancement of the true doctrine. Finally, the Reader
must be admonished touching the signification of this Hebrew word Raah: for it
has this emphasis or meaning, that it signifies not only to see and
leasurely behold, but with a certain admiration and pleasure to look upon
some thing, as Esaias in his 9. cap. 2. verse. says: The people that walked in
darkness saw a great light, etc. that is, The Church gathered from among the
nations shall be amassed with admiration at the wisdom which in the Gospel is
revealed. So David says here, his eye did see the fall and destruction of his
enemies; not without admiration at ye judgment of God, touching which it is
said in another Psalm, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and righteou, is thy
judgment. Psalm. 119. pars. 14. verse. 1.

PSALM. LV. Exaudi Deus orationem meam.
To him that excels on Neginoth, a Psalm of David: to give instruction.


THE ARGUMENT.
THis psalm is a most fervent prayer, not indeed against enemies whose
outrages are manifest, but against the falshoode of fained friends our sociats
and companions, which flatter us to our faces, but behind our back, if they
take occasion can lay a cold pad in the straw. This A prayer against fained
friends.
false friendship is most worthy of hatred, and to be accursed of all men. For
as faith is the most holy good property pertaining to the heart of man: so no
plague greater flows from the Stygian or hellish lake then falsehoode of
faith which is covered with many sleights of dissimulation, and ouerspred as
it were with certain sails. But therefore does God suffer us to be forsaken
of friends, or else also to be oppugned by them, to the end he may put away
from us vain confidence in man, which leans either upon the judgments or
the most uncertain wills of our alies and sociats. How often are lewd
opinions of men spread in the church, or unnecessary wars in the commonwealth
by confidence in humane helps? Wherefore that this mischief may be remedied,
and to the end faith reposed in God alone might increase in us, God not only
forbids confidence in man, as where he says, Iere. 13. 5. Cursed is he
that puts his trust in man, but also suffers even our very companion of the
same religion to start back from us, forsake us, and strive against us: In
such a case learn we how much better and more safer it is to trust in God
alone, then for a man to put his trust in a thousand princes: And were it not a
thing hateful, I would here commemorate examples of the lightness and lewd
looseness of some which have mu^ded and assaulted with hostility, even their
very colleges and companions of the same journey by sea: But these new examples
I omit, and I beseech God that he would vouchsafe to defend us with the shadow
of his hand, not only against our enemies, but also against our unfaithful
and unconstant companions or sociates. Amen.

Psalm. LV. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Hear my prayer, O God, and hide not thy self from my petition. Verse
2 Take heed unto me, and hear me, how I mourn in my prayer.
THe Son of God says, True worshippers A difference between the prayer of
the faithful, and the prayer of hypocrites.
do worship God in spirit and truth. John 4. 23. as if he said; Hypocrites do
pray without understanding, without devotion, and with a contradietion: without
understanding, because they consider not the essence and will of God manifested
in his commandments and promises; neither do discern things that are to be
asked of God. Finally, neither consider they what a virtue true prayer is, but
after the manner of prating Parots, do sound words which they understand not.
Without devotion, because they feel not spiritual motions in time of prayer,
as faith, hope, and patience: but they pray with wrath, and with doubting, that
is, they do fret and fume in misery against God, and do doubt of his hearing
of them. Finally, they pray with contradiction, speaking The threefold prayer
of the hypocrites and wicked ones.
one thing, and thinking another: for though they have these words in their
mouths; Sanctified be thy name; Thy kingdom come; Thy will be done. Mat. 6.
9, 10: yet their heart disagreeth from their tongue, forasmuch as they
vehemently desire and earnestly with for the destruetion of the true knowledge
of God, and the overthrow of Christ's kingdom, and that many things may be
unthankfully The prayer of the faithful
done against God. Such is the prayer, or rather much lip labor, to little
purpose, of all them which defend idolles and manifest errors: but the godly
ones (as David in this place) do worship the father in spirit John 4. 23.
and truth; that is, do bring with their prayer true acknowledgement of the
essence of God, and a consideration of the commandments and promises wherein
God made his will known: and they know what benefits God will give us without
condition, and wherein he will require obedience. Furthermore, they acknowledge
and bewail their sins, and yet with faith they vanquish doudtings,
believing, that though they be unworthy of themselves, yet for the Mediators
sake, they are and shall be heard. Finally, in the prayer of the godly ones,
there is a consonancy of the mind, will, heart, and tongue; then which harmony
none can be thought more sweet. Let this difference between true and
hypocritical prayer be often considered in the Psalms, when indeed it
brings some light unto the reading of the Psalms. Now think with your self
how fervent David's prayer is, Hear (says he) my prayer, O God, and with that,
he adds this, as it were, striving with doubting: Hide not thy self from my
petition: yea, and he requires God to take heed unto him, Take heed unto me,
and hear me. And least any man should think that David is cold, or goes
about some other thing in time of his praying, he affirms expressly, that he
will rule his motions in the same prayer; that is, he will crave of God with
most fervent desires, and with all his heart, benefits necessary both for his
soul and his body. But why does he make mention of being vexed? berely because
he would signify that he felt outward fears, inward fightings. 2. Cor. 7. and
did not only strive with external dangers, wherein his body was exercised, but
also with fears and deiections, rising from acknowledgement of sin, and of
the wrath of God: for most commonly the enemies threatenings and the conflicts
of conscience, striving with sin and with the wrath of God, do come together
in one object. But these things are often times repeated, and set forth in the
Psalms, therefore I am now more brief herein.

Verse 3 The enemy cries so, and the ungodly comes on so fast: for they are
minded to do me some mischief, so maliciously are they set against me. Verse
4 My heart is disquieted within me: and the fear of death is fallen upon me.
Verse 5 Fearefulnes and trembling are come upon me: and an horrible dread has
overwhelmed me.
We need not long interpretation in these complaints, because they are
understood by considering our own and others examples: for how much every man
suffers, so much he knows, as one of the old writers says notably. But
contrariwise, he that is tempted, what things does he suffer? For there are
three instruments or means to learn divine things by; Meditation, Prayer, and
Temptation: for the Scripture delivered from God needs no Three special
means to learn divinity Meditation, Prayer, and Temptation.
allegory, but contemplation and understanding. Seeing then we suffer such
like things, such complaints become more sweet in taste with us, which are
every where extant in the Psalms.

Verse 6 And I said, O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I flee away
and be at rest. Verse 7 Lo, then would I get me away far off, and remain in
the wilderness. Verse 8 I would make haste to escape, because of the stormy
wind and tempest.
He adds unto the complain, a prayer of fleeing away: Would to God (says
he) I might be separated afar off from my false and unfaithful friends,
which lie in wait for me nights and days, and are bent upon all occasions
whereby they may overthrow and oppress me. After the same manner all the holy
ones desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Phil. 1. 23. that is, desire
a more sincere beholding of God, and full and perfect deliverance from sin:
for like as a trauailer making his journey in the dark, knowing neither the
way nor the place where he goes, rejoices when the morning begins to wax
light; so all the godly ones feeling the burdens of sin, and striving with
diverse dangers, do desire to have fellowship with God, and being called to the
end of their life, do willingly cast aside the grievous burden of doubtings
and the filthiness of sin, which is in this our unclean lump of flesh
remaining, and do wish themselves altogether and always fervently desire to
have the love of God, and gladness in God. These prayers are neither obscure
nor unknown to the godly ones: I pass on therefore unto the verses following.

Verse 9 Destroy their tongues, O Lord, and divide them: for I have spyed
vnrighteousnesle and strife in the city. Verse 10 Day and night they go about
within the walls thereof: mischefe also and sorrow are in the mids of it.
Verse 11 Wickedness is therein, deceit and guile go not out of their streets.
Seeing we must needs be conversant in the world, as it were in Medeas
bosom, even until the very last end of our life and vocation, let us be
content with our second navigations: and let us pray unto God, that he would
stopp and stay the cunning deceits and iuggling practices of the children of
this world: and that he would Against the open enemies of our time.
cast to them the apple of discord, for the which they may like unto Chadmeis
children fight one with an other: For although the first and most wishfull
voyage is that, which with large spread sails and prosperous winds brings us
into the haven of everlasting blessedness, yet if this be not by and by
granted us, let us with a crooked course quite forsake the winds and tempests
which indeed was wont to be done, when God would restrain the fradulent
^ilchiuous enterprises of domestical and foreign enemies.

Verse 12 For it is not an open enemy, that has done me this dishonor: for
then I could have borne it. Verse 13 Neither was it ^ine adversary that did
magnify himself against me: for then peradventure I would have hid my self
from him. Verse 14 But it was even thou my companion, my guide, and mine own
familiar friend. Verse 15 We took sweet counsel together, and walked in the
house of God as friends. Verse 16 Let death come hastily upon them, and let
them go down quick into hell: for wickedness is in their dwelings and amongst
them.
The greatness of sorrow (which the swaruing or re^^sulting Against the false
friendship of our time.
of our friend brings to us with whom we have lived publicly and privately
most familiarly and most friendly, and which was not only our companion in
counsels and the rest of our affairs; but also of the self same religion)
exceeds all eloquence of speech or utterance. For this false friendship
increases the enemies outrages, and vexes the holy spirit of the godly ones:
For indeed the weak persons taking offense at the diversity or difference of
men's judgments, begin to doubt of the certeinty or truth of doctrine. But the
enemies they triumph at it, when the chiefest teachers are caught away from the
church. Finally so many and so great offenses do follow this swaruing or
backsliding, that David not vainly nor unadvisedly (being inflamed with the
zeal of the holyghost) cried out here: Let death come hastily upon them, and
let them go quick into hell. etc.

Verse 17 As for me I will call upon God, and the Lord shall save me. Verse
18 In the evening and morning and at noone day will I pray, and that instantly:
and he shall hear my voice. Verse 19 It is he that has redeemed my soul in
peace, from the battle that was against me: for there were many with me.
Verse 20 Yea* even God that endures for ever, shall hear me, and bring them
down: for they will not turn nor fear God.
True prayer is a special safegarde of the godly mind, in so great miseries
of this life: Let us therefore run for refuge unto this tower, and in this
haven let us settle our selves, and let us not seek for those remedies of our
sorrows which are not granted us. This place also teaches that we must go
forwards in faith, in prayer and hope for Gods help: For although by the
assured providence of God, our deliverance be deferred: yet this little lingering
has great advantages, because it exercises faith and prayer, and shows,
that we are not preserved and defended by man's help, but by Gods help: and
many ways adorneth and aduaunceth the glory of God: Luke 16. 20. Matthew. 9. 8.
Luke 7. 12.
As the raising of Lazarus from death to life, was more glorious, then the
reviving of the daughter of Iairus, or the widows son of Naim.

Verse 21 He laid his hand upon such as be at peace with him: and he brake his
covenant. Verse 22 The words of his mouth were softer than butter, having war
in his heart: his words were smoother than oil, and yet be they very swords.
This most pleasant description painteth out the properties of false brethren
and points the finger unto the Against the false brethren of our time.
wel-spring of dissimulation, fraud, or guile subtle deceits and cruelty: for
the original of these mischiefs is impiety, which neither fears God, nor
is not converted unto God: from this wel-spring flow the sleights of hurting,
which hipocrits most subti^ly are acquainted with, and the^^ flattering speech,
touching which Cicero says: Frons, vultus, oculi persaepe mentiuntur, oration
vero saepissime: The face, the countenance, and the eyes,
very often deceive men:
But the speech of tongue
most often deceive them.


And Eurypides says: Dura molliter loquuntur, they speak grievous things
smoothly. Hitherto pertains the fable of the little Mowse, to whom her
mother gave this commandment: Beware my little one (says she) not of the
crowing cock, but of the silent Cat, whose manners and gestures are altogether
full of craft and subtilty. And what say you to that which our learned
schoolemaister D. Philip Melancthon was wont very merrily to recite in these
verses: Annis mill i am peractis,
Nulla fides est in pactis,
Mel in ore verba lactis,
Fell in cord, nil in factis.


In English thus: These thousand years now past and gone,
None keep covenants, no not one:
Honey in mouth, words milk proceeds,
Gall's in the heart, and naught in the deeds.


Verse 23 O cast thy burden upon the Lord: and he shall nourish thee, and
shall not suffer the righteous to fall for ever.
This is a notable and sweet consolation, which bids us settle our selves
in confidence of the presence and help of God, and to crave and look for from
him either deliverance or mitigation: This consolation heals not the scarres,
but the wounds, as the experience of the godly ones witnesses. It is our part
to do the works of our vocation diligently and faithfully, and to eschew the
favoring of offense in our selves. But the care touching the issue and event
of our labors must be commended unto God, who will bring to pass that we
shall not be oppressed with vain contention, but that our care should be
profitable to the glory of God, and to the salvation of many men. O Lord Jesus
Christ, I therefore beseech thee, that thou would mercifully hear and
preserve us wretched and weak souls reposing upon thy shoulders. So be it.

Verse 24 And as for them, thou (O God) shall bring them into the pit of
destruction. Verse 25 The bloodthirsty and deceitful men shall not live out
half their days: nevertheless, my trust shall be in thee, O Lord.
He recites in conclusion of this psalm, a curse, the The cursed end of the
wicked.
which is a prophecy of the holyghost touching the tragical destruction of
false brethren, which are not curable of their sores: for in as much as God is
a lover of truth and righteousness, without all doubt he shall and will destroy
the craftes-maisters of lyings and murders. And I will not be here any longer
tedious, but I beseech God, that he would heal our wounds, and turn the
hearts of such as are teachers in the Church unto a godly and wholesome
agreement in doctrine and conversation.

PSALM. LVI. Miserere mei Deus.
To him that excels, a Psalm of David, on Michtam; concerning the dumb Dove
in a far Country: when the Philistims took him in Gath.


The Title.
THe history whereof mention is made in the Title is recited in the 1. li.
Samuel. 29. cap. And though the declaration thereof be brief, yet painteth it
out the Image of those Kings Courts, wherein Ambition, King Achis and his
courtmaligning the estate of King David.
Emulation, Envy, Hatred, Slander, and a thousand sleights do bear sway: for
the Governors in king Achis Court burned with very hatred at the glory of king
David, and could not rest in quiet till they had driven this exile away, whose
wisdom and virtue was excellent. And how like one egg is unto another, or
milk like milk, so like is one Court unto another. But why do I speak of
Courts, when even in very schools there are contentions for poor
superiority. Let us therefore be Doves, and indeed dumb Doves, without the
case of our confession, as in the old verse is said; Melius est hospitem tacere
quam clamare:
Better does silence a stranger become,
Than for to be too too tatling of tongue.


For there is difference between allow able silence and unjust silence,
because there are often probable causes why we must keep silence, according to
the Pr. 25. 20. Like as vinegar is poured upon niter, so is he that sings
songs to an heavy heart. Also many things does the thing it self refute when
we hold our tongues.

Here then a question is asked, when we must keep silence, or when we must
speak? Seeing the An Apology of the life and doctrine of true gospellers.
confession of our Religion is known we are able to pass over reproaches:
being accused of heinous crimes, let us purge our selves modestly, and let us
bear with many more slender reproaches, and stop their mouths with silence:
and let us take heed that our adversaries may in our life and conversation be
refuted, and not with words, as Cicero says: Male mecum agitur, si me oration
potius quam vita mea purgat. It goes evil with me if my speech rather than my
life should purge me. And Scipio says in Liuius: Res non verba ad purgandum se
parasse, he had addressed matters, not words to purge himself withal:

It is an unjust silence when either with fear or flattery a true opinion in
case of Confession is hidden or not revealed: Of this unjust silence this our
age affords unto us very many examples. Christ himself both before Herod
Luke 23. 9. and again when he was upon the Cross ibid. 34. And when David
heard Semey crying out against him 2. Sam. 16. 7. Come forth, come forth
murderer and wicked man. Let this be enough spoken as touching the Title.

THE ARGUMENT.
THere be three parts of this Psalm; the first is a prayer, wherein he craves
defense against the The tripartite division of this Psalm.
malapertnes of his enemies amongst whom he lived in exilement, the second
part is a declaration of his calamity: For although it be a great mischief
for a man to be plucked away from the society of his parents and friends, and to
wander amongst unknown persons without honor, and to be cast ^orth to al
dangers of fortune, yet there are greater mischefs not to be conversant in the
congregation of the true church, and not to have or enjoy the sweet
conferences with the godly ones, but to hear the blasphemous speeches of men
against God. The greatness of these mischefs exceeds all cogitations of mind
and eloquence of tongue. The third part is a thanksgiving for defense and
deliverance from God. For as Saint Peter says. 2. 2. 9. The Lord knows to
deliver the godly out of temptation etc. and as Saint Paul says 1. Cor. 10.
15. God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you
be able, but will even give the issue with temptation, that ye may be able to
bear it.

But always in the reading of the Psalm let us consider of the application:
seeing the church lives banished in the world, and not unlike to the Halcyan
The church like the Halcian bird.
bird building in the sea rocks, we must crave that God would mitigate these
calamities in the whole body and all the members thereof, and now and then
grant us after tears gladness. Also let us be thankful unto God for the
mitigation of those calamities, and for his wonderful defense of the church
against the rage of the world and of the devils.

Psalm. LV I. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Be merciful unto me O God, for man goes about to devour me: He is
daily fighting and troubling me. Verse 2 Mine enemies are daily in hand to
swallow me up: for they be many that fight against me, O thou most highest.
The cruelty of hatred wherewith the enemies of the godly ones do burn is in
most sorrowful words described of Saint Paul 1. Corint. 4. 9. The godly ones
are made a gasing stock unto the world, also ibid. 13. the filth of the world,
the of-scowring of all things. For, excrementum, signifies an odious thing
filthily defiled, accursed, worthy of destruction, for which God punishes
whole nations, except it be utterly taken away. And as excrementum is a filthy
thing upon earth, so reiectamentum, signifies a man, who with his contagion
hurts his companions of the same journey by sea: and whom it is needful
that we cast into the sea, least all that are in the ship and the ship it
self be overwhelmed with the raging floods. Now think what a heavy and
sorrowful thing it is, to be judged a plague and destruction of mankind, and
to be nights and days laid open to all chances of sudden dangers. Wherefore
we must sufficiently well furnish and arm our minds with true doctrine,
prayer, and testimonies of the true church that we be not oppressed with the
unjust judgments of the world, or else do start back from the gospel through
fear of dangers.

Verse 3 Nevertheless though I am sometimes afraid, yet put I my trust in
thee. Verse 4 I will praise God because of his word: I have put my trust in
God and will not fear what flesh can do unto me.
Unto the history he adds a consolation which is taken not out of
Philosophy, but out of the word of God: For most truly it is said in the 119.
Psalm part 3. ver. 2. This is my comfort in my affliction, because thy A
refuge in sorrows.
word has quickened me. For in sorrow unfeigned, when the mind seeks every
where for comfort, and we find by experience we are not helped by man's device
or imaginations, at the length the godly mind running down to the preaching
of the gospel, as it were unto a fountain of lively water, begins to setle
it self, and to feel Gods help and presence, and the restoring of life
everlasting. And here let the nature of faith be considered which (as Saint
paul's epistle Heb. 11. cap. 1. verse has set fortth) is the ground of things
which are hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not seen: For it is
a matter important to believe those things which we see not, to hope well of
things deferred, and to rest at peace in God, yea, though he cast a stern
countenance at us, and so to persevere even unto the very end. To this purpose
Job says cap. 13. verse 15. Yea, though he shall kill me, yet will I trust in
him, and he shall be my Savior. So David with a great respect or regard of
faith says, I have put my trust in God, and will not fear what flesh can do
unto me: yea although all fears and all dangers every where arise over me:
yet I hold it a thing both certain and affirmed, to yield and obey to God
calling me, and not to start aside no not a nail breadth from his word: For
if God be on our side, who shall be against us Romans 8. 31. O that it would
please God to give us in the great outrage of storms and concourse of
calamities like strength of faith vanquishing fears and doubtings: And without
all doubts he shall be mighty in our infirmity if we make our prayers unto
him, according to his promise. Math. 7. 11. How much more shall my heavenly
father give you his holy spirit, when you pray for it?

Verse 5 They daily mistake my words: all that they imagine is to do me evil.
Verse 6 They hold altogether, and keep themselves close, and mark my steps:
when they lay wait for my soul. Verse 7 Shall they escape for their
wickedness? thou O God in thy displeasure shall cast them down.
He handles at full the history as touching his miseries in time of his
banishment. Like as in Esops fables all beasts conspire together to spoil the
poor Camel: So (as Tyrteus the musician says) Nemo curat vagos and ledere
nemo veretur.
Non exul cur^ ducitur esse Deo.
No man cares for the wandering wights,
to hurt them none does fear:
Men think that God forgets quite
pore Exiles living here.


But unto a most evident complaint we need not to add any long declaration.

Verse 8 Thou tellest my flittinges, put my tears into thy bottell: are not
these things noted in thy book?
O the unspeakable fatherly loving kindness of God, The unspeakable fatherly
loving kindenes of God toward his.
numbering the very hairs of our head, and gathering our tears! For I pray you
think and consider how great this gatherer is, namely, the Creator of all
things, the King of kings and Lord of lords. We merueile at the humanity of
Theseus, who washed with his own hands the dead carkases of his slain
soldiers at the water of Thebes: But much more let us marvel, yea, and al
amassed wonder at this, when we read and hear that God gathers our tears.
But whose tears I pray you gathers he* not the tears of Angels but of
sinners, whose infirmity and filthiness is great. Surely I can scarce tell
whether any more notable description be extant of Gods providence either in
the histories of the Prophets or of the Apostles. Let this therefore be fast
fixed in our minds, so that it may comfort us, so often as we are vehemently
disquieted touching the will of God, and are vexed with a certain special
sorrow. God takes care, not only for our bodies and souls, but also even for
our very hairs and seely tears, and keep them as it were a matter of great
importance and as a treasure of great prise. Therefore notably said Saint Paul,
that our light afliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far
more excellent, and an eternal weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4. 17.

Verse 9 When soever I call upon thee, then shall mine enemies be put to
flight. This I know for God is on my side.
In this verse let there be considered a difference between The doutings of
the Heathen.
the doubting of the Ethnicks and the careful confidence of the church. Cato,
although he believed there The faith of the church.
was a God, yet he doubted whether he might be hard and by little and little was
plunged into desperation: But the church which embraces the word delivered
from God, striving against doubting believes assuredly, that she is received
and heard for the Mediators sake, and the cause of his assuredness is the
word of GOD, in which phrase or speech I comprehend the commandment,
promise, oath, and truth of God: But these things are elsewhere often expounded.

Verse 10 In Gods word will I rejoice: in the Lords word will I comfort me.
Verse 11 Yea in God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do
unto me. Verse 12 Unto thee, O God, will I pay my vows: unto thee will I give
thanks. Verse 13 For thou have delivered my soul from death, and my feet from
falling: that I may A threefolde conclusion of thanksgiving.
walk before God in the light of the living.
So often times as I have now spoken of thanksgiving unto God, the same is to
be referred unto three conclusions; whereof the first is, that the glory of the
power, liberty, and presence of God in his Church might be attributed unto God:
and that Epicures, Stoics, and other blasphemous persons (which cry out that
God is either idle or blind) might be refuted, etc. The second conclusion is,
that true acknowledgement of God might go forwards in us, and that God
henceforth would vouchsafe to communicate himself unto us: for God cease to
communicate himself unto unthankful persons, which are liars and unjust:
Liars indeed, because they acknowledge not from whence their benefit is
received; and unjust, because they render not due recompenses whereunto they
are bound. The last conclusion is, that others by our example might be assured
or woon^e to the true acknowledging and inu^cating upon God. Unto these final
effects, let us refer our Eucharist or thanksgiving, and let us declare our
thankfulness, not only in speech and preaching, but with all obedience, in
our vocation, life, and calamities.

PSALM. LVII. Miserere mei Deus, miserere mei, quoniam in te confidit anima mea,
etc.
To him that excels (Destroy not) a Psalm of David on Michtam: when he
fled from Saul in the cave. 1. Sam. 24. 4.


THE ARGUMENT.
PLato in Protagora cites the saying of Simonides: Uirum vere bonum nasci
difficile A constant person in goodness.
est, qui manibus, pedibus and mente sit Tetragonos, that is, A hard matter it
is to find a right good man borne, which of his hands, feet, and mind is
always upright and constant. Such a man was David, who could more hardly be
withdrawn from an honest or good purpose, then the shining Sun may be driven
out of his course: for although by great right he might have slain Saul, yet
neither would he use the law of defense, whereof politic laws do make
mention, nor yet take occasions which ministered opportunity unto him to slay
Saul. For seeing he had altogether consecrated himself unto God, and his
country, that is, the Church, he would not be the author of an evil example
amongst Gods people, in putting kings to death, but in faith craved and looked
for help from God: wherefore let us marvel at this humility and gentleness
in David here set down, and let us use the like as we may use it. Let others
marvel at David's victories, wherein he tare in pieces both Lion and Bear,
and overthrew the monstrous fellow Golias before his own eyes: let us marvel
at and publish abroad the most excellent kind of victory, wherein our
domestical enemies, their ambition and desire of revenge, are overthrown and
destroyed. For in that part of man which is called Furious, namely, in the
heart, there are two most trouble some and most cruel affections, wrath, and
ambition: and these are easily inflamed in great personages; and being
inflamed, do every where trouble whole kingdoms and the common society of men:
therefore to vanquish these plagues is more glory then triumph. Let us also
consider in the history of David, a testimony of Gods presence in the Church:
for although Saul bent and practiced God delivers David out of Saul's hands.
all the whole endeavor of his kingdom to the destruction of David, and that
he never purposed any thing more earnestly then to destroy David by all means
that he could, not by judgment, nor by good aduisement, but by violence and
greedy assault: yet God took this silly mor^ell (if I may so say) out of Saul's
jaws, and suffered not so much as a hair to fall from David's head. Let us,
being confirmed with this testimony, believe that God is always present in his
Church, and that the enemies can not be cruel against her, but when he
himself suffers them.

Psalm. LVII. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Be merciful unto me (O God) be merciful unto me: for my soul
trusts in thee: and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, until
this tyranny be ouerpast.
IN reading of the Psalms, let not the foot go one way, and the string sound
another way, as it is said of those which dance not right measure; but let our
affections iumpe in one with David's harp. Let every man say therefore with
true confidence in his dangers and calamities: My soul trusts in thee, and
in the shadow Our affections must iump with David's harp.
of thy wings will I trust, until this tyranny be ouerpast. This application
of the Psalms unto our selves, brings more light to the Readers then long or
large commentaries shall do: but how hard a matter it is in a true heart to
sound these words, godly minds do by experience find. For two temptations
do always murmr against us; the one of our unworthiness, the other of
particularity: but against our unworthiness, let us set down and oppose free
promise; and against particularity, universal promise, as elsewhere is often
said. Also before in the 17 Psalm is a most excellent metaphor taken from
Hens, largely declared at full. I will not therefore sing one and the same
song so often times.

Verse 2 I will call upon the most high God: even unto the God which shall
perform the cause that I have in hand. Verse 3 He shall send from heaven and
save me, from the reproof of them that would eat me up. Verse 4 God shall send
forth his mercy and truth.
He foresheweth with notable words the presence of God in his Church, that he
may confirm us with his example and testimony; that we should not come
fearfully unto God, but trusting in the mercy and truth of God we should cry,
that is, as Christ says, Math. 7. 7, 8. We should ask, knock and seek: for
every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that
knocks it is opened. But so often is mention made in the Psalms of the mercy
and truth of God, to the end we may know and acknowledge that we are preserved
and defended, not by humane helps or safegards, nor yet for our own merits,
but freely by mercy promised in the Gospel, which is not a device of man's
opinion, but an eu^^lasting and unchangeable decree of Gods wisdom and truth.
Therefore although we are unworthy, yet must this glory or praise be attributed
unto God, that he is merciful, and keeps promise with most assured faith.
Wherefore let us cry out with Daniel 9. verse. 17, 18. We power out our prayers
before thee, not in our righteousnesses, but in thy great mercy; hear us for
the Lords sake.

Verse 5 My soul is among Lions, and I lie even among the children of men
(that are set on fire) whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a
sharp sword.
Let this description of the Church be diligently looked The church is in the
world like Daniele^^ among the lions, etc.
upon; for the Church always so lives, even as Daniel sitting among the
Lions. Dan. 6 16. The devils are always intrapping us. Ungodly persons always
give cruel threatenings unto the church. So does the prophet I say in his 11.
cap. verse. 11. compare the church unto an infant playing upon the hole of the
aspe, and to a weined child playing upon the cockatri^e hole. For like as the
infant perceives not the greatness of the danger, wherein he is exercised,
neither is furnished with any defense against the most hurtful serpents: So
the church looks not so far into the sleights of the devil and the world,
wherewith she is allured, neither has she visible ^uc^ours whereunto she may
flee for refuge. Then rests this one thing, that she with her whole mind
and heart be turned unto God and from him look for defense in so great snares
of the devil and in so great multitude of dangers. Furthermore, (seeing no
weapon is The description of slanderous tongs.
more hurtful then the tongue, if it be prepared to do hurt) most elegantly
does he compare slanders unto fire, arrows, and sharp swords: For indeed
slanders do not only hurt those whom they diffame, but also foolish light
believing hearers, in whose hearts and breasts they leave the stings of
suspicions. For, most truly is it said of a certain slaunderer, Calumniare
audacter, quia semper aliquid haeret. Slander still boldly. something always
sticks in thee. Then what remedies must be administered to the poisonfull
bitings of Sycophants, the seventh psalm teaches us: namely, a denial, or
modest refutation and prayer. For, let us when we are accused of heinous
crimes, purge our selves modestly: Afterward let us commend our causes unto
God, and let neither our confession nor patience strive the one with the other,
but let either virtue have his due place.

Verse 6 Set up thy self, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory above all
the earth.
God is moved with nothing more, then with respect of his glory: As in Esaias
48. verse 11. For mine own sake, for mine own sake will I do it. Therefore
notably does David in his praying allege this cause: Be thou a defender of
thy glory, refute the enemies slanders, which exclame against us that we are
heretics and Schismatics and falsely lay in our dish two most heinous crimes,
Blasphemy and Sedition, whereof the one violateth or transegresseth the first
the other the second of the commandments. These poisonful reproaches
blemishing or defacing thy glory, thou thy self refute, and show in purpose
and event that the confession of truth pleases thee.

Verse 7 They have laid a net for my feet, and pressed my soul, they have
dug a pit before me, and are fallen into the midst of i^ themselves.
Elder age long ago made a most honest law for punishing of a slaunderer, for
the cause being known the The example of gods indgement and justice upon
slanderous persons.
slaunderer was scurged with the same punishment wherewith the other should
have been scurged if he had been convinced. So they that slandered Daniel
were cast amongst the lions. Dan. 6. 24. And they that slaundered Susanna were
stoned to death, Daniel 13. 62. For not a more just punishment is there then
that murderers should be manqelled. Therefore said Pithagoras viz. Iustum esse
quiddam retaliatum, a ^ust man was a certain recompensed thing like for like.
And as the verse of Rhadamanthus says. Iusta malis haec admisso pro crimine
poena est, Si quae fecerunt, eadem pat^antur et ipse. A punishment just to the
wicked men,
This is for crime committed so by them:
That if they have done any wickedness,
They therefore should smart all remedile Te.


Verse 8 My heart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give
praise. Verse 9 Awake up my glory, awake lute and harp I my self will awake
right early. Verse 10 I will give thanks unto thee O Lord, amongst the people:
And will sing unto thee among the nations.
A great part of the Psalm consists of prayer and thanksgiving. Like as
therefore heretofore he craves defense against the violence and fraud of his
enemies: So now with great alacrity or cheerefulnes of mind he David's
thanksgiving unto God for his goodness.
gives thanks unto God. And this comfortablenes in thanksgiving is stirred
up, not by man's help, but by the spirit of grace and of prayer. For without
his spirit, the old grace sleeps, and man little in mind keeps as Pindarus
says. But men being maued with the holy ghost, are true and just, that is,
they acknowledge the society with God, and study according to their ability
to render some recompense.

Hereof come those sayings, My heart is fixed, awake Lute and Harp, and I will
sing unto thee, etc. But, why adds he that he will give thnakes unto the Lord
among the people? Uerily to teach that Thanksgiving is a public, and not a
private virtue. For Temperance and certain other virtues are men's private
induments and ornaments. But Justice whose outward show is Gratitude or
thankfulness rejoices in communicating her self Gods goodness must be both
acknowledged in ourselves and made known unto others.
unto others, and in that thing follows large fountains which send whole
rivers out of them. Therefore it is not nough that we privately acknowledge
the presence of God, but we must celebrate gods benefits before others, that
even they also may be called unto true acknowledgement and prayer unto God.

Verse 11 For the greatness of thy mercy reaches unto the heavens: and thy
truth unto the clouds.
He amplifieth the mercy of God, not with vain thetorike, but with true
affirmation, such as is extant in the epistle of S. Paul to the Romans the 5.
chapter, and 2. verse grace abounds above sin: for we must most firmly
believe, that the kingdom of God is moremighty, than the whole kingdom of the
devil: neither must we add this defperation unto other our offenses; which
thing Caine added in committing that murder saying, Genesis 4. 13. My sin is
greater than that it can be forgiven. This blasphemous speech which accuses
God of untruth, and derogateth from him the praise of immense mercy, does
Augustine most gravely reprehend, saying; Thou lie Cain, greater is Gods
mercy than the misery of all sinners.

Verse 12 Set up thy self, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all
the earth.
Like as Rhetoritians in their epilogues or shuting up of their tales will have
the chief arguments repeated: So David repeateth this most sweet little verse
in the end of this Psalm, wherewith he as it were stirs forth (if I may so
say) God voluntarily running upon his side: Let thy glory flourish, rule, and
reign, even to the destruction of all epicures and blaspheimers. Amen.

PSALM. LVIII. Sivere vtique iustitiam loquimini.
To him that excels (Destroy not) a Psalm^ of David on Michtam.


The disposition of the Psalm.
THere are four parts of this Psalm: the first is, a rebuking of the godly
ones mightily amplified by degrees of mischiefs, circumstances, and
familitudes: The second part is a prayer, that God would restrain and subdue
tyrants and heretics. The third part prophecieth of the punishments due to the
ungodly ones, and of vain contention, so far as pertains to the effect of
the matter. The fourth part promises unto the godly ones deliverance. These
parts if it please you let us ^unne through hereafter.

Psalm. LVIII. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Are your minds set upon righteousness, O ye congregation? and do ye
judge the thing that is right, O ye sons of mer? Verse 2 Yea, you imagine
mischief in your hearts upon the earth: and your hands deal with wickedness.
Verse 3 The ungodly are froward even from their mothers womb: as soon as they
be borne they go astray and speak lies. Verse 4 They are as venomous as the
poison of a serpent: even like a deaf adder that stops her ears. Verse 5
Which refuses to hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely.
ALthough mankind wholly, without the Contempt of God in heretics and tyrants*
sight of the Gospel, and without the holy spirit, be both dumme and deaf,
because nature not regenerate, either securely contemns Gods judgment, or
else is full of academicall doubtings, either else being astonished with fear,
flees from God and hates him: yet in this place heretics and tyrants of all
ages are by name rebuked, when they become incurable. For like as Aspes do
stop and close up their ears that they might not hear the words of the
charmers* even so heretics and tyrants are so troubled out of their mind and
whole body, that furiously they refuse and despise all wholesome counsels and
all godly admonitions: but the causes of this furiousness are not only men's
wills, covered with an e^icuricall contempt of God, and most cruelly setting
themselves against the present state, of what sort soever it be, but much more
do devils, leaping into the very hearts of the godly ones, and by their
breathings extinguishing light, and natural affection in men. Examples of this
purpose are set down in Pharaoh, Exodus 14. 8. Antiochus, 1. Mac. 1. 11. the
Pharisees, and monks of Examples of both.
our time, which have night and day bent and practiced all their endeavors to
the destruction of the true church. But these Aspes at length by casting a
little nightshade or petimorell unto them are therewith cast asleep. And that I
say nothing of tyrants, who ever read or heard that any author of a lew^
religion has been revoked from his error, and restored to a sound or perfect
opinion* For like as in the godly ones there increases spiritual light,
according to that saying in the Proverbs cap. 4. verse. 18, 19. The path of the
righteous shines as the light that is brighter and brighter, unto the perfect
day: but the way of the ungodly is as the darkness, they know not where they
fall: so in heretics do increase darkness, malepartnesse and s^ubburnnesse,
which by no help may be healed. Therefore S. Paul bids us, Titus 3. 16. To
shun an heretic after he has been once or twice admonished. Which thing,
since they so ^e, let us fervently crave of God, that he would not cast us away
amongst those vessels of wrath, such as have been and are all heretics and
tyrants incurable. But that he would make us vessels of mercy, whose course
in this life may edify to Gods glory, and tend to the welfare of many men*

Verse 6 Break their teeth, O God, in their mouths, smite the iaw bones of the
lions, O Lord.
Hitherto has the Prophet painted out the image of David's prayer for defense
against those his enemies.
the ungodly ones, which do all they can to oppress the manifest truth, and
the church it self. Now he sets against this fury, a most firm defense,
namely true prayer unto God, whereof Solomon says, Proverb. 18. 10. The name
of the Lord is a strong defense, etc. For, like as Christ vanquished the devil
in the wilderness, not with brazen pieces, but partly with the word of God,
and partly with prayer, Math. 4. So the special weapons of our warrefare are
Doctrine and Prayer. Let us therefore crave of God that he himself would subdue
the practices of the enemies and vouchsafe to help us in our so great
infirmity.

Verse 7 Let them fall away like water, that runs apace: and when they shoot
their arrows, let them be rooted out. Verse 8 Let them consume away like a
snaile, and be like the untimely fruit of a woman: and let them not see the
Sun. Verse 9 Or ever your p^tets be made hot with thorns: so let
indignation vex him, even as a thing that is raw.
In other psalms, the ungodly ones and their practices Whereunto David
compares these his enemies in four kinds.
are compared unto vain chafe which is carried or blown hither and thither
with the wind: again, unto rust and unto grass growing upon the house side,
which before it be plucked up, withers away. Let there be adjoined unto these
most pleasant sights of figures, five similitudes recited in this place:
whereof, in the first he compares the practice of his enemies unto water
running away. Which though now and then it bear great substances, and seems
to last always, yet after a while, being heated of the sun, or blown of the
Esterly wind runs away swiftly. Secondly he compares the enemies mischeuous
enterprise unto an arrow or weapon which is broken together with the bow, out
of the which it is sent, or else misseth quite the mark whereat it is aimed.
Thirdly he describes the image of a snaile coming out of the shell presaging
some harm ensewing unto him that paseth by, but she within a while being
resolved into water leaves her house without any thing in it. Fourthly he
sets down a sigure of an untimely lump or piece of flesh, and which is
brought forth with danger of death: For as this wretched lump swells the
womb, and yet comes not to full ripenes or fulness of time: So the contentions
of the ungodly ones, are burst off, or ever they have half effect. Lastly he
compares the cunning crafts and pleasant practices of the enemies unto young
thorns, which are quite plucked up by the travelers, before they come to
their full sharpnes: But seeing the Hebrew word Sir, signifies both, the
thorn, and the pot, this similitude may even in this sense be understood
likewise. Before your pottes feel the thorn hot, or fiery flame, the flesh
as yet raw, together with the pottes shall be turned up side down. Now think
what an Orator the holy ghost is, and with what notable words he teaches and
comfort us* that we should not be discoraged nor enfeebled with the first,
furious outshew of our enemies: But let us in silence and hope look for
preservation of the body, yea though by a sure providence of God, some members
are persecuted or torn in pieces. Let us therefore hold fast this consolation,
and with this hope let us reverence the studies of heavenly doctrine. For, as
S. Paul says 1. Cor. 15. 58. Our labor shall not be vain in the Lord. but
shall bring plentiful and permanent fruits unto us, and to the church.

Verse 10 The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengance. He shall wash
his footesteppes in the blood of the ungodly. Verse 11 So that a man shall say
verily, there is a reward for the righteous: Doubtless there is a God that
Judges the earth.
These last verses contain a perspicuous affirmation An affirmed difference of
Gods judgment in the behalf of his church against her enemies.
touching the judgment of God, discerning the godly ones from the ungodly
ones. This affirmation shall be more notable, if in our minds we do behold
the universal judgment, which after a while shall follow, wherein the minds
of all the ungodly ones shall be discovered and shall be cast away damned into
eternal torments, but the godly ones shall attain unto the long desired
glory and deliverance. Then fully and wholly shall the church rejoice being
delivered from the guilty and violence of the deuiles, and shall give God the
praise for his just judgment, yea, shall reap and receive with great joy, the
fruits of their labors and sorrows which they have sustained in this life. In
mean time let us remember, that the church is for many causes burdened with
the cross, and that we must not depart from God, no though deliverance come
not unto us by and by. But God sometimes also in this life ouertaketh the
tyrants with punishment to the end these aparant sights should be testimonies
of the judgment which shall follow this life, and that the church might have
some tranquillity and truces like unto the Ha^^ion days.

PSALM. LIX. Eripe me de inimicis meis.
To him that excels (destroy not) a Dsalme of David on Michtam: when Saul
sent, and they did watch the house to kill him.


THE ARGUMENT.
THe application of this Psalm is after The application of this Psalm two
fold.
two sorts: One unto the history of David, touching which the title speaks,
an other unto the passion of Christ, and perpetual scattering of the Jewish
nation. For the history in the 1. lib. Sam. 19. says that Saul being vexed
and troubled with the flaming fittes or burning pangs of his fury, as one out
of his wits and senses sent his messengers to catch, and kill David his son
in law, and one best deserving in the government of Israel: But David by Gods
help The first signifies the history of David's troubles.
was delivered out of those snares. Let us know that this history setting
down an example of Gods protection was written for us, that we (in dangers
which for honest and just causes do hang over our heads) may crave and look
for help and defense from God, who indeed numbreth all the hairs of our
head. Moreover, seeing the comparison of familiarity is great between the
head and the special members of the body, let us read this Psalm, as it
were a prophecy The second, the history of Christ's passion.
of the passion of Christ our Lord, and of the punishment of the Jews. For
like as Saul persecuted David with an implacable or vnpacifiable hatred: so the
blind and furious Jews raged with hatred against Christ. But as David (when
Saul and his family was extinguished, and almost utterly destroyed) flourished
and reigned king of the Jews, so the political government of Moses law
being utterly destroyed, and the Jews wandering in perpetual banishment,
Christ sits at the right hand of his Father, and gives most ample gifts or
benefits unto his church.

Psalm. LIX. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Deliver me from mine enemies O God, defend me from them that rise up
against me. Verse 2 O deliver me from the wicked doers, and save me from the
blood thistie men.
THe same things which David prayed for against The Popes Nero-like cruelty.
Saul's messengers, let us pray for in like manner against the popes adherents,
by whom many godly ministers are for matrimony cruelly slaughtered, when never
yet any barbarous nation killed men for the like cause. And neither only do
they exercise Nero like cruelty against charchmen, but they kill and slay also
other honest and godly persons, when they transgress any ungodly law. These
bloody persons, let all godly men (with most fervent prayers) crave of God that
he would either call them back to amendment, if they be amendable, either else
even at the first to destroy them.

Verse 3 For lo, they lie waiting for my soul; the mighty men are gathered
against me, without any offense or fault of me, O Lord. Verse 4 They run and
prepare themselves without my fault: arise thou therefore to help me, and
behold.
Some man peradventure would ask, what cause should move Saul to lie in wait
nights and days to slay David? Again, even so, what cause should move the
pope and his confederates to set themselves so cruelly against our churches*
Touching this question, David here answers, that Saul had no grievous nor
just cause which he might lay for excuse of his fury: For although Saul burnt
with hatred at the felicity of David, and sorrowed sore to see this yongling to
be esteemed of all men before himself and his some Ionathas, even by Gods
providence: yet with no right did he persecute David, whom to obey he must
needs, when God of necessity would have it so. Even so our adversaries,
although they are displeased with us when they are reproved of their ungodly
opinions and worshippings, yet can they not but with rashness and impudency
object unto us any corruption of doctrine in us* for those things which we
That which our Preachers do teach, is agreeable to the scriptures,
Prophetical, Apostolical, and Symbols.
^eauch touching all the articles of the Christian doctrine, most sure it is,
that the same do agree with the Scriptures prophetical and apostolical, and
with the symbols or articles of the Christian bel^efe. Therefore like as the
Jews for no just cause hated Christ, so do papists practice (without any cause
great and just) to destroy churches or congregations religiously constituted.
But touching two sorts of justice or righteousness in the seventh psalm
before it is spoken largely: the one concerning our good conscience, the other
concerning our persons. Concerning the righ^eou^nesse of our person, the psalm
s^^^h 143. 2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, because in thy sight
shall no man living be justified. A twofold kind of righteousness. First, of
our person. Second, of our cause.
Again Pfal. 130, 3. If thou, O Lord, shall mark straightly what is done
amiss (O Lord) who shall abide it? Touching the righteousness of the cause,
let us hold that saying of Paul. 2. Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, even
the testimony of our conscience, that we live in this world in simplicity and
godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had
our conversation in this world. This rejoicing is needful before God, when we
ask or crave of God, that he would help a just cause, and before men openly,
because he confirms the godly ones, and vanquisheth the victories of the
ungodly ones.

Verse 5 Stand up (O Lord God of hosts) thou God of Israel, to visit all the
heathen: and be not merciful unto them that offend of malicious wickedness:
Verse 6 They go to and fro in the evening, they grinne like a dog, and run
about through the city. Verse 7 Behold they speak with their mouth, and
swords are in their lips: for who does hear?
Often times in the psalms this question is handled; whether we may curse our
enemies, yea or no? and although some men make answer otherwise, yet these
three verses are so manifest, that they require not long reasoning of the
matter. For first of all, blasphemy is to A threefold cause why the enemy may
be cursed.
be condemned, when immediately it hurts the glory of God. Next of all,
blasphemers are to be accursed, because they sin the sin unto death.
Thirdly, we must crave that God would repress errors and their favorers.
These things being thus considered, the declaration of the precept delivered
from Christ is easily understood Luke 6. 28. Bless them that curse you;
namely, blasphemers which are recouerable, for in the society of our enemies
some persons there be recouerable.

Verse 8 But thou, O Lord, shall have them in derision: and thou shall laugh
all the heathen to scorn. Verse 9 My strength will I ascribe unto thee: For
thou art the God of my refuge. Verse 10 God shows me his goodness plenteously,
and God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies. Verse 11 Slay them not
least they forget, but scatter them abroad, among the people, and put them
down O Lord our defense.
No doubt of it these verses do prophecy touching the Five causes why Moses
law was abolished.
remnant of the Jews people, which after the destruction of Jerusalem,
wandered amongst the nations so many years. But here let us consider of the
causes why the political law of Moses was destroyed, than which, there was
none more excellent in all the world. And certs the first cause is, for that it
pleased God to set down 1
an horrible or fearful example of his wrath against the enemies of Christ:
Touching this cause Christ says Luke 19. 44. Because thou knew not the time
of thy visitation. etc. Therefore in these days let them fear like
punishments, which either despise the pure doctrine of the gospel with an
Epicuriall contempt, or endeour what they can to destroy the same with an
ungodly wilful stubbernes. The second cause is, that the matter 2
and event may show, that the promises touching the Messiah are not to be
understood conerning a political kingdom, but concerning everlasting
benefits. The third, to manifest that the works of the law are not
righteousness 3
before God. The fourth, that the Jewish prerogative 4
which they had in their own nation might be taken away: For if Moises his
policy, should as unto this day have remained, no doubt of this these which
were converted out of the Jews would challenge and take to themselves a
singular prerogative for their temple and ceremonies which they had. The fifth
cause, that the destruction of the same policy might witness that Christ has
been present upon earth. For it behaved that Christ should be borne in
Bethleem, and in very deed so was he when the policy of Moses stood in
force. But now more then a thousand and four hundred years, the city of
Bethleem and the policy of Moses lie ouerhrowen and brought to none effect.
Then needful it was, that Christ should come in the flesh laug before: All
these causes are most worthy of diligent consideration.

Verse 12 For the sin of their mouth, and for the words of their lips, they
shall be taken in their pride: and why, their preaching is of u^sing and lies.
Verse 13 Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that they may perish: and
know that it is God that rules in Jacob, and unto the end of the world. Verse
14 And in the evening they will return, grin like a dog, and will go about the
city. Verse 15 They will run here and there: and grudge if they be not
satisfied.
The cause of the perpetual banishment of the Jews is not any civil ossence,
but a high degree of sin, namely The cause of the perp^tuall destruction of
the Jews.
Blasphemy against Christ and his church: For they call Christ a deceiuer and
a malefactor: moreover they cast up from their hateful stomachs such bitter
railing against him, as one ship cannot carry away. And the church which
embraces the gospel touching Christ they call the people of Edom, that is
crewell and full of blood. For these reuilings which they used against Christ
and his church do they suffer grievous punishment and just punishments: For in
their banishment they wander abroad as it were dogs which when the wringing
of their belie vexes them, do make a horrible howling. For although they
require and look for doubtfully, a Messiah, and go about to set up anew their
kingdom; yet neither find they the Messiah, no nor yet though they burst
themselves: can they set up again their ancient government. The histories are
known touching the scoms and outcasts of the Jewish people, which now and
then went about with all endeavor to recover their country, and restore their
temple, but their looked for harvest has disappointed them with a vain
reaping: For other whiles with the Roman armies, and otherwhiles with horrible
prodiges or wonders they were overthrown and scattered abroad as in the 21.
Psalm is before declared.

And that the Jewish rabins are not only blind, but the leaders of blind,
hereof it may be adjudged whereas The Jewish Rabines, both blind themselves,
and leaders of the blind.
with a most scuere decree they forbid, that no man shall despute of the time
when the mesias shall come: whereof indeed God has appointed almost the time*
itself in 9. of Daniels prophecie^. And how I pray you do they sycophantically
wrest the most excellent prophecies, touching the nativity, passion,
resurection, and eternal kingdom of Christ the Messiah from their native and
proper unto a strange and improper meaning, and so all witting and willing do
procure darkness unto themselves and others? Therefore when we read these and
other innumerable such like things, let us partly bewail the blind
stubbernnesse of this most wretched nation, and partly tremble with fear in
thinking upon the wrath of God, whose most evident example is seen in this
out-scowring or scumme of the Jews. For, if God spared not the natural
branches (as saint Paul says) what shall become of the wild graffe? Romans 11.
21. that is, if God pour out his wrath upon that people, from amongst whom
Christ was borne, how much less will he spare other enemies and contemners
of the Gospel? Let us therefore live in the fear of God the Lord, and let us
keep still the excellent benefit of the gospel by the holy spirit, lest the
same thing happen unto us, which happened unto those same unthankful Jews.

Verse 15 As for me I will sing of thy power, and will praise thy mercy betimes
in the morning: for thou have bin my defense and refuge in the day of my
trouble. Verse 16 Unto thee (my strength) will I sing: for thou (O God) art my
refuge, and my merciful God.
Two sacrifices, there are wherein God specially takes Two sacrifices
acceptable to God: The first, thanksgiving. The second, Mortification
pleasure and delight: the one is, Thanksgiving, the other Mortification, that
is, of true contrition, and of obedience in miseries, the one and fiftieth
psalm says, A troubled spirit is a sacrifice unto God, a contrite and humble
heart, O God, will thou not despise. Of the other kind of sacrifice we have
already often times spoken in the Psalms, so that it would be a thing
unpleasant to sing that song here again.

PSALM. LX. Deus repulisti nos, etc.
To him that excels upon * Shusshan, * Eduth, These were certain songs,
after the note whereof this psalm was sung.
or * Michtam, a Psalm of David to teach: when he fought against Aram,
Naharaim, and against Aram Zobah when Ioab returned and slew twelve thousand
Edomites in the salt valley.


The Title.
THere is a great difference between 2. Sam. 8. 1. and 10. 1. 1. Chron. 18. 3.
the government of the kingdom of Israel and other gouernements: For though
all good gouernements be ordained of God, yet this kingdom was by the express
word of God ordained, and had a special promise touching the preservation
thereof until the time of the Messiah sent into the world. Such a promise has
not any nation now, but after a sort we know, that God will give some
harboring places for his church in exile, somewhere more, somwhere less. Now
think with your self what a benefit it has bin, that the church of the people
of Israel for the space of 1500: years and more has (by Gods providence) bin
preserved and defended. How acceptable a thing were it for us to know for
certain, and have it by good proof verified, that in these countries where
the Gospel is now preached, a mean state of the church should continue 100.
years together? Again also the special A special difference between the
kingdom of Israel and other kingdoms.
ornaments of other policies, wherein shines not true knowledge of GOD, are
laws agreeing with a right rule, judgments, mean discipline, defense in
peace, and wars, and wealth. But these things serve only for this life mortal,
and do not deliver a man from sin and death: But the kingdom of Israel had far
greater and more necessary and wholesome ornaments, namely, a law given from
God, a promise of the Mediator (for which cause the truchurch of God was
planted in this people) the sending of Prophets, the gathering of the
everlasting Church, manifest testimonies of Gods presence, studies of the
doctrine of God, and of other good things, true worshipping of God, and modesty
of discipline; these benefits exceed all cogitation and eloquence of man. Last
of all we must consider of the final cause of this excellent policy or
government: for although all commonwealths ought to endeavor to this end,
whereof Saint Paul most gravely exhorts 1. Timot. 2. 2. That we may live a quiet
and peaceable life, with all godliness and honesty; yet this policy or
government was therefore ordained especially, that there might be an Vni^ersity
and Library wherein the promises touching the Mediator might be preserved and
advanced, and that the Messiah might have a certain household and assured
lodging place wherein he might be borne, wherein he might teach, and being
raised from death to life he might begin a kingdom, whose proper benefits
are to take away death and give righteousness and life everlasting. For these
great prerogatives, of right, and worthily is the government of Israel
compared unto a most fragrant Rose, and a bracelet of gold.

THE ARGUMENT.
LEt us reading this Psalm give God thanks, that as yet, he gathers a
church amongst us: and let us crave that he would preserve and defend the
harborers of the church. Let us also learn out of this psalm necessary
doctrine and consolation: For it teaches, that the wholesome state of the
church and government is not preserved or kept in good order, by man's
safegards, but by the help of God. It also promises unto godly ones, not
only help in great infirmity, but also a joyful end of our conflicts and
dangers: For touching these things, namely, the help of God, and the fruit of
our labors, all the godly ones are vehemently troubled with cares. Against
this carefulnes he opposes consolation specially and most congruent, where he
says verse 12. Through God we shall do great Acts: That is, God shall help
us, and will bring to pass that our labors shall not be in vain.

Psalm. LX. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 O God, thou have cast us out, and scatred us abroad: Thou have also
been displeased, O turn thee unto us again. Verse 2 Thou have moved the land
and divided it: heal the sores thereof, for it shakes. Verse 3 Thou have
showed the people heavy things: thou have given us a drink of deadly wine.
THese verses contain a complaint of the cross, and dangers of the church:
the church is always like a City which being besieged round about, is cruelly
assaulted of enemies. Also oftentimes is it sharply chastized by reason of
sin, as it was in the Babilonicall ex^lement: But amongst these floods and
storms God preserves the ship which carries his church. These calamities
he here deploreth, and withal craves and aduanceth the deliverances.

Verse 4 Thou have given a token for such as fear thee: that they may triumph
because of the truth. Verse 5 Therefore were thy beloved delivered: help me
with thy right hand, and hear me.
The word [ Token] some do interpret, as touching A signification of the word
Token in triumphing.
the Arc of the covenant which was a testimony of Gods presence: For God in
that place put forth his oracles where the arc was, and those not obscure,
doubtful, wavering words, such as were the answers of Apollo: but Oracles
assured, evident and nothing faileable touching the greatest matters, and heard
the prayers of those that called upon him. But other do apply the word, Sign,
unto all notable victories and deliverances, which do witness, that God has
charge of his church: For the final causes of deliverances are to the end the
body of the church may be preserved, yea though The final causes and impulsive
causes of the delivering of the church.
some members, as soldiers fighting in the batle be slain: again, that the
presence of God may be acknowledged, and that faith might be confirmed by such
examples. But the impulsive cause in the will of God is, why he may help: even
that he may testify of the truth, that is, lest the light of the true
doctrine should be extinguished, and that blasphemous persons might be
vanquished and overcome, which cry out, that the doctrine of the church
differs nothing from the invention of their sects.

Verse 6 God has spoken in his holiness.
The proper glory of the church is in the preservation and propagation of the
true doctrine of God: This mark discerns the same from other sects: For
other sects are carried about as children with diverse winds of doctrine, and
devise eftsoons new gods and new worshipings. But the church reteineth the
true acknowledgement, and true prayer unto God, and according to a certain
rule delivered from God, directs all her duties and worshippings. He
therefore that speaks in the church, let him speak the word of God, but if
any man teach any other doctrine, let him be accursed. For like as the rough
arteries in man's body do shun all things saving air, and do fear the
same, so the church with glowing ears abhors from all opinions and
worshippings that do strive with the doctrine delivered from God: which only
she hears, learneth, embraces, professes, and also studieth to advance.

Verse 7 I will rejoice and divide Sichem: and mete out the valley of Sucoth.
Verse 8 Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine, Ephraim also is the strength of
my head. Verse 9 Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe:
Philistia, be thou glad of me.
This thanksgiving and song of victory, agrees with A comparison of David's
verses unto two ancient prophecies of Jacob and Esau.
two prophecies, whereof the one is recited in the 25. of Genesis, the other in
the 49. of Genesis. For when as Rebecca had conceived two twins, Esau and
Jacob, God himself did say, Genes. 26. 23. the elder shall serve the younger.
That is, Esau the elder or first begotten shall serve and obey Jacob the
younger: And in Genesis 49. The most holy man Jacob calling to him his son Judah
says verse 8. Thou Judah, thy brethren shall praise thee: Thy hand shall be in
the neck of thine enemies: thy fathers son shall bow down unto thee, verse
9. Judah as a Lions whelpe shall thou come up from the spoil, my son: He
shall lie down and couch like a Lion and as a Lioness: who shall stir him
up: But although these prophecies are approved in purpose and event, when
David sat at the helm in the government of his people, and subdued the
Edomites which were the successors of Esau: yet, the godly ones do ma^^ell,
and are in love with those secret prouidences wherewith God governs his
church in this life. For as D. Luther says notably, All the works of God are
wrought in mean contraries. God indeed promised it should come to pass, that
the elder should serve the younger, but a contrary show now and then chanced
before their eyes. for truly Jacob without any certain abiding place wandered
abroad together with his wives and children, and yet Esau in mean time
swelling with envy, and carrying a lofty countenance, ruled with great
authority in the world: where then remains the event answering unto the
promise: So the The application of Saul and David to the foresaid Isac and
Jacob.
first King that was over the people of God, was not chosen out of the
posterities of Judah, but out of the family of Benjamin, and he endeavored with
his whole heart and mind night and day to that end, even to oppress and
destroy David and his family. Doubtless both these seemed with a contrary
countenance to go quite against the promise. Therefore let us learn, that God
by a certain providence of his deferre^h now and then his promises, and at the
length tho with an excellent faith and most abundant goodness performs the
same, and yet for all that ought we not to doubt of his promise, no albeit we
see a manifest contrary before our eyes. For he that will serve God, it
behooves him to look for the Lords providence, that is, to believe things
invisible, to hope for things deferred, and to love God whether he show us a
gentle or stern countenance, and so to persevere Explication of these words
to the end. It follows that I now speak a few words of the place whereof
mention is made in the Psalm. Sichem is situat not far from the city of
Samaria, nor Sichem.
unto the hill Garizim, whose name before time was Salem, Sucot.
as it is written in the 33. chap of Genesis. Sucot is a place beyond* Jordan,
at the flood or river of Iaboc. Gilead.
Gilead is a hill beyond Jordan toward Arabia Genesis 31. 21. Numb. 32. 1. But
therefore makes he mention of these places, that he may admonish the reader
touching the testimony of Gods presence in his church. For God in Sichem made
himself known unto Abraham by rehearsing and manifesting his promise touching
the deliverer which was to come. Ge. 12. 3. Jacob was comforted and defended at
the river Iaboc against Esau Ge. 33. 4. At the hill Gilead, whose proper name
signifies a heap of stones, Laban and Jacob laying a heap of stones together
after the ancient fashion, made a covenant together. Ge. 31. 44. Touching these
dangers and deliuera^ces of the church, the names of the places admonish us.
Ephraim is the strength of my head, that is, out of this Ephraim.
Tribe, as out of the Trojan horse, came mighty warriors, fuch as have fought
great battelles. luda is my Judah.
Lawgiver, that is, this stock or generation sends forth for my purpose
most prudent counselors and governors in thadministration of a peaceable
government. Moab is my wash-pot. Moab and Edom were countries Moab.
lying near together in the rocky or mountainy Arabia, beyond the lake
Asphaltiten: and he names Moab Genesis 19. 37 and 36. 36.
to be his wash-pot, by reason of the watery places: for there is the great
flood Arnon, and certain other floods. And Edom that country, in the time
when Achab reigned, Edom.
again revolted from God. But Johannes Hucanus when he had conquered the
Moabits or Jdumeans, compelled ^. Mac. 3. 11.
them to embrace circumcision and other Jewish ceremonies, out of which nation
Herod afterward rising, would be reputed for a very Jew. These changes of
servitude and reuolting from God amongst the Jdumeans, did the most holy
patriarch Isac prophecy of long before Genesis 27. 40. Esau shall serve his
brother, but at the time appointed he shall again cast off his yoke. O
wonderful consonancy in the prophesies and their events! which is a notable
testimony of Gods providence, and a rule of the certeinty of that doctrine
which the church imbraceth and professes. Philistia was a country on the
Philistia.
Mediterrene sea shore, wherein also both those cities Tyrus and Sidon were. By
this declaration may be understood Cen. 10. 4. and 21. 32.
how far the borders of David's kingdom stretched, and how truly he
represents the image of Christ: for like as David gave laws, not only unto
his people, but also compelled the nere adjoining nations to do that they were
enjoined them; so the son of God the eternal king gathers his church from
amongst both Jews and Gentiles.

Verse 10 Who will lead me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?
Verse 11 Have thou not cast us out, O God? Will not thou, O God, go out with
onr hosts? Verse 12 O be thou our help in trouble: for vain is the help of
man. Verse 13 Through God shall we do great acts: for it is he that shall tread
down our enemies.
He affirms clearly, that the cause of victory is not The causes of victory
in battles, Gods help, not humane exploits
in weapons, nor hosts of men, but in the help of God: Ajax of whom Sophocles
makes mention, says, Sluggerds and dasterds have need of Gods help, but I am
able to overcome, yea, even without God. Such a Thraso or boaster is not here
our prophet David; but he acknowledges all humane helps to be far more unable,
then that they may defend the policies, or churches. For all wisdom and virtue
of man without God is unhappy: and it is not enough to hold the negative
meaning, touching the weakness of man's strength: but also two assirmatiue
meanings are to be holden of us; one touching the help of God, which we must
oppose against our infirmity, the other, touching the wholesome issue of our
labors. As touching help, the son of God says, Mat. 10. 20 It is not you
which speak, but the Spirit of your father speaks in you. And Paul 2. Phil.
13. says, God works in you to will, and to be able to perform: that is,
seeing God has before helped you in your conversion, no doubt of it, he will
accomplish and finish his work begun. Touching the events of our labors,
most sweetly says Paul 1. Cor. 15. 58. Your labor shall not be f^ustrate in the
Lord. And in the first Ps^l^e it is said, All things that they shall do, shall
have prosperous success. verse. 4. And the son of God comfort us saying,
John 15. I am the vine, you are the branches: he that abides in me shall bear
much fruit. verse. 5. We therefore being confirmed with these promises, let us
crave of God necessary gifts in our vocation, and let us surely look for the
wholesome fruits of our labors, both unto our selves, and to the church.

PSALM. LXI. Exaudi De^ deprecationem, etc.
To him that excels on Neginoth; a Psalm of David; when he was in danger of
the Ammonites, or being pursued by his son Absolon: Here he ^rieth to be heard,
delivered, and confirmed, in his kingdom, and promises perpetual praise.


THE ARGUMENT.
THis psalm is a prayer full of faith, which This Psalm contains a prayer
for the prosperity of the supreme magistrate.
the godly mind makes for himself and the magistrate: For although the godly
ones do feel inwardly fears, and outwardly fightings as saint Paul says. 2.
Cor. 7. 5. yet they being confirmed by confidence in Gods promises, do crave
and look for benefits from God. And because the church cannot in this life be
without harbors or succors the prophet here most fervently craves of God,
that he would preserve, and defend some policies or governments which do
harbor and succor the church. And lest any man should swerve into that
opinion, that he should think prayer for the Magistrate to be but a certain
thing indifferent, let us set down for us, and in our mind thoroughly persuade
our selves touching the commandment which is of God extant in 1. Tim. 21. I
exhort therefore, that first of al supplications, prayers, intercessions and
giving of thanks be made for all men. verse. 2. For kings and all that are in
authority, that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and
honesty. Let us then obeying this precept, make our prayers, that it would
please God long to preserve, protect, and prosper those governors, in
flourishing and sound estate, which are succourers and helpers of the church:
and that he would govern them in life, and vocation, unto the glory of his
name, and to the public benefit of his church. Seeing then God commands so
often times, prayer to be made for the Magistrate, that the government may
remain firm, and be fully established, and that we must not ask that sins
should be established, needeful it is, that politic order be a good thing
acceptable unto God, and not to be sin. But I now omit this disputation of
the institution and approbation of the magistrate: Seeing all men do well know
the good admonition which saint Paul gineth us in the 13. cap. to the Romans
form verse 1. to verse 7.

Psalm. LXI. And exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Hear my crying, O God; give ear unto my prayer. Verse 2 From the
ends of the earth will I call unto thee: when my heart is in heaviness.
LIke as physicians use to say, that a man's appetite or stomach by tart or
sharp sirrups is soonest stirred up or gotten; so the best instructor how to
pray, is necessity: for in time of prosperity our prayer is cold, but when all
fears and dangers do appear imminent, we not only prepare our selves The
flesh fea^full of the cross, but the spirit reapeth comfort thereby.
by all means to pray and deuote our selves, but we also do cry out. Although
flesh therefore eschew and tremble with fear to feel the cross, yet the
spirit reapeth of nothing greater profits, then of the cross and of
calamities, as the 119. Psalm 5. part and 7. verse says, It is good for me, O
Lord, that I have been in trouble: that I may learn thy statutes. And in this
psalm David says, When my heart is in heaviness, I will call upon thee.

Verse 3 O set me up upon the rock that is higher then I: for thou have been
my hope, and a strong tower for me against the enemy. Verse 4 I will dwell in
thy tabernacle for ever: and my trust shall be under the covering of thy wings.
Verse 5 For thou, O Lord, have heard my desires: and have given an heritage to
those that fear thy name.
Seeing nothing is more uncertain, nor any thing David's assured affiance in
Gods alone defense.
more deceivable then humane helps, I (says he) do fully repose all the hope
of my safety in thee the true and living God, for thou both wilt and can
help me: unto thee therefore, as it were unto a tower of defense, do I flee
for refuge, and I doubt not, but dwelling in thy tabernacle, that is, remaining
a member of the true church, I shall find and obtain defense. Of this my
careful confidence there are two arguments, in no point failing: the one an
inheritance, which thou have given to them that fear thee; that is, the
possession of the true doctrine, which to advance and defend I chiefly desire:
the other, is, because thou have often times heard my prayers at full. Let us
therefore learn out of this place, that we shall never perish, so long as we
shall godlily and innsolably keep still the excellent inheritance or notable
benefit of the gospel given from God, and hereunto adioyne our godly prayers,
For like as the ship which carried Paul as passenger in her, escaping a great
wrecke and ouerwhelming, at length saw her wished haven; so no doubt of it, the
congregation which receives and h^loeth fast the true doctrine of God, shall
yet remain, yea though all the gates of hell grudge thereat, and, though they
send forth fiery flame, and thunder flash.

Verse 6 Thou shall grant the King a long life: that his years may endure
thorowout all generations. Verse 7 He shall dwell before God for ever: O prepare
thy loving mercy and faithfulness, that they may preserve him.
Hitherto has the godly mind commended his safety A three fold prayer for the
preservation of the supreme magistrate.
unto God* now craves he of God that the government of the common wealth, for
the churches sake, might be happy, firm* and stable. For, most true it is,
that the poet Euripides said: Republica male affecta, etiam Res diuinae fiunt
languidiores.
The commonwealth once sick or sore,
The churches state does quail the more.


First therefore let us crave of God, that he would grant For long life and
prosperity
unto our present governors and rulers long time of life, and help them in
government: because, what shall come hereafter is uncertain, and kingdoms are
ofttimes turned into a worse and worse estate. Again, that our Governor may
remain in the sight of God, both privately and publikly, for so far as to
his person apperteineth, let him live in the fear of the Lord* and in faith,
and let him call upon God truly, let him set forth notable testimonies of
confession: and in the rule of his office, let him take away idolatry and
blasphemies, with godly duties, let him further and help forwards the
advancement of the true doctrine of God: let him be careful to see youth
rightly trained up and taught in churches and schools, that there may always
remain some holy seed. Thirdly, that he may be merciful and true, because
his throne For Gods merciful and true protection.
shall with mercy be established, and not with tyranie. And Salamon says: A
dissembling tongue beseems not a king. But if any man had rather refer this
mercy and truth unto God, in this sense, or to this purpose: preserve, govern,
and defend godly governors, which are always exercised in great danger and
distress for thy mercy and truths sake; against this I will not disdainfully
contend: for both these meanings are godly and profitable.

Verse 8 So will I always sing praises unto thy name: That I may daily perform
my vows.
Saint Paul wills us not only to make prayers, Prayer and thanksgiving
but also to give thanks to God for our magistrate: Wherefore here David
promises unto God, for prosperity of government, Thanksgiving. For so much
welfare as in government remains, that is, by God effectually preserved
according to the saying, Psalm. 127. ver. 2. Except the Lord keep the city,
the watchman waketh but in vain.

Now unto the King everlasting, incorruptible, invisible 1. Tim. 1. 17.
God, only wise, be honor and glory for ever and ever. So be it.

FINIS.

