A Summarie of English Chronicles, Conteynyng the true account of years,
wherein every King of this Realm of England began their reign, how long they
reigned: and what notable things has been done during their Reygnes.

With also the names and years of all the Baylyffes, Custos, majors, and
sheriffs of the City of London, sens the Conqueste, dyligentely Collected by
JOHN STOW citisen of London, in the year of our Lord God 1565.

Whereunto is added a Table in the end, conteynyng all the principal matters of
this Book.

Perused and allowed according to the Queen's majesty's Injunctions.

In aedibus Thomae Marshi.

KL. January has.xxxi days. The day is.viii. hours, the night.xvi.
Fayres
xviij A Circumcision of Christ 1 b Octa. of saint Stephen 2 xj c Oct. of saint
John 3 d Oct. Innocents 4 xix e Deposit. of saint Edward 5 viij f Epiphanla
Dom. at Salisbury 6 g Grant. Withelmi. 7 xvj A Lucian priest, 8 v b Jews
confessor 9 c Paul the first Heremite 10 xiij d Sol in ^quary 11 ij e Rychard
martyr 12 f s. Hillary martyr 13 x g Felicis 14 xviij A Archadius martyr 15 vij
b S. Mauricius 16 c Saint Anthony 17 xv d Prisce vyrgyn 18 iiij e Wolstan bysh.
19 f Fabian and Sebastian 20 xij g Agnes vyrgyn 21 A Uincent martyr 22 j b
Emerense Term begin. 23 c Timothe at Bristow at Chirchingford 24 ix d Co^uer.
Pauli at Bristow at Chirchingford 25 e Policarpe at Bristow at Chirchingford 26
xvij f Julian confessor 27 vj g Ualerij bysh. 28 A Theodore 29 xiiij b Basilij
30 iij c Saturnine and Uictor 31

KL. February has.xxviii. days The day is.x. hours, and the night.xiiii.
Fayres.
b Fast. Brygyd vyrgyn 1 xj c Parth. of Mary at Bath and Maydstone, 2 xix f
Blase bysh. 3 viij g Gilbert confessor 4 A Agathe vyrgyn 5 xvj b Amandy bishop
and confessor 6 v c Anguly bishop 7 d Paul bysh. Son in Pisces. 8 xiiij e
Apolen vyrgyn 9 ij f Scholastice vyrg. 10 g Desidery bishop 11 x A Dorothe
vyrg. Term ends. 12 b Woulfrani bishop 13 xviij c Ualentyn martyr at
Feuersha^ 14 vij d Faustine Iouite 15 e Julian vyrgyn 16 xv f Polycron bishop
17 iiij g Simon bishop 18 A Sabyn and Julian martyr 19 xij b Myldred vyrgyn 20
j c Lxxix. martyrs 21 d Cathedra Petri 22 xix e Fast. Locus bysexti 23 f Mathie
apostle. at Henly upon Thames, and at Teukesbury. 24 xvij g Mathie apostle. at
Henly upon Thames, and at Teukesbury. 25 vj A Mathie apostle. at Henly upon
Thames, and at Teukesbury. 26 b Augustyn 27 xiiij c Oswalde bishop 28

KL. March has xxxi days. The day is.xii. hours, and the night.xii.
Fayres.
tij d David bishop 1 e Cedde confessor 2 xj f Maurice confessor 3 g Adrian 4
xix A Foce and Eusebij 5 viij b Uictor and Uictorin 6 c Perpetue and Felix 7
xvj d Deposit. of Felix 8 v e Quadraginta mar. 9 f Agathe vyrgyn 10 g Gorgonij
martyr 11 xiij A Gregory bishop 12 ij b Theodore martyr 13 x c Longius mar. Sol
in aries 14 d Cyriaci mar. 15 xviij e Hilary bishop 16 vij f Patrick and
Gertrudis 17 g Edward king and confessor 18 xv A Joseph the husband of Mary 19
iiij b Cutbert, at Durham 20 c Benedic ab. 21 xij d Aphrodosy bishop 22 j e
Theodore martyr 23 f Fast. 24 ix g Anuntiae. of Mary, at Northampton, at
Walde^, at great Chart, and at new 25 A Anuntiae. of Mary, at Northampton, at
Walde^, at great Chart, and at new 26 xvij b Anuntiae. of Mary, at Northampton,
at Walde^, at great Chart, and at new 27 vj c castle, Hu^tingto al ye lady days
28 d Uictor martyr, 29 xiiij e Quirini martyr 30 iij f Adelme bishop 31

KL. April has.xxx. days. The day is.xiiii. hours and the night.x.
Fayres.
g Theodore vyrgyn 1 xj A Mary Egypciace 2 b Rychard bishop 3 xix c Ambrose 4
viij d Martian at Wallyngforth 5 xvj e Syxtus bysh. 6 v f Egesippus at Darby 7
g Perpetuus at Bickelsworth, at Byllingworth, 8 xiij A Perpetuus at
Bickelsworth, at Byllingworth, 9 ij b Perpetuus at Bickelsworth, at
Byllingworth, 10 c Sol in Tauro, at Esam 11 x d Gutlary the mo^day after 12 e
Oswoldy archbishop 13 xviij f Eufemie vyrgyn 14 vij g Olife 15 A Isidore 16 xv
b Aniceti 17 iiij c Eleuthery bishop 18 d Alphe Term begins 19 xij e Simon
by. The.3. sunday after Easter fair at Louth 20 j f Simon by. The.3. sunday
after Easter fair at Louth 21 g Simon by. The.3. sunday after Easter fair at
Louth 22 ix A George Mark at Charing, at Ipswiche, Amtyll and Hinninga^, at
Gilford, 23 b George Mark at Charing, at Ipswiche, Amtyll and Hinninga^, at
Gilford, 24 xvij c George Mark at Charing, at Ipswiche, Amtyll and Hinninga^,
at Gilford, 25 vj d evangelist, at Darby 26 e Anastasij 27 xiiij f Uitali
martyr 28 iij g Petri Medolanensis 29 A Deposit, Erkenwalde 30

KL. May has.xxxi days. The day is.xvi. hours, the night.viii.
Fayres.
xj b Philip and Jacob. In. cru. at Rippo^, at Stow the old, at Reading,
Lecester, and Che^sford 1 c Philip and Jacob. In. cru. at Rippo^, at Stow the
old, at Reading, Lecester, and Che^sford 2 xix d Philip and Jacob. In. cru. at
Rippo^, at Stow the old, at Reading, Lecester, and Che^sford 3 viij e Floriant
martyr 4 f Godard 5 xvj g John port latin 6 v A John of Beuerley 7 b Aapparitio
Mich. at Beuerley 8 xiii c Gengulfi martyr 9 ij d Gordian and Epimachy 10 e
Ascension day. at Newcastell, at Yern, at Bermincham at s. Edes. at bysh.
Standford 11 x f Ascension day. at Newcastell, at Yern, at Bermincham at s.
Edes. at bysh. Standford 12 g Boniface martyr at Newcastell, at Yern, at
Bermincham at s. Edes. at bysh. Standford 13 xviij A Boniface martyr at
Newcastell, at Yern, at Bermincham at s. Edes. at bysh. Standford 14 vij b
Seruacij confessor 15 c Translat. off. Bernard 16 xv d Dioscorides martyr 17
iiij e Dunston bishop 18 f Bernardyne 19 xij g Helene Queen 20 j A Whytsunday
at s. Tyues, at Canterbury, Royston and Stow the old, Kingston upon Thames. 21
b Whytsunday at s. Tyues, at Canterbury, Royston and Stow the old, Kingston
upon Thames. 22 ix c Whytsunday at s. Tyues, at Canterbury, Royston and Stow
the old, Kingston upon Thames. 23 d Whytsunday at s. Tyues, at Canterbury,
Royston and Stow the old, Kingston upon Thames. 24 xvij e Adelme bishop 25 vj f
Augustine of England 26 g Bid priest 27 xiiij A Trinite sunday. On the eve at
Stokesly, at Ke^dale. On the day, at s. Mary Auke. at Rowell, 28 iij b Trinite
sunday. On the eve at Stokesly, at Ke^dale. On the day, at s. Mary Auke. at
Rowell, 29 c Trinite sunday. On the eve at Stokesly, at Ke^dale. On the day, at
s. Mary Auke. at Rowell, 30 xj d Trinite sunday. On the eve at Stokesly, at
Ke^dale. On the day, at s. Mary Auke. at Rowell, 31

KL. June has.xxx. days. The day is.xviii. hours, the night.vi.
Fayres.
e Corpus Christi at Newbery, at Conentre, at s. Edes, at bishop Sta^ford. 1
xix f Corpus Christi at Newbery, at Conentre, at s. Edes, at bishop Sta^ford. 2
viij g Corpus Christi at Newbery, at Conentre, at s. Edes, at bishop Sta^ford.
3 xvi A Petroci confessor 4 v b Boniface bishop 5 c Melon bishop 6 xiij d
Translat. Wolstane 7 ij e Wilhelmi confessor 8 f Trans. Edmond. at Maydstone 9
x g Iue confessor, 10 A Barnabe apost. at Okyngham, 11 xviij b Basil Sol in
Cancer. 12 vij c Anthony 13 d Basil bishop and confessor 14 xv e Uite and
modeste 15 iiij f Translat. Richard 16 g Botalphe 17 xij A Mardi and
Marciliani 18 j b Geruasie 19 c Translat. Edward 20 ix d Walburge Uyrgyn 21 e
Albane martyr 22 xvij f Fast. at Shrewsbury s. Albo^s, 23 vj g Na. John
Baptist. at Cambrydge, at Gloucester, Lincoln at wynsor, Canterbury, Colchester,
and wynbroke. 24 A Na. John Baptist. at Cambrydge, at Gloucester, Lincoln at
wynsor, Canterbury, Colchester, and wynbroke. 25 xiiij b Na. John Baptist. at
Cambrydge, at Gloucester, Lincoln at wynsor, Canterbury, Colchester, and
wynbroke. 26 iij c Na. John Baptist. at Cambrydge, at Gloucester, Lincoln at
wynsor, Canterbury, Colchester, and wynbroke. 27 d Fast. 28 xj e Peter and
Paul at wadhurst, Marlborow, Holsworth, at Northampton, and at Peterborowe. 29
f Peter and Paul at wadhurst, Marlborow, Holsworth, at Northampton, and at
Peterborowe. 30

KL. July has.xxxi. days. The day is.xvi. hours, and the night viii.
Fayres.
xix g Octa. John Baptist. 1 viij A Uisitat, of our Lady 2 b Trans. of s.
Thomas 3 xvj c Trans. of s. Martyn 4 v d Zoe Uyrgyn and martyr 5 e Octa. Peter
and Paul 6 xiii f Tran. s. Tho. at Canterbury 7 ij g Deposit. of Grymhald 8 A
Cyrilli bysh. at Partney, at 9 x b Nabor, at Felix. 10 c Trans. of saint Benet
11 xviij d Nabor and Felix, at Lydde 12 vij e Private. Sol in Leo 13 f Revel.
Dogdayes begin. 14 xv g Trans. of s. Swythyn 15 iiij A Trans. of s. Osmund 16 b
Kenelme king, at wynscombe 17 xij c Arnolphe bishop 18 j d Rufine and Iustine
19 e Margarete, at Uxbridge. 20 ix f Praxede vyrgyn 21 g Mary Magda. Fast. at
Marleborow, at Wynchester, at Colchester, Tedbery. 22 xvij A Mary Magda. Fast.
at Marleborow, at Wynchester, at Colchester, Tedbery. 23 vj b Mary Magda. Fast.
at Marleborow, at Wynchester, at Colchester, Tedbery. 24 c James apostle at
Brystowe, at Ipswyche, Northampto^ Darby, s. James beside London, Readyng. 25
xiiij d James apostle at Brystowe, at Ipswyche, Northampto^ Darby, s. James
beside London, Readyng. 26 iij e James apostle at Brystowe, at Ipswyche,
Northampto^ Darby, s. James beside London, Readyng. 27 f James apostle at
Brystowe, at Ipswyche, Northampto^ Darby, s. James beside London, Readyng. 28
xj g Samson bishop 29 xjx A Abdon and Sennes mar. 30 b Germany bishop 13

KL. August has.xxxi. days. The day is.xiiii. hours, the night.viii.
Fayres.
viij c Peter Lammas at Exeter, at Fever sham, at Donstable, at s. Edes, at
Bedford, at Merham church, at Wisbyche, and at York. 1 xvj d Peter Lammas at
Exeter, at Fever sham, at Donstable, at s. Edes, at Bedford, at Merham church,
at Wisbyche, and at York. 2 v e Peter Lammas at Exeter, at Fever sham, at
Donstable, at s. Edes, at Bedford, at Merham church, at Wisbyche, and at York.
3 f Peter Lammas at Exeter, at Fever sham, at Donstable, at s. Edes, at
Bedford, at Merham church, at Wisbyche, and at York. 4 xiij g Peter Lammas at
Exeter, at Fever sham, at Donstable, at s. Edes, at Bedford, at Merham church,
at Wisbyche, and at York. 5 ij A Transfiguration 6 b The feast of Jesus 8 x c
Siriarke 7 d Roman at Romney 9 xviij e S. Laurence day at Waltam, at
Ho^gerford, at Bedford, at Srrodes, Blackamore, s. Laurence by Bodman 10 vij f
S. Laurence day at Waltam, at Ho^gerford, at Bedford, at Srrodes, Blackamore,
s. Laurence by Bodman 11 g S. Laurence day at Waltam, at Ho^gerford, at
Bedford, at Srrodes, Blackamore, s. Laurence by Bodman 12 xv A S. Laurence day
at Waltam, at Ho^gerford, at Bedford, at Srrodes, Blackamore, s. Laurence by
Bodman 13 iiij b Eusebij priest 14 c Assumpt. Mary, at Wakefield 15 xij d
Rochus Sol in Uirgo 16 j e Oct. of s. Laurence 17 f Agapethe martyr 18 ix g
Magnus martyr 19 A Jews confessor 20 xvij b Bernarde 21 vj c Oct. Assumptio
Mary 22 d Timothe 23 xiiij e Barthol. Apostle at London, Teukesbury, Sudbery,
Norwich, Northha^pton, Dover, and at Rye. 24 iij f Barthol. Apostle at London,
Teukesbury, Sudbery, Norwich, Northha^pton, Dover, and at Rye. 25 g Barthol.
Apostle at London, Teukesbury, Sudbery, Norwich, Northha^pton, Dover, and at
Rye. 26 xj A Barthol. Apostle at London, Teukesbury, Sudbery, Norwich,
Northha^pton, Dover, and at Rye. 27 xix b The.27. day at Ashforde, 28 c
Decolat. of s. John 29 viij d Felix 30 e Cuthburge virgyn, 31

KL. September has.xxx. days. The day is.xii. hours, and the night.xii.
Fayres.
xvj f Egidy abbot 1 v g Anthony martyr 2 A Gregory 3 xiij b Translat. of
Cuthbert 4 ij c Bartyn abbot 5 d Eugenius 6 x e Gorgon 7 f Nati. of our Lady at
Sturbryge, at London in Southwarke, at wakefild 8 xviij g Nati. of our Lady at
Sturbryge, at London in Southwarke, at wakefild 9 vij A Nati. of our Lady at
Sturbryge, at London in Southwarke, at wakefild 10 b Marcian confessor 11 xv c
Maurily bishop 12 iiij d Amantij martyr, Sol in (...) 13 e Holy roode day. at
Walta^ abbey at Wotton vnderhedge, Spaldyng, at Uxbridge, and Catesby. 14 xij f
Holy roode day. at Walta^ abbey at Wotton vnderhedge, Spaldyng, at Uxbridge,
and Catesby. 15 j g Holy roode day. at Walta^ abbey at Wotton vnderhedge,
Spaldyng, at Uxbridge, and Catesby. 16 A Holy roode day. at Walta^ abbey at
Wotton vnderhedge, Spaldyng, at Uxbridge, and Catesby. 17 ix b Uictor 18 c
January martyr 19 xvij d Eustatius 20 vj e Matthew Apostle at Maulborowe, at
Bedford. at Croydo^ at s. Edmundsbery. 21 f Matthew Apostle at Maulborowe, at
Bedford. at Croydo^ at s. Edmundsbery. 22 xiiij g Matthew Apostle at Maulborowe,
at Bedford. at Croydo^ at s. Edmundsbery. 23 iij A Andochy martyr 24 b
Firmynmartyr 25 xj c Cyprian and Iustine 26 xix d Cosmy and Damiany 27 e
Exuperrij 28 viij f Michael archan^ at Maulton, at s. Iues, Hadley, Milnal,
Sittingborne. 26 g Michael archan^ at Maulton, at s. Iues, Hadley, Milnal,
Sittingborne. 30

KL. October has.xxxi. days. The day is.x. hours, and the night.xiiii.
Fayres.
xv A Remigius 1 iiij b Leodegarii 2 xij c Candidi martyr 3 ij d Frauncis
confessor at Michel, 4 e Faith, at Maydstone. 5 x f Marci and Marciliani, at s.
Sythes 6 g Pelagie 7 xviij A Dionisij Term begin. 8 vij b Nicasius, at Wells
9 c Wylfryde 10 xv d Trans. of s. Edward. 11 iiij e Calixt, bysh. at
Grauesend. 12 f Wol^rane. Sol in Scor. 13 xij g Maurice martyr 14 j A Gaili
confessor 15 b Maximini martyr 16 ix c Etheldrede vyrgyn 17 d Luke Euang. at
Ely. 18 xvij e Quirini martyr 19 vj f Austrebert 20 g Xj. M. virgyns 21 xiiij A
Mary Salome 22 iij b Romani archbysh. 23 c Chrispine 24 xj d Euerest 25 xix e
Ursula 26 f Fast. 27 viij g Simon and Jude apo. at New market, at Neeford, at
Ciceter. 28 A Simon and Jude apo. at New market, at Neeford, at Ciceter. 29 xvj
b Simon and Jude apo. at New market, at Heeford, at Ciceter. 30 v c Quyntyn
martyr, 31

KL. November has.xxx. days. The day is.viii. hours, the night.xvi.
Fast. Fayres.
b All saints day. at Wakefield 1 xiij e All souls day, at Blechyngly. 2 ij f
Wenefrede vyrgyn 3 g Amancius 4 x A Let 5 b Leonard. Newport ponde. 6 xviij c
Wyllybrord bishop 7 vij d Quatuor coronato. 8 e Theodore martyr 9 xv f Martyn
bysh. of R. 10 iiij g Martyn, at Marlborow, Dover, 11 A Paternie Sol in Sagit.
12 xij b Brice. at s. Edmundes bury, 13 j c Trans. of Erkenwald 14 d Macute 15
ix e Deposit. Edmond 16 f Hughe bishop 17 xvij g Octa. Martini. 18 vj A
Elyzabeth 19 b Edmond king at Heth 20 xiiij c Present. of our Lady 21 iij d
Cecilie virgyn. 22 e Clement bysh. at Sandwych. 23 xj f Grisogoni martyr 24 xix
g Katheryne vyrgyn 25 A Peter bishop 26 viij b Uitalis and agricole 27 c Ruffi.
Term end^^ 28 xvj d Fast. at Maydenhead, 19 x e Andrewe apost. 30

KL. December has xxxi days. The day is.vi. hours, the night.xviii.
Fayres.
xiij f Crisanti and Darie martyr 1 ij g Libiany 2 A Deposit, Osmond 3 x b
Barbara virgyn 4 c Sabba ab. at Puckley 5 xviij d Nicholas bysh. at Spaldyng 6
vij e Oct. Andrew. at Sandhorst 7 f Concep. Mary. 8 xv g Cypriane abbot 9 iiij
A Eulalie 10 b Antippa. Sol in Capri. 11 xij c Paul bishop 12 j d Lucy vyrgyn
13 e Nicasij 14 ix f Ualery 15 g O sapientia 16 xvij A Lazarus bishop 17 vj b
Gracian bishop 18 c Uenesy vyrgyn 19 xiiij d Julian martyr 20 iij e Thomas
apostle 21 f 30. martyrs 22 xj g Uictor Uyrgyn 23 xix A Candidi 24 b Christmas
day 25 viij c Steven martyr 26 d John Euangelyst 27 xvj e Innocents day 28 v
f Thomas Becket, at Ca^torbury 29 g Translat. of s. James 30 xiij A Syluester
bysh. 31

A rule to know when the (...) begins and ends.
Eight days before any term be, the Exchequer opens for certayntie, except
Trinity term, which is but.4. days before.

Hillary term begins the.xxiii. day of January, if it be not Sunday: then
the next day after, and ends the.xii. day of February.

Easter term begins.xvii. days after Easter, and ends four days after
the Ascension day.

Trinity term begins the next day after Corpus Christi day, and ends
ye wednisday fortnyght after.

Mighelmas term, begins the.ix. day of October, if it be not Sunday, and
ends the.xxviii. of November.

In Easter term, on the Assentio^ day. In Trinity term, on the Nativity of
Saint John Baptist In Michaelmas term, on the feast of All Saints. In
Hyllary term, on the feast of the Purification of our Lady, ye Queen's Judges
of Westminster, do not use to sit in judgment, nor upon any Sundays.

A table for.xxx. years. to come.
The years of our Lord God. Letter Dominica^ Leap years. Easter day. March
or Apryll. 1564 a b 2 A 1565 g 22 A 1566 f 14 A 1567 e 30 M 1568 c d 18 A 1569
b 10 A 1570 a 16 M 1571 g 15 A 1572 e f 6 A 1573 d 22 M 1574 c 11 A 1575 b 3 A
1576 g a 22 A 1577 f 7 A 1578 e 20 M 1579 d 19 A 1580 b c 3 A 1581 a 26 M 1582
g 5 A 1583 f 3^ M 1584 d e 29 A 1585 c 11 A 1586 b 3 A 1587 a 1^ A 1588 f g 7 A
1589 e 30 M 1590 d 19 A 1591 c 4 A 1592 a b 2^ M 1593 g 15 A

In this table above, what year our Lord God, you do chose within written,
you shall straight find in the second row toward the left hand, the
Dominicall letter serving for ye year: the third row shows the leap years:
the.iiij. row the number of the day that Easter day falls on: and the fifth
row, the name of the month that Easter day falls on. Note that the letter
A. stands for Apryll, and the letter M. for March.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, and my very good Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl
of Leicester, Baron of Dynghby, Knight of the honorable order of the Garter,
one of the Queens most honorable privy counsel, and Master of her majesty's
horse.
BECAUSE, both by the universal report of all men, I hear, and also by mine
own experience I perfectly know (right honorable and my very good lord) how
honorably and cherefully diverse works presented to your lordship, have been
accepted: I (though of al others most simple) was thereby encouraged, to offer
to your honor this my simple work, in token of my bounden duty. The exaumple
also of that famous Monarche Artaxerxes, who so well accepted the simple
handful of water, that the poor Persian Sinetas brought him from the river
Cyrus, puts me in good hope, that your honor who give place to no man in
humanity and courtesy will not mislike this simple signifieng of my good will.
For, like as the mite of that poor widow that is mentioned in the Gospel,
which she gave in all her penury, is accounted a greater gift, then those
huge sommes that great men laid out of their great stoare: so ought this my
simple pamphlet be adjudged to proceed, though not from greater, yet from as
great good will, as the best and learned writers bear to your honor. For,
they, of their abundant stoare, have laid out somewhat: But I, of my mean
knowledge, have presented these few first fruits to your honor: knowing that
your wisdom can in this small present right well see my good will. My gift
is a short brief or summarie of the chiefest chances and accidents, that have
happened in this Realm, from the time of Brutus, to this our age. Which I
have done by the conference of many authors, both old and new, those Imeane,
that commonly are called Chroniclers, out of whom I have gathered many notable
things, most worthy of remembrance, which no man heretofore has noted.
which work also I was the bolder to dedicate to your honor, because I know
your lordships good inclination to al sorts of good knowledges: and especially
the great love that you bear to the old Records of deeds done by famous and
noble worthies which my boldness, like as I trust your honor will not only
pardon, but also accept in good part: so I beseech all the readers hereof, that
following your honorable example, they will judge the best of this my travail,
which I took in hand, only for the respect that I had to their profit.
VVherby they shall both show the goodness of their own natures, and also
encourage me willingly to go forward in this my enterprise. Which doubting
not, but that I shall the rather obtain of them, because of your lordeships
favorable acceptance hereof, I will now cesse any longer to trouble your honor,
beseching almighty god long to preserve you to the commodity of this our
native countreie.

Your L. most humble John Stovve.

To the Reader.
Diverse writers of Hystories write dyuersly. Some pen their hystories
plentifully at large. Some contrary wise, briefly and shortly do but (as it
were) touch by the way, the remembrance and accidents of those times, of
which they write. Some do with a large compass discover as well the affairs
done in foreyn parts, as those that happened in that country, of which
especially they write. And some content to let alone other matters, put in
memory only such things, as they the^ selves have had experience of, in their
own countries. Amongs whom, good Reader, I crave to have place, and desire
room in the lower part of this table. For I use thee in this my book as some
simple feaster, that being not able of his own cost to feast his guestes
sufficientely, is feign to be frended of his neighbors, and to set before
them such dishes as he has gotten of others. For I acknowledge, that many of
the hystories, that thou shalt read here abridged, are taken, partly out of
Robert Fabian, sometime Alderman of London, Edward Halle gentylman of Greyes
Inn, John Hardynge, a great trauailer both in foreyne countries, and also in
all writings of antiquitie^, and other, who reaped great abundance of
knowledge, and filled their books full therewith, to the great profit and
pleasure of all posterity, and to their own great fame and glory. So that of
their great plenty, I might well take somewhat to hyde my pouertie^. Howbe it, I
have not so done it, as, if they should claim their own, I should forthwith be
left naked. For somewhat I have noted, which I my self, partly by paynfull
search, and partly by diligent experience, have found out. Where fore, hoth the
smalnesse of the volume, which co^prehe^deth great matters in effect, and lso
the novelty of some matters vttred therein, ought to cause yt it should not be
altogether unwelcome to thee. For, though it be written homely, yet it is not
(as I trust) written untruly. And in hystories the chief thing that is to be
desired is truth. Wherefore, if thou find that in it, I beseech thee, wynke at
small faults, or at the least, let the consyderation of my well meaning,
drown them. So shall thou both encourage me to farther diligence, and also
utter thine own frendlynesse, in that thou do rather further, then condemn
a weak writer.

Of smoothe and flattering speech, remember to take heed:
For Truth in plain words may be told, of craft a lie has need.
The names of Authors in this Book alleged.
Arnoldes Chronicles. John Rastall. Beda de gestis Angloru^ John Mayor.
Cornellus Tacitus. John Bale. Domes day a book. John Gower. Edward Haulle.
John Sleydane. Gildas de uictoria Aure lii and Ambrosii. Merlyn chronicler.
Martyn Chronicler. Gildas de gestis Arthuri. Mathewe Paris. Norham chronicler.
Gildas the wise. Polydorus Virgilius. Guido de Columna. Robert, a chronicler,
that wrate in the time of Henry the third. Geffrey of Monmouth. Geraldus
Cambrensis. Hector Boyce. Rodolphus niger. Houeden. Raynolffe of Chester. John
Hardynges Chronicle dedicated to Henry the.6. Robert Fabian. S. Columbe
Cronicus Colmanni. John Leylande. Thomas Lanquet. John Lydgate. Thomas Couper.
John Frosarde. William Caxton.
A brief Description of England.
BEfore I enter to abridge the factes and gestes of the kings and other
persons within this Realm from Brutus, Polydore Virgil.
the first King of the same, I purpose briefly to make a description of this
noble Realm gathered out of Polydore Uirgil, reported in his work of ye
English history, who says: That all Britain, which by two names is called
England and Scotland, is an Island in the Ocean sea, sytuate right over against
the Region of Gallia: one part of which Isle Englishmen do inhabit, another
part Scotts, the third part Walshemen, and the fourth part Cornish men. All
they, either in language, conditions or laws, do differ amongs them selves.
England (so called of Englishemen, which did win the same) is the greatest
part, which is divided into.xxxix counties, which we call shyres. Whereof ten
(that is to say, Kent, Suffer, Surrey, Southampton, Barkshire, Wyltshire,
Dorsetshire, Somersetshire Devonshire and Cornwall, do ^^n^eine the first part
of that Island: which ya^^s bounding toward the Southe, stands between the
Thames and the Sea. From thence, to the river of Trent, which passes
thorough the mids of England be.xvi. shyres: whereof the first vi. (standing
Estward (are Essex, Midd^eser, Hertfordshire, Suffolk, Northfolke, and
Cambridgeshire, the other ten which stand more in the myddle of the country,
are these: Bedford, Huntingdon, Buckingham, Oxford, Northhampton, Rutland,
Leicestre, Notyngham, Warwike, and Lyncolne. After these, there be.vi. which
border westeward upon Wales, as Glocestre, Hereforde, Worcester, Salop,
Stafford, and Chester. About the myddle of the Region lie Darbyshyre,
Yorkshyre, Lancashyre, and Cumbreland. On the left hand toward the west is
Westmerlande. Against the same, is the Byshopryke of Durham, and
Northumberland, which bou^deth upon the north in the marches of Scotland.
Those shyres be divided in to.xvii. Bishop rickes, which by a greek word, be
called Dioeceses. Of which Dioeceses, Canturburye and Rochester, be in Ke^t.
Essex, Middlesex and part of Hertford, belongs to the bishoprike of London.
The bishop of Chicester has Suffer. Wynchester, has Hampshire, Surrey, and
the Isle of Wight.

Salesbury, has Dorsetshire, Barkshyre, and Wylteshire.

Excetor, has Devonshire, and Cornwall. Bathe, and Wells, has Somersetshyre.
Worcester, has Glocestershyre, Now at this present there is a bishop of
Gloucester.
Worcestershyre, and part of Warwikeshire. Hereforde, has part of Shropshire,
and Herefordshire.

Couentre, and Lichfelde, Staffordeshyre, and the other part of Warwikshire.
Chestre, has Cheshire, Darbyshire, and a piece of a Lancashyre, nere the river
of Kepel. The Diocese of Lincoln, There is now a bishop at Peterborow.
which is the greatest, has eight shyres, lieng between they Thames and
Humbre, as Lincoln, Northampton, Leycester, Rutlande, Huntingdon, Bedforde,
Buckyngham, Oxford and the residue of Hertfordshire. The byshoprike of Ely,
has Cantabridgeshire, and the Isle of Ely Suffolk, and Norffolke, be in the
circuit of Norwiche Diocese. And this is the Prouynce of the Archebyshop of
Canterburye, which is the primate of all England, with Wales, which has
iiii. diocesses, as hereafter shall be declared. The bishop of York, has
Yorkeshyre, Notynghamshyre, and a piece of Lancastshyre. The bishop of Durham,
has the bishoprike so commonly called, and Northumberland. Carlisle,
contains Cumberlande and Westmerland: And this is the other province of
tharch bishop of York, which is another prymate of England, and was of long
time also primate of all Scotland: but these Diocesses take their names of the
cities where those seas be placed. The chief whereof, is London, where in the
beginning was the Archebyshops sea: but afterward transposed to Canterbury, a
City in Kent, placed in a soil amiable and pleasant. London, standethe in
Middlesex, on the northside of the Thamis. That most excellent and goodly
river, begins a little above a village called Winchelcombe in Oxfordshyre,
still increasyng, and passes first by the university of Oxe^ford, and so with
a marvelous quiet course by London, and and then breaks into the french
Ocean by main tides, which twyse in xxiiii. hours space does ebb and flow
more then.lx. miles, to the great commodity of trauailers, by which all
kinds of merchandise be easylye conueyde to London, the principal store and
staple for all commodities within this Realm. Upon the same river is placed a
stone bridge, London bridge.
a work very rare and marvelous, which bridge has.xx. arches made
of.iiii. squared stone, of height.lx. foot, and of breadth.xxx. foot, distant
one from an other.xx. foot, compacte and joined together with vaultes and
Sellars. Upon both sides be houses builded, that it seems rather a
continual street then a bridge. The Ocean sea doothe bound England, the
first part of Britain east and South, Wales, and Cornwall west. The river of
Twede deuideth England and Scotland north. The length of the Island begins
at Portsmouth in the South part, and ends at Twede in the north, conteinyng
320. miles. This Realm above other is most fruitful on this side Humbre: for
beyond, it is fuller of mountains. And although to the beholders of that
country a far of, it may seem plain, yet it is full of many hills, and those
for the most part void of trees: the valeys whereof be very delectable,
inhabited for the most part by noble men, who according to ancient and old
order, desire not to dwell in Cities, but near unto valleys and ryuers in
several vyllages: for aduoidyng of vehement wyndes, because that Island
naturally is stormye. Humbre has his beginning a little on this side York, and
by and by runs southward, and the^ holds his course eastward and so into
the mayn sea, greatly increaced by the ryuers of Dune and Trent. Trent
begins a little from Stafforde, runnyng through Darbyshyre, and
Leycestershyre, passing by Lichfield and Notyngham on the right hand, and Dune
on the left: so that both those ryuers do make an Island, which is called
Aurolme, and then ioynyng together on this side Kyngston upon Hull, a goodly
merchant town, they fall into Humbre: by which river they may aryue out of
France, Germany, and Denmark. England is fruitful of beasts, and abounds
with cattle: whereby thinhabita^tes be rather for the most Grasiers, then
ploughme^ because they give them selves more to fedyng, then to tyllage. So
that almost the third part of the country is employed to cattle, dear red
and fallow, gores (whereof there be store in the north parts, and conyes, for
every where there is ioly maintenance of those kinds of beasts: because it is
fulle of great woddes, whereof there ryseth pastyme of huntyng greatly
exercised, specially by the nobility and gentlemen.

Of Scotland, an other part of Britayn, I purpose to say nothing because I
have promised only and briefly to remember thaffaires of mine own country,
as best travailed and acquainted with the knowledge of the same.

Wales, the.iiii. part of Britayne lies upon the left hand: which like a
Promontarie or forelande, or an Isle (as it were) on every side it is compassed
with the main sea: except it be on the east part with the River of Sabrine
commonly called Seuerne, which deuideth Wales from England. Although some late
writers affirm Hereforde to be a bound between Wales and England, and say,
that Wales begins at Chepstolle, where the River Ueye augmented with an
other river called Lugge, passing by Hereforde does run into the sea: which
river rises in the myddle of Wales out of that hill (but uncertain whether
out of that spring) that Sabrine does, Cornelius Tacitus.
which Corn. Tacitus calls Antona. For even to that place there goth a great
arm of the sea, This arm of the sea, as I Judge, is now called Anste, where
is a passage between the village of Anste and Chepstoll.
which passing through the land westward: on the right hand leaves Cornwall,
and on the left, Wales. Which Topography or description, although it be new,
yet I thought good to follow. Therefore Wales is extended from the town of
Chepstol, where it begins almost by a straight line a little above
Shrowsbury, eue^ to Westchester northward. Into that part, so many of the
Britains as remained alive after the slaughter and loss of their country, at
the length being driven to their shyftes, did repair as ancient writings
report: where partly through refuge of the mountains, and partly of the woddes
and marshes, they remained in safety: which part they enjoy even to this day.
That land afterward the english men did call Wales: and the Britaius the
inhabitauntes of the same, Walshmen: for among the Germaynes, Walsman,
signifies a stranger, an alien, an outborn or strange man: that is, such a
one, as has a contrary language from theirs, for Wall, in their tongue is
called a stranger born as an Italian or Frencheman: which differ in speech
from the Germane.

Man, signifies Homo, which is a man in english. Therefore englishmen, a people
of Germany, after they had wo^ne Britain called the Britains, which escaped
after ye destruction of their country, after their country manner. walshmen,
because they had an other tongue or spech, besides theirs, and the land which
they inhabited, Wales, which name afterward both to the people and country
did remayn. By this means the Britaynes with their kyngedome lost their name.
But they which affirm that name to be derived of their king or queen without
doubt be deceived. The country soil toward the sea coaste, and in other
places in the valleys and playnes, is most fertile, which yeldeth both to man
and beast, great plenty of fruit and grass: but in other places for the
most part it is bareyne and less fruitful, because it lacks tyllage: for
which cause husbandmen do live hardly, eating Oten cakes and drinkyng milk
myxte with water, and sour whay. There be many towns and strong castles,
and.iiii. Bishoprikes, if the byshoprike of Hereforde be counted in England, as
ye late writers declare. The first byshoprike is Meneue, so called of Meneua,
which at this day they call Saint David's, a City very ancient, situated
upon the sea coast, and bou^deth westward toward Ireland. An other is
Landaeffe, the third Bangor, and the fourth All Saint Asaph. which, be under
Tharchbyshoppe of Canterburye. The walshmen have a language from thenglishmen,
which as they say, that fetch their Petigree from the Troianes, do the partly
sound of the Trojan antiquity, and partly of the Greek. But how soever it
is, the walshemen do not pronounce their speech so pleasantely and gentilly as
thenglyshmen do, because they speak more in the throat: and contrary wise
thenglishemen rightly following the Latins, do express their voice somewhat
within the lyps, which to the hearers seems pleasant and sweet: And thus much
of wales, the third part of Britain.

Now follows the fourth and last part of Britayne, named Cornwall. This
part begins on that side which stands toward Spayn westward: Toward
theast, it is of breadth.iiii. score and ten miles, extendyng a little beyond
saint Germains, which is a very famous village situated on the right hand upon
the sea coast, where the greatest breadth of that country is but.xx. miles:
for this parcel of land on the right hand is compassed with the coaste of the
main sea: and on the left hand with that arm of the sea, which (as before
is declared) parts the land, and runs up to Chepstoll: where the country
is in form of a Horn: For at the first, it is narowe, and then growethe
broader, a little beyond the said town of saint German. Eastwarde it
bordreth upon England, West, south, and North, the main sea is round about
it: It is a very barreyn soil, yeldynge fruit more through travail of the
tyllers and husband men, the^ through the goodness of the ground. but there is
great plenty of lead and tyn: in the myning and dyggyng whereof does specially
consist the living and sustentation of thinhabitants. In this only part of
Britayn, even to this day continues the nation of the Britains, which in
the beginning brought out of Gallia occupied and inhabited that Island, (if
credit may be given to them, which report the first inhabitants of
Britain to come out of the Cities of Armerica.) The argument and proof whereof,
is because ye Cornishmen do speak ye langage, which the Britains use now in
France, whom the Britons do call Britona^tes. This thing to be more true, an old
ancient chronicle does declare, wherein I found written, not Cornubia, but
Cornugallia, compounded of Cornu, a horn, the form whereof that country has,
and of Gallia, out of which country thinhabitantes came first, the manner of
which name is not to be mislyked. Their tongue is far dissonant from
english, but is much like to the Walshe tongue, because they have many words
common to both tongues: yet this difference there is between them, when a
walsheman speaks the Cornyshe man rather understands many words spoken by
the Walshman, then the hole tale he tells. whereby it is manifest, that those
three people do understand one an other in like manner as the Southern
Scotts do perceive and understand the Northern. But it is a thing very rare
and marvelous, that in one Island there should be such variety of speches.
Cornwall or Cornugall is in the Diocese of Excetour, which was ones woorthye
to be counted the fourth part of the Island, as well for the contrariety of
language as for the first inhabitants thereof, as is beforesayde. Afterward,
the Normans which constituted a kingdom of all those three parts reckned
Cornwall to be one of the counties or shires of the country. Thus much of
the particular descryption of Britayne, that the whole body of the realm (by
the members) may be the better known to some peradventure that never heard the
same before.

The form of the Island is triquetra. or three cornered, having three corners,
or three sides: Two whereof, that is to say: The corner toward theast, and
the other toward the weast: (both extending northwardes) are the longest.

The third side which is the south side is far shorter then the other: for the
Island is greater of length then of breadth. And as in the other two parts is
contained the length, even so in the last, the breadth. In which place, the
breadthe begins: and so continuyng from the South part to the north, it is
but narowe. The first and right corner of which Island eastwarde, is in
Kente, at Dover and Sandwyche.

From whence to Caleys or Boloygne in France, is the dystance of.xxx. miles.
From this Angle which is against France to the third Angle, which is in the
North, in Scotland, the main whereof, boundeth upon Germany, but no land
seen, and there the Island is like unto a wedge even at the very angle of the
land in Scotland. The length whereof is.vii. hundredth miles. Again, the length
from this Corner at Dover in Kent, to the uttermost part of Cornwall, being
saint Myghels mount (which is the west part or weste angle) is supposed to
be.300. miles.

From this left Angle being the west part and thuttermoste part of Cornwall,
which has a pros^ect toward Spain, in which part also stands Irelande,
sytuated between Britayne and Spayn to the north angle in the further part of
Scotland, in which part the Island does end, the length is.viii. hundred
miles, in which part there be very good havens, and saufe harboroughes for
ships, and apt passage into Ireland, being not past one day saylyng, but the
shorter passage is from Wales, to Waterforde, a town in Ireland upon the sea
coast, much like to that passage between Dover and Calaice, or some what more:
but ye shortest passage of all, is out of Scotland. From this last Angle to
Hampton: (which is a town upon the sea coast, with a haven so called toward
the southe, and therefore called Southhampton) between the Angles of Kent and
Cornwall, they do measure by a straight line the whole length of the Island,
and do say, that it conteyneth 800. miles, as the breadth from Meneua, or
Saint David's to Yarmouth, which is in the uttermost part of the Island toward
the East does conteyn.200. miles for the breadth of the Island is in the southe
part, which part is the front and beginning of the Land, and ends narow, or
as it were in a straighte. So the circuit or compass of the Island is.xviii. C.
miles, which is.200. less than Caesar doothe reckon or account.

Thus much I have thought good to take out of Polydore, touching the division
of England, with the form and situation of the same. Much other good matter
that author does allege, which here for brevity I do omit, referring
those that desire to know farther hereof, to that book: where he shall find the
style and story both pleasant and profitable.

The Race of the kings of England, since Brute the first of this Realm: and
in the margent are placed the years before Christ his birth, when every king
began their Reigns, tylye come to Cimbilinus, in whose time Christ the
Savior of the world was born, and then follows the years from Christ his
birth.
AFter the commune and best allowed opinion of the most ancient and best
approved Authors, 1108
Brute the son of Siluius Posthumous, arrived in this Island, at a place now
called To^nes in Devonshire: the year of the world.2855. the year before
Christ's nativity.1108. wherein he first began to Reign, and named it Britayn,
which before was called Albion: And therein he builded the noble City of
London, London builded.
and named it new Troy buildyng there a Temple to Appolyn, wherein he placed an
Archeflamyn. He divided the same Island among his three sons: He stablyshed the
Trojan laws in this kingdom.
unto Locrine he gave the middle part of Britayn, now called England, with the
superiority of all this I Will: Unto Camber he gave Wales, and to Albanact
Scotland: After which partition he deceassed, when he had reigned xxiiii.
years, and was buried at London, then called new Troy, as is aforesaid.

1084
Locryne, the eldest son of Brute reigned.xx. years: he chased the Hunnes
which invaded this Realm: and pursued them so sharply, that many of the^ with
their king were drowned in a river, which departs England and Scotland. And
for so much as the king of Hunnes, How the river of Humber took that name.
named Humbar, was there drowned, the river is till this day named Humbar, so
says Hardyng, Fabian, and other. This king Locryn had to wife Gwendolyn^
daughter of Corineus, duke of Cornwall, by whom he had a son named Madan, he
also kept as paramor, the beautiful lady Estrilde, by whom he had a daughter
named Sabryne. And after the death of Corineus duke of Cornewal, he put from
him the said Guendolyn, and wedded Estrylde, but Gwendolyn repaired to
Cornwall, where she gathered a great power, and fought with king Locryn, and
sieve him: he was buried at Troynouant. She drowned the lady Estrylde with her
daughter Sabrine in a river, How the river of Seuerne took that name.
that after the young maidens name, is called Seuerne.

Gwendolyne the daughter of Corineus, 1063
and wife to Locryne (for so much as Madan her son was to young to govern the
land) was by common assent of all the Britaynes, The Queen reigned during the
mynoritie of her son.
made ruler of the whole Isle of Britayn, which she well and discretely ruled,
to the comfort of her subjects.xv. years, and then left the same to her
son Madan.

Madan, 1053
the son of Locryne and Gwendolyne, was made ruler of Britayne, of him is
little memory made, by any wrtters, but that he used great tyranny among his
Brytons: And that being at his disport of huntyng, he was devoured by wyld
wolves, The king devoured by wolves.
when he had reigned.xl. years. Policronica.
He left after him.ii. sons (as is reported in Polycronica) named Mempricius,
and Manlius.

1009.
Mempricius, the son of Madan, being King, by treason slew his brother
Manlius, after whose death he lived in more tranquillity, wherthrough he fell
in sloth, John Hardyng.
and so to lechery, taking the wives and daughters of his subjects: and
lastly, becam so evil that he forsook his wife and concubines, and fell to the
sin of Sodomie with beasts, whereby he became odible to God and man. And
going on huntyng, lost his company, The king destroyed of wolves.
and was destroyed of wyld wolves: whereof the land was then full, when he had
reigned.xx. years.

989.
Ebranke, the son of Mempricius, was made ruler of Britayn, he had as
testifies Policronica, Policronica.
Gaufride, Gaufride.
and other.xxi. wives, of whom he receued.xx. sons, John Hardinge.
and.xxx. daughters: which he sent into Italye, there to be married to the
blood of the Troyans. In Albanye (now called Scotland) he edified the castle
of Alclude, which is Dumbritain, Dumbritaine Edenbrough, Bawburgh, and York
builded.
he made the castle of Maidens, now called Edenbrough: he made also the castle
of Bamburgh: he builded York city: wherein he made a temple to Diane, and set
there an Archeflame: and there was buried when he had reigned.lx. years.

About the year of the world.3000. according to the prophecy of Helie half
the years of the world, were fulfilled, which was the year before Christ's
birth.963.

Brute Greneshield, 929.
the son of Ebranke, ruled this land.xii. years, and was buried at York,
leuyng after him a son named Leill.

Leill the son of Brute Greneshield being a just man, 917.
and lover of peace in his time builded Carleile, Carleile builded.
and made there a temple, placyng therein a Flamyn, to rule the same, according
to the laws of their gods at that time: and there was buried, when he had
ruled Britayn.xxv. years.

Lud Rudibras, the son of Leille, 892.
builded Canterbury, Canterbury Wynchester and Shaftesbury builded.
Winchester, and Shaftsburye, wherein he builded.iii. temples, and placed in
the same.iii. flames, like as bishops now be. he reigned.xxix. years, and
left a son after him named Bladud.

Bladud, 863.
son of Lud Rudibras, who had long studied at Athens, brought with
him.iiii. Philosophers, to keep schole in Britayn: for the which he builded
Stamford, Stamforde builded.
and made it an university (as says Merlyn:) John Hardyng alledgyng Merlyn
wherein he had great number of scholars, studyinge in all the.vii. liberal
sciences: which university dured to the coming of S. Augustine. At which
time the bishop of Rome interdited it, for heresies that fell among the Sarons
and Britons together mixed. so says Hardyng. He builded Bathe, Bathe, with the
hot bathes builded.
and made there a temple to Apollo, and placed there a Flamyn: he made there
the hot bathes, and practiced his necromancye: He decked himself in feathers,
The king attemptynge to fly, brake his neck.
and presumed to fly in the air, and falling on his temple of Apollo, brake
his neck, when he had reigned.xx. years.

844
Leire, son of Bladud succeeded his father, he builded Caire Leyr, now called
Leicester, Leycester builded
and made there a Temple of Ianus: placyng a Flamyn there to govern the same.
he had.iii. daughters, Gonorell, Ragan, and Cordelle: Which Cordelle for her
wysedom and virtue toward her father, succeeded him in the kyngedome. When he
had reigned.xl. year, he deceassed, and was buried at Leycester.

Cordyla, ^0^
the youngest daughter of Liere, succedynge her father, was sore vexed by her
two nephues, Morgan of Albanie, and Conedagus of Camber and Cornwall, who at
the length took and cast her in prison: where she being in despair of
recoueryng her estate (as testifies Galfride) slew her self, Galfride.
when she had reigned.v years, and was buried at Leycester in Ianus temple by
her father.

Morgan, 800
the eldest son of Dame Gonorell claimed Britayn, and warred on his nephue
Conedagus, that was king of Camber, (that now is Wales) and of Cornwall: but
Conedagus met with Morgan in Wales, and there slew him: How Glamorganshyre
took that name.
which place is called Glamorgan till this day. And then Condenagus was king
of all Britayne: he builded a Temple of Mars at Perch, that now is S. John's
town in Scotland, S. John's Town in Scotland builded.
and placed there a Flamyne: he builded an other or Minerue in Wales, which now
is named Bangor. Bangor in Wales builded.
The third he made of Mercury in Cornwall, where he was borne: he
reigned.xxxiii. years, and was buried at London.

766
Riuallo, son of Conedagus succeeded his father, in whose time it rayned
blood.iii. days: It rayned blood.iii. dais
after the which tempest ensued a great multitude of venomous flies, which
slew much people. And then a great mortality through out this land, which
caused almost desolation of the same. This Riuallo reigned over this whole
Island.xlvi. years, and than deceased, and was buried at Caire branke, that now
is York.

In the year.1554. after the universal Flood, and after Comerus the first
king of Italy.1414. after ye destruction of Troy.432. And after Brute arrived
in England.356. Rome was builded in Italy by Remus and Romulus. Rome was
builded.


^21
Gurgustus, son of Riuallo succeeded in the kingdom of Brytayne, who reigned
quietly: but was a common dronkarde, whereof followed all other vices. when he
had reigned.xxxviii. years, he deceased, and was buried at York:

684
Scicilius, the brother of Gurgustus succeeded in the Kingdom: of whom is left
but little memory: but that he reigned.li^. years, and was buried at Bathe.

Iago or Lago cousyn of Gurgustus, 636
reigned.xxv. years: for his evil government, he dyed of a litargie, and was
buried at York.

The game of Chesse about this season was devised by wise men, The game of ^
hosse devised.
to mytigate the minds or hearts of tyrants, the year of the world.3339. the
year before Christ.614.

Kynimacus, 612
succeeded Iago in this realm of Brittany, wherein he reigned liiii. years: and
was buried at York.

Gorbodug succeeded his father Kynimacus in this realm of Britain, 559
as our Chronicles write: He reigned.lxiii. years, and was buried at London.

Forrex with his brother Porrex, 496
ruled this land of Britayn.v. years: but it was not long ere they fell at
civil discord for the soueraygne domynion, Porrex slew his brother Forrex,
and Porrex was afterward slain by his mother.
in which Forrex was slain. And Porrex afterward by his mother was killed
in his bed. Thus cruelly was the bloodde and house of Brute destroyed, Brutus
line extinguished.
when that this Realm by the space of 616. years had been governed by that
lynage.

After the death of the two brethren, Forrex and Porrex, this Realm was
divided with civil wars, for lack of one sovereign governor, which
continued by the space of.li. years, until that noble Dunwallo reduced the
same into one Monarchy.

MUlmutius Dunwallo, the son of Cloten, 441
duke of Cornwall, reduced this realm into one Monarchy: The first king of
England that ware a crown of gold, who builded Black well Hall in London.
being before by civil wars and discention, severed and brought into diverse
dominions: he was the first that ware a crown of gold: he constituted good
laws: which long after were called Mulmutius laws: he gave privileges unto
Temples, The second laws were Mulmutius laws.
and ploughes, and began to make the four notable ways in Britayne. In
London, called then Troy Nouant, he builded a great Temple: which some suppose
to be S. Paul's, some Blackwell Hall, which was called Templum pacis. Finally
when he had brought this Ralme to wealth and quietness, reygnyng herein.xl.
years: He dyed honorably, leaving after him two valiant and noble sons
Belinus and Brennus, as Fabian writes He builded the town of Malmsbury, R.
Fabian
and of Uies. The town o^ Malmesbury builded.
He was buried at London in the temple of Peace before named.

BElinus, and Brennus, 401
sons of Mulmutius divided this whole Isle of Britayne, between them. Unto
Belyne, the elder brother was appointed England, Wales, and Corn wall. Unto the
other the North part beyond Humber. But Brennus a young man, desirous of glory
and dominion, thinking him self equal with his brother in marciall prowes,
was not therewith content: Wherefore he raised war against Belyne. But in
conclusion by the means of their mother they were accorded, and Brennus bring
given wholly to the study of wars, left his country to the governance of
his brother, and went into France amongst the Galls: where in the Province
of Lions, for his excellent qualities, he was greatly esteemed of Siguinus king
of the country, whose daughter he married: And of the Galls was made Souerain
captain when they made their usage to Rome. Belyne in the mean time both in
civil justice and also religyon, John. Hardynge.
such as at that time was used, greatly increased his Realm. He made three
Archeflames, Three archeflames in England.
whose seas were at London, York, and Carlion. Four notable ways made in
England.
He fynyshed the four great ways begone by his father: He subdued and made
tributarye unto him, Denmark. In London he made the haven, which at this
day, retains the name of him, called Belynes gate: Belyns gate in London
builded.
and as John Leyland writes (whose labor and industry in most diligent
serchyng out the antiquities of this Realm, John Leylande.
is greatly to be commended) builded ye tower of London. The tower of London
first builded.
He married his daughter Cambria unto a prince of Almayn called Antenor, of who^
these people were called Cymbri, and Sycambri. Finally, after he had reigned
with his brother and alone.xxvi. years, he died: and after the pagan manner,
with great pomp was burned: and his ashes in a vessel of brass set on a high
Pynacle over Belyns gate (as says Robert Fabyan) he builded Carlion, Carlyon
builded.
and also the temple of concord, The old temple nexe to temple bar builded.
which after the opinion of many, is now the paryshe church of the Temple.

Gurgunstus, 375
son of Belyne, succeeded his father: He subdued Denmark compellyng them to
continue their tribute: and in his return home, met with a fleet of
Spaniards, The Spaniards first inhabited Irelande.
which were seeking for habitations, because their country was so populous, and
not able to sustain them: to whom the King granted the Isle of Ireland to
inhabit and to hold the same of him as their sovereign Lord: Ector Boyce
But the Scots write that the Spaniards arrived before this time in Ireland.
This Gurgun^us reigned.xix. years, and was buried at Carlyon.

Guinthelinus, son of Gurgunstus was crowned king of Britayne. 356
A prince sober and quiet, who had to wife a noble woman named Marcia, of
excellent learning and knowledge. She devised certain laws, The third laws
were Marcian laws.
which long time among the Britains were greatly esteemed, and named Marcian
laws. Finally when this virtuous prince had reigned.xxvi. years, he dyed,
and was buried at London.

Cecilius, 330
the son of Guenthelyne and Marcia, reigned.vii. years: of him there
remains nothing notable. But that (as the Scotts write) in the first year
of his reign, a people of Almain called Pyctes, The Pictes first inhabited
the marches of England and Scotland.
arrived here in Britayn and possessed those parties, which now be the marches
of both realms, England and Scotland. Cecilius was buried at Carlyon.

323
Kymarus succeeded Cecilius, and reigned three years in Britayne: he was slain
as he was huntyng.

321
Elanius, called also Danius, was king of Britayn.ix. years.

311
Morindus, the bastard son of Danius began to reign in Britain: he (as our
Chronicles say) fought with a king, who came out of Germanye, and arrived
here, and slew him with all his power. Moreover (as they write) of the Irishe
seas in his time, The king devoured by a monster.
came forth a wonderful monster: which destroyed much people. whereof the
king hearing would of his valiant courage, needs fight with it: by who^ he
was clean devoured, when he had reigned.viii. years.

303
Gorboma^nus, eldest son of Morindus, reigned.xi. years: A prince just and
religious. he renewed the temples of his gods, and governed his people in peace
and wealth. Our english Chronicle says, Cambridge and Grantham builded.
he builded the towns of Cambridge. and of Grantham.

Archigallo, 292
brother to Gorbomannus, was crowned king of Britayne. he was in conditions
unlike to his brother: for he deposed the noble men, and exalted the unnoble.
He extorted from men their goods to enriche his treasury: for which cause by
the estates of the realm, he was deprived of his royal dignity, The king
deprived.
when had reigned.v. years.

Elidurus, 286
the third son of Morindus, and brother to Archigallo, was elected king of
Britayn: a virtuous and gentil prince, who governed his people justly. As he
was in hunting in a forest by chance he met with his brother Archigallo, whom
most louyngly he embraced, and found the means to reconcile him to his
lords: and than resigned to him his royal dignity, when he had reigned.v.
years.

Archigallo thus restored to his royal estate, 281
ruled the people quietly and justly.x. years, and lies buried at York.

Elidurus aforenamed, 272
after the death of his brother Archigallo, for his pity and justice, by the
general c^nsente of the Britayns was again chosen king. But he reigned not
passing two years, but that his younger brethern Uigenius and Peredurus raised
war against him, took him prisoner, and cast him into the Tower of London:
where he remained (as they write) during their Reign.

270
Uigenius and Peredurus, after the taking of their brother reigned together vii.
years. The town of Pikerynge builded.
Uigenius tha^ died, and Peredurus reigned after alone.ii. years. He builded
the town of Pyckeryng after the opinion of diverse writers.

261
Elidurus, the third time was made king of Britayne, who continued his latter
reign honorably and justly: but being sore bruised with age and troubles he
fynyshed his life, when he had now lastly reigned.iiii. years, and was buried
at Car^^le.

258
Gorbonian reigned in Britayne.x. years.

248
Morgan was crowned king of Britayne who guyded the realm peacibly xiiii.
years.

234
Emerianus brother to Morgan succeeded in the Realm of Britayne. And when he had
tyrannously reigned.vii. years, he was deposed. The king deposed.


Iuall was chosen king of Britayne for his justice and temperance which he
governed peacyblye.xx. years. 225


Rymo governed this realm of Britayne.xvi. years. 207
In his time was great plenty and peace.

Geruncius reigned here in Britayne xx. years. 191


Catillus reigned peacibly in Britayn x. years, 173
he houng up all oppressors of the poor people: to give ensample unto other.
A good ensample.


Coilus succeeded Catellus in the realm of Britayne, 163
who quietly reigned xx. years.

Porex, 143
a virtuous and gentle prince reigned in Britayne.v. years.

Chirinnus king of Britayn, 138
through his drunkenness (as our Chronyclers write) reigned but one year.

Fulgen his son reigned two years in Britayne. 137


Eldred, 135
reigned in Britayne one year.

Androgius, 134
likewise reigned one year in Britayne.

Uarianus, 133
the son of Androgius, succeeded his father in this realm of Britayne. He
wholly gave him self to the lusts of the flesh, and reigned.iii. years.

136
Eliud, king of Britayne reigned v. years: who was a great Astronomer.

124
Dedantius king of Britayn reigned v. years.

120
Detonus reigned in this land of Britayne.ii. years.

118
Gurgineus reigned.iii. years in Britayne.

115
Merianus was king of Britayne.ii. years.

113
Bladunus governed Britain.ii. years

111
Capenus, reigned king of Britayn iii. years.

108
Ouinus ruled Britain.ii. years.

106
Silius reigned in Britain.ii. years.

104
Bledgabredus was.xx. years king of Britayne. He delited much in musycke, and
gave him self to the study thereof.

94
Archemalus was king of Britayne ii. years.

92
Eldelus reigned king of Britayne iiii. years.

In this time diverse prodigies were seen, Prodigious signs in the air.
as globes of fire, burstynge out of the air with great noise.

Rodianus, 88
was king of Britayne.ii. years.

Redargius reigned king of Britayn iii. years. 86


Samulius reigned in britayn ii. years 83


Penisellus was made king of Britayne: 81
who governed it.iii. years.

Pirrhus ruled Britayne.ii. years. 78


Caporus, 76
was king of Britayne.ii. years.

Dinellus, 74
the son of Caporus, a just and virtuous prince governed this realm of
Britain.iiii. years.

Helius the son of Dinellus, 70
reigned not fully one year king of Britayn. Of this prince the Isle of Ely
took this name: Now the I Will of Ely ^tooke first that name.
for that he there builded a goodly palace, wherein was his most delight to
live: and also was there buried.

LUd, 69 King Lud builded London from London slone to Ludgate, and named it
Ludston.
the eldest son of Hely, succeeded his father, and reigned.xi. years in
Britayne. As soon as he was made King, he reformed the state of his common
weal: for he amended his laws, and took away all vsages that were naught:
Moreover, he repaired the City of London then called Troynouant, with fair
buildyngs and walls: and builded on the west part thereof of, a strong gate,
which unto this time retains the name of him, and is called Ludgate. Finally
he dyed, leauyng after him two sons Androgeus and Theomancius: who being not
of age to govern, their uncle Cassiuelane obtained the Crown. Our Chroniclers
write, that London took the name of this Lud, and was called Ludston. He was
buried nere to the same Ludgate, in a Temple which he there builded.

58
CAssiuelane, the son of Hely (as our vulgar Hystoriographiers write) after
the death of his brother Lud, was made governor of Britayne, which he
ruled.xix. years.

Julius Caesar made his first voyage into England.
In the.viii. year of his reign, Julius Caesar, who warred long in France, made
the first vyage of any stranger into this Realm: and afterward subdued it.
When C. Julius Caesar, had warred seven years in France and Germany, coming
unto that part where Calaice and Boloigne now stand, he determined to make
war into Britain which until that time remained unfrequented and unknown of
the Romans. His quarrel was, because that in the wars of France, he
perceived the Frenchemen to have much succor and aid from thens. Wherefore
having prepared.lxxx. ships, he sailed into Britayne: where at the first
being weried with an hard and sharp battle, And after with sodeyne tempest,
his nauye almost destroyed: he returned again into France, there to winter
his men. The second voyage of Julius Caesar in to England.
The next spring (which was the year before Christ.51.) His navy being new
rygged and increased, he passed the seas again with a greater army. But
whiles he went toward his enemies on land, his ships lying at anchor, were
again by tempest almost lost: for either they were driven on the sands, where
they stacke fast: orels through beatyng one an other, with force of the
tempeste, they were destroyed. So that xi. were lost, the other with much
labor were saved. Upon land also his horsemen at the first encountre were
vanquished, and Labienus the Tribune slain. At the second conflict, not
without great danger of his men, he put the Britayns to flight, and pursued
the^ to ye river of Thamis: on the further side whereof, Cassiucian, with a
great multitude of people, was keeping the banks, but they not hable to resist
the violence and force of the Romans, hyd them selves in woddes, and with
sodayn eruptions oftentimes invaded them: but in the mean time their strongest
city, London submitted to Julius Caesar.
Troynouant submitted it self to Caesar delyueryng unto him hostages: which
exaumple also the other cities followed: England first tributarye to the Romans
John Lidgate Julius Caesar, a bakers son co^quering ye world and being the
first Emperor, was in the capitol by the senate slain with bodkins
whereby Cassiuelan after many losses was constreigned to give pledges, and to
agree that Britayne should become tributarie to the Romans. Then Caesar like a
conqueror with a great number of prisoners sailed into France, and so to Rome,
where shortly after he was slain with bodkyns. John Lydgate in his book named
the Serpent of division writethe, that Julius Caesar builded in this land
diverse cafteis and cities for a perpetual memory, to put his name in
remembrance: that is to say, The castles of Dover Canterburye Rochester, and
the tower of London builded.
the castle of Dover, of Canterbury, Rochester, and the Tower of London, the
castle and town of Cesars bury: taking his name after Caesar, the which is
now called Salisbury. Salisbury, Chichester and Excester builded.
He also edefied Cesars Chester that now is called Chichester, and the castle
of Excester etc.

Thus ended the wars which he made in Britayn, whereby he rather opened
only a way for his successors, to come to the same: then that he delivered
to them the dominion thereof. This conquest was made.2255. years after the
uersall flood.1057. years. after the arrival of Brute.702. years after the
buyldyng of Rome, in the second year of the.181. Olympiade, the.1116. year
before the conqueste made by Wylliam of Normandye, and.1615. years before this
present year of our Lord.1564.

Theomancius, 42
the son of Lud, and nephue to Cassiuelan succeeded in the realm of Britayne,
and reigned quietly xxiii. years: and was buried at London.

Cymbalinus, 19
the son of Theomantius reigned king of Britain.xxxv. years, and was buried
at London.

The most blessed and pure virgin Mary, mother of our savior Jesus Christ, was
born of the holy matrone Saint Anne, the year of the world.3948. the year
before Christ.15.

When Caesar Augustius the second Emperor by the will of God had stablished
most sure peace thorough the world, our redemer IESV CHRIST, The birth of
Christ.
very God and man, upon whom peace waited, was borne in the.xlii. year of the
reign of Augustus: after the universal Flood.2305. years. From the birth of
Abraham.2012. years. After the departing of the Israelites out of Egypt 1509.
years, after the building of the temple by Solomon.1029. years. From the
buildyng of Rome.752. years. after the captivity of Babylon.614. years. And
in the last year of the.194. Olympiade. But here is to be noted, that the
first year of our Lord has but vii. days, after some computation: for he was
borne the.xxv day of December, and the first of January following, began the
second year.

From this place following, the years since Christ's birth, are placed in the
margent, at the beginning of every kings Reign.

17
GUiderius, the first son of Cimbalyne began his reign over the Britains, in
the.xvii year after the birth of Christ our Savior. Thomas Lanquet.
This man was valiant, hardy, welthye, and trusted much in his strength. And
for that he thought the Romans had their tribute wrongfully, he of great
courage denied to pay the same. For which cause Claudius the.v. Emperor came
into Britayne with a greatte power, to claim again the payment thereof: and
lastly slew the said Guiderius, when he had reigned.xxviii. years.

ARuiragus, 45
the youngest son of Cymbalyne, and brother of Guiderius, was ordained King
of Britayne: he reigned.xxvii. years. Southampton, how it took that name.
He slew Hamon near to a haven of the sea, and threw him gobbet meal therein:
Wherefore it is now called Southa^pton. Claudius the Emperor (after diverse
happes of battle) took king Aruiragus to his grace. And for so much as he
perceived him to be a valiant prince, in token of friendship (as the english
Chronicles testify) gave to him his daughter in marriage, named Genissa.
Gloucester builded, which before was named Carlyon.
This Claudius (as says Fabyan) builded Gloucester: and Aruiragus was there
buried.

Peter and Paul by the tyranny of Nero, Peter and Paul crucified.
were crucified at Rome, after the birth of our Savior Jesus Christ, 68.
years.

Marius, 73
the son of Aruiragus, an excellent wise man was ordained king of Britayn.
He reigned.liii. years. In his time Lodrik king of the Pictes (which were a
people of Scythia) accompanied with the Scotts, invaded Britayne, and spoiled
the country with sword and fire, against whom Marius with his knights,
assembled in all haste, and gave them sharp battle. Wherein Lodrike captayn
of the Pictes was slain, with a great number of his soldiers: to them which
he remained, Marius gave inhabitance in the further part of Scotland. And for
as much as the Britains disdayned to give their daughters to them in marriage,
they acquainted them with the Iryshe men, and married their daughters, and grew
in process of time to a great people. Chester town builded.
This Marius (as says Fabyan) builded the town of Chester, and is buried at
Carlyon.

126
COilus, the son of Marius, was ordained king of the Britaynes. He was brought
up even from his young age in Italy among the Romans and therefore favored
them greatly, and paid the tribute truly. Some write, that he builded the town
of Colchester, Colchester builded.
he reigned.liii. years, and was buried at York.

180
LUcie, the son of Coilus was ordained king of Britayne, who in all his acts
and deeds followed the steps of his forfathers, in such wise that he was of
all men loved and dread. England first received the christen faith.
This Lucie in the.viii. year of his reign, that was about the year of our
Lord.187. sent loving letters to Eleutherius bishop of Rome, desyryng him to
send some devout and learned men, by whose instruction both he and his people
might be taught the says and religion of Christ: whereof Elutherius being very
glad, sent into Britayne.ii. famous clerks, Faganus, and Dunianus. Gildas in
his book De victoria Aurelii Ambrossi.
By whose diligence (as Gildas writes) Lucie and his people of Britayne were
instructed and baptized in the faith of Christ 1294. years, after the arrival
of Brute: In this time (as Gildas and Martin, a chronicler do write) xxviii.
temples of Flamynes were made cathedral churches, and bishops placed in the
same as Flamyns before had been. London, York and Earlyon were archbyshops.
The year of Christ.189. Lucius king of Britayne, when he had reigned xii.
years deceased, and was buried at Gloucester: after whose death, for so much as
of him remained no heir, the britains between them selves fell at great
discord and war, which continued to the great disturbance of the realm
about.xv. years. By mean of this forsaide discord among the britons:
Seuerus was moved to make haste into this Countreye, as well to quyete the
realm, as to keep back the Pictes and Scotts, which vexed them with war.
he caused a wall of turues and great stakes to be made of the length of 112.
miles, Adrians wall repaired by Senerus, which is yet called the scottyshe
bank.
or (after some) repaired the wall of Adrian: It began at Tyne, and reached to
the Scottyshe sea. This Seuerus governed Britayne.v. years, and was buried at
York.

213
BAssianus Caracalla succeeded his father in the empire, and reigned vi years. Of
nature he was cruel and fierce, able to endure al pains and labors, and
especially in warfare, whereto he seemed to be framed of nature.

218
In Britayne was yet no king: but the Emperor was accounted as king, wherefore
(as some write) Carassus, a britayn of low birth (but valyant and hardy in
marciall deeds) purchased of the Emperor, the keeping of the coasts of
Britayn. By means whereof he drue to him many knights of his country, and
addressed deadly war against the the Romans: having the better hope, for
that he heard of the death of Bassianus the emperor, who about this time was
slain by one of his own servants. Polydore Virgile
But Polydore affirms that this Carassus took on him the governance of
Britayne in the time of Dioclesian: and says, that this land was in good
quietness the space of.76. years, with whom the latin histories seem to agree.

Alectus, a duke of Rome was sent to subdue Carassus, which unlefullye
usurped the crown of Britayne: To which Alectus, fortune was so favorable,
that he vanquyshed Carassus: and lastely slew him, when he had reigned.viii.
years.

Alectus, 226
the Romayn governed the britaynes after he had subdued the land again to the
Romans: and used among them much cruelty and tyranny. Wherefore they
intendyng utterly to expel the Romans, moved a noble man called
Asclepiodatus, Alectus slain by Asclepiodatus.
to take on him the kingdom: who gathered a great power and made sharp war
upon the Romans, and chased them from country to country, until at length
Alectus kept him at London for his most surety: whither Asclepiodatus pursued
him and nere to that city gave him bata^le: in which Alectus was slain, when
he had governed Britayn.vi. years.

Asclepiodatus, 232
after Alectus was thus slain, belayed the city of London with a strong siege,
wherein was Liuius Gallus the Romayn captain: and ere it were long, by
knightly force and violence, entered the city, and slew the forenamed Gallus
nere unto a broke there at that day runnyng, Walbroke in London, how it took
that name.
into which broke he threw him, by reason whereof, it was called Gallus or
Wallus brook: and this day, the street where sometime the broke ran, is
called Walbroke. After which victory Asclepiodatus governed britayne.xxv.
years.

262
At this time happened a great discention in britayn between Asclepiodatus their
king, and one Coill duke of Colchester: whereby was raised a grievous war,
Asclepiodatus slain.
in which Asclepiodatus was slain. And Coill took on him the kingdom of
britayne, and governed the realm the space of.xxvii. years.

289
Constantius, a duke of Rome was sent into britayn to recover the tribute:
shortly after whose arrival. Coill which then was king, died: Wherefore the
britayns to have more suertie of peace, wylled this Duke to take to wife
Helena, the daughter of Coill, which was a wonderful fair maiden, and
therewith well learned. This Constantius when he had recovered the tribute,
returned with his wife Helena to Rome: as chief ruler of Britayne: who
governed the same.xxi. years: he was buried at York.

In this Constantius time, S. Albon of England martyred.
was S. Albon prothomartir of England, martyred at Uerolan. Of him John Lidgate
monk of Burye has compyled a goodlye storye in english meter Heroical.
John Lidgate


COnstantine, the soonne of Constantius, 310
succeeded as well in the kingdom of Britayne, as in the governance of other
realms, that were subject before to his father. This Constantine was a right
noble and valiant prince and son of Helena, a woman of great sanctimony, and
borne in Britayne. He was so mighty in marciall prowess, that he was
surnamed the great Constantyne: And had the faith of Christ in such
reverence, that always most studyouselye he endeavored to augmente the same.
In witness of his belief, he caused a book of the Gospel to be carried
before him and made the bible to be copied out, and sent into all parts of
the empire. Wherefore the kings of England wear close crowns
Of this man the kings of Britayne had first the priuileage to wear close
crowns or diademes: he reigned.xviii years

Constantine in the.vi. year of his reign came with a part of his army
against Maxentius, The first christen Emperor.
which vexed the Romans with grievous eractions and tribute: when he was in
his journey, by a vision in the night, he saw the sign of the Cross in the
elemente shynynge like fire, and an angel thereby, saying in this wise:
Constantine, in this sign thou shall overcome. wherefore he being greatly
comforted, shortly after vanquished the army of Maxentius: who fleing out of
the battle, was drowned in Tyber.

Helena, S. Helene an english woman.
the mother of Constantyne, at Jerusalem found the cross, on which Christ
suffered his passion, and the.iii. nails, wherewith his fete and hands were
pierced.

OCtauius, duke of Iesses or wesse Saxons, who^ Constantine made lieutenant in
Britayne rebelled: and endeavored to expel the Romans out of the land.
Whereof when Constantine had knowledge, he sent against him a Duke named
Traherne with legions of soldiers, after whose arrival in Britain was fought
a fires battle, near to Wynchester: In which Traherne was put to the
worse, and constrained to flee toward Scotland: who^ Octauius followed. And in
Westmerlande gave to him the second battle: in which Octauius was chased,
and Traherne obtained the victory, and pursued Octauius so fiercely, that he
was driven to forsake the land, and sailed into Norway.

Octauius repairing his army, 329
came again into Britayn: but in the mean time an Earl which favored his
party, by treason murdered the fornamed Trahern. And then Octauius (called in
the English Chronicles Octauian) reigned in this land at the least liiii.
years. In which time (as says the Scottishe history) he was troubled with
often wars by the Romans: Ector Boice.
Polidore says, that this Realm was in good quiet all the time of
Constantyne and his successors, Polydore Virgile
until the fifth year of Gratian, and makes no mention of this Octauius which
thing I I speak not for any reproach to Polydore (whom I know right well to
have followed most certain and commendable Authors,) but only to show to
the reader, the dyuersitie of hystories, which is great.

283
MAximus, son of Leonine, and cousyn german to Constantine the great, was
made king of britayne. This man was mighty of his hands: but for that he was
cruel, and pursued somedeale the Christians, he was called Maximus the
tyrant. Between him, and one Conon Meridoke a Britayn, was a strife and
debate, in which they both sped dyuersly: but at at length they were made
friends. Maximus reigned.viii. years.

Maximus conquered little Britayn.
Maximus, king of Britayne made war upon the Galls, and sailed into
Armerica, now called little Britayn: and subduyng the countreye, gave it to
Conon Meridoke, to hold for ever of the kings of great Britayn.

Maximus, was constrained of the soldiers, to take on him the imperial
crown: and therefore being in France passed further into the lands of the
empire, and subdued a great part of France, and all Germany. Gratian the
Emperor of him was put to flight at Paris and slain at Lions.

Whiles Maximus was occupied in the wars in Italye, Melga king of Pictes,
and Guanius captain of the Hunnes, vexed the Britayns. Whereof when Maximus had
understanding, he sent a captain named Gratian to withstand their force.

Saint Ursula, S. Ursula of England.
with the.11000. Uirgins, which were sent into little Britayne to be married to
the foresaid Conon and his knights: were slain of the barbarous people being
on the sea.

Forthwith the foresaid Gratian that was sent into Britayne of Maximus, 391
to defend the land from Barbariens, took on him the kingdom of Britayn, and
exercised all tyranny and exaction upon the people: for which cause he was
abhorred of all the Britaynes: and by them was slain, when he had reigned
four years. Then was the Realm a good space without head or gouernoure: In
the which time they were now and then very much vexed with the foresaid
Barbarous people, and other foreyne enemies.

The Scotts and Picts invade England
Nere about the year of Christ.427. the Britaynes were invaded again by the
Pictes and Scots: which not withstanding the foresaid wall that was made by
the Romans, spoiled the country very sore, so that they were driven to seek
for new help of the Romans: who sent to them a company of soldiers: which
again chased the Picts, and made a wall of stone of the thicknes of viii. foot,
A wall of stone between England and Scotland.
and in height.xii. foot. Which thing when they had done, comfortyng the
britones, and admonishynge them hereafter to trust to their own ma^hod and
strength, they returned again to Rome.

The Scotts and Pyctes yet once again entered the land of Britayne, spoylynge
the countreye, and chasyng the commons so cruelly, that they were altogether
comfortelesse, and brought to such myserie, that each robbed and spoiled
other: and over this, the ground was untilled: whereof ensued great scarcity
and hunger, and after hunger death. The Scotts and Picts invaded this realm
so sore, that the Romans refused to defend the same: but rather to lose their
Trybute.
In this necessity they sent for aid to Aetius, the Romayne captain,
being then occupied in wars in a part of France: but they had no comfort
at his hand. And therefore were forced to send ambassade to Aldroenus, king of
little Britayne, to desire aid and comfort: which they obtained, in
condition, that if they achieved the victory, Beda de gestis Angloru^.
Constantine his brother should be made king of britayn: for to that day they
had no governor. Which thing of the Ambassadors being granted, the said
Constantine gathered a company of soldiers, and went forth with them. And
when he had manfully vanquished their enemies, obtained the victory:
according to the promise made, he was ordained their king, and guyded this
land.x. years.

Here ends finally the dominion and tribute of the Romans over this land,
which had continued by the space of 483. years, from the time that Brute
began to rule this land.1541. After the city of Rome was builded.1585. years.

THen it followed, 433
that when Constantine brother of Aldroenus, had chased and overcome the Pictes
and Scots (as is beforesaid) he was crowned king of great Britayne and guyded
the land the space of.x. years in quietness.

In the court of Constantyne king of Britayn was a certain Picte, in so
great favor and authority with the king, The king slain in his chamber by
a Picte.
that he might at all times come to his presence: who watchynge his time, by
secret means trayterouslye slew the king in his chamber.

443
Then Constantius his eldest son, which for his lofte spirit, was made monk
at saint Swithens in Wynchester, A Monk made king of England.
by the means of Uortiger, duke of Cornwall, was taken out of the cloister, and
made king: under whose name the foresaid Uortiger ruled all the land and used
great tyranny.

Constantius, king of Britayn, was slain of certain Pictes or Scotts, The
king traiterousely slain by certaig Pictes.
whom Uortiger had ordained for a guard to the kings body. Whereof when
Uortiger had knowledge, he wept and made semblaunt of great sorrow and
heauynes: and caused the said Scotts or Pictes to be put to death, though he
in deed were the chief causer of their treason and murder. So this Constantius
reigned but.v. years: And Aurelius and Uther, the kings younger brethren,
fled into little Britayn.

Uortiger was by force ordained king of Britayne, 448
and governed the realm.xvi. years, not without trouble. For the nobles of
Britayne suspected, that Constantius was not murdered with out his consent:
And therefore alienated their minds from him.

In Britayne was so great plenty of corn and fruit, Great plenty of Corn
and grain.
that the like had not ben seen many years before. Which plenty was cause of
idleness, gluttony, lechery, and other vices: so that through their incontinent
and riottous living, ensued so great pestilence and mortality, A great
pestilence.
that the living scantely suffised to bury the dead.

The Pictes and Scotts also, having knowledge of the death of their knights,
which were slain by Uortiger, for murderyng of the king: The Scots and
Pictes spoiled this land.
invaded, and in most cruel wise spoiled the land of Britayne.

Uortiger being sore abashed, for so much ash knew the minds of his people
to be alienated from him (after some men's opinion) sent for the Saxons, named
Angli, which had no place to dwell in: and gave to them inhabita^ce in Kent.
The first Saxons entryng this realm.
By their help and manhood in many batails, he vanquished and drove back the
Pictes and other enemies: and therefore had them ever after in great love and
favor.

Hengist, one of the captains of the Saxons found means that Uortiger king
of Britayne married his daughter Rowan, King Uortiger deuorced from his laufull
wife, and married Rowan, ye daughter of Hengist the Saxon.
a maiden of wonderfulle beauty and pleasantness, but a myscreant and
Pagane. For her sake, the king was deuorced from his laufull wife: by whom
he had.iii. sons. For which deed welnere all the Britones forsook him:
and the Saxons daily increased both in favor multitude and authority: and
from this time sought always occasyon to extinguyshe utterly the power of the
britayns: and subdue the land to them self.

The Saxons couenanted with the Britons, that they should attend to their
worldly busynes: and the Saxons (as their soldiers) would defend the land
from the incursions of all enemies: for which service the Britains should give
to them competent meat and wages. And under this pretense caused more Saxons
to be sent for, entendyng at conueniente time, by force to have the land in
their subjection.

Saint Germain came into Britayn to reduce them from the heresye of Pelagius,
Pelagius heresy in England.
to the faith of Christ.

The britayns consyderyng the daily repair of the Saxons into this realm,
showed to their king, the ieopardy that might thereof ensue, and advertised him
to avoid the danger, and expel them out of the realm: but all was in vayn.
For Uortiger, by reason of his wife, bore such favor toward the Saxons that
he would in no wise hear the counsel of his subjects. Uortiger deprived of
his kingdom.
Wherefore they with one will and mind deprived him of his royal dignity,
and ordained to their King, his eldeste soonne Uortimerus.

VOrtimer (as before is said) being made king, 464 The king poisoned by his
stepmother.
in all have he pursued the Saxons: and by his marciall knyghthode, vanquyshed
them in iiii. great battles, besides conflictes and skirmyshes. Untyll at
length he was poisoned by mean of Rowen his stepmother, after he had
reigned.vii. years.

Uortiger obtained again the kingdom of great Britayne, 471
and reigned after this time.ix. years. But shortly after, Hengistus (which
was chased of Uortimer into the Isle of Thanet, entered the land with a nu^bre
of Saxons: but when he heard of the great assemble, that the britons made
against him, be treated for peace: which in fine was concluded.

Hardyng says the Saxons slew on the Plain of Salisburye iiii. C. and ix.
barons and Earls, and took the kyngeprisoner.
The Saxons in Britayne, by privy guyle and treason, got the king Uortiger into
their hands, and kept him as prisoner: and by that means constreyned the
King to grant unto them three countries in the land of britayne: (that is to
say) Kent, Susser, Suffolk, and Norffolke. Than Hengist began his dominion
over Kent: and sendynge for mo saxons, to inhabit the other provinces: Abbot
Ambry builded Ambresbury.
shortly after made war upon the Britayns: and so chased them, that he kept
his kingdom of Kent in peace and war.xxiiii. years.

Uortiger fled into Wales, and there builded a castle. Of which buildyng and
long let of the same, and of his prophet Merlyn, the common voice of the
people speaks many things.

Aurelie surnamed Ambrose, and Uther, the brethern of Constantius king of
brittayne: which was slain by the treason of Uortiger, landed with a Nauye of
ships at Totnes: and by the healpe of britaynes, King Uortiger burned in his
castle in Wales.
which gathered to them in all haste, made war upon Uortiger, and burned
him in his castle in Wales, where he kept him for his most sure defense.

Aurelius Ambrose, 481
was ordained king of Britayne, which immediatlye hasted him with an army
toward York, against Octa son of Hengist, who with his saxons kept the
City, where he discomfited, and took prisoner the said Octa.

A Saxon named Hella, with his.iii. sons, The second kingdom of the Saxons.
and a company of Saxons landed in the southe part of britayne slew the
britons, and chased many of the^ into deserts and wods, and subdued the
countries of Southery, Somerset, Deuonshyre and Cornwall, which after was
called the kingdom of South Saxons

A saxon named Porthe, How Porismouthe came to that name.
landed, with his.ii. sons, at an haven in southsex: After whom, the Haven
is named Portsmouthe.

The third kingdom of the Saxons
The kingdom of the East Saxons began in Britayn under a duke named Uffa: The
kingdom whereof contained Norffolke and Suffolk: the kings of that lordeshyp
were called Uffines: great murder and veration of the britains was at the
entryng of those Saxons.

218
In the end of Aurelie his reygne, Pascentius, the youngest son of Uortiger:
who for fear of Aurelius fled into Irelande, invaded this land with a great
army: at which season Aurelius was sick at Wynchester. And therefore sent his
brother Uther, to resyst the malice of Pascentius, and Guillamour king of
Irelande. In the mean time Aurelius dyed (as some write) being poisoned: when
he had reigned.xix. years.

500
Other, surnamed Pendragon, was crouned king of Britayne, and reigned.xvi.
years. He was enamored upon the dukes wife of Cornwall: and to obtain his
unlawful lust, made war upon her husband Garelus, and slew him in bataile:
he was buried at Stone hynge.

517 Gildas made a book de gestis Arthuri.
ARthur, the son of Uther Pendragon, a striplyng of.xv. years of age, began
his reign over Britayne, and governed the land.xxvi. years, having
continual war and mortal battle with the Saxons. Of this Arthure be
written many things in the English chronicle, of small credence, and far
discordant from other writers: but yet all agree, that he was a noble and
victorious prince in all his dedes^ and they testify, that he fought xii.
notable battles against the Saxons, and was always victour. But
notwithstanding he might not clearly void them out of his land, but that they
held their countries which they were possessed of.

John Frosarde affirms, John Frosard Wyndsor castle builded.
that king Arthure builded the castle of Wyndesour: and there founded the
order of the round Table.

The fourth kingdom of the weste Saxons began in Britayne, The fowerth
kingdom of the Saxons.
under a Saxon called Cerdicus. They landed first at an haue^ in Norffolk
called Yarmouth. With this Saxon Cerdicus, and his people, Arthure had much
trouble and war. This lordshyp contained the west part of England, as
Wylshire, Somersetshire, Barkshire, Dorsetshire and other.

Arthure, when after many and diverse battles, he had set his land in
some quietness: he betook the rule thereof to his nephewe Mordred, Galfride.
and with a chosen army (as says Galfride and other) sailed into France,
where he did meruaylous things, and vanquyshed Lucius Hibertus, the Romain
Capytayne, which thing seems not to agree with other histories.

Mordred the traitor usurps the crown.
MOrdred, which had the governance of Britayn in the absence of Arthur, by
treason was crouned king through the healpe of Cerdicus king of weste Saxons.
Of which treason when relation came to Arthur being then in France: with all
haste he made back to Britayne: where he was met of Mordred, which gave to
him.iii. strong battails. In the which many noble and valiant knights
perished. And lastely, in a battle foughten besides Glastenburye, Mordred was
slain, Mordred slain, and Arthur wounded to death.
and Arthure wounded unto the death. He was buried in the valley of Aualon,
and afterward at Glastenbury.

COnstantine, 543
kynsman to Arthur by assent of the brytons was ordained king of Britayne, and
reigned three years. This man was by the two sons of Mordred greuouslye
vexed. For they claymed the land by the right of their father: so that
between them was foughten sundry battaylles: In the which lastely the two
brethren were vanquyshed and slain.

Holy Gildas our countreyman flouryshed in this time, Gildas the wise.
he was called Gildas the wise.

Aurelius Conanus, a britain, raised mortal war against Constantine the
king: and after sore fight, slew him in the field, when he had reigned.iii.
years, and was buried at Stonehyng.

Aurelius Conanus, 546
was crowned king of Britayn: he was noble, hardy, and therewith very lyberall.
but he cherished such as loved strife and discention within his Realm: and
gave light credence to them, which accused other, were it right or wrong. He
imprisoned by stren^gth his uncle, which was right heir to the crown: and
dyed when he had reigned.iii. years.

The.v. and vi. kingdom of the Saxons
The kingdom of Northumberland began first in Britayn under a Saxon, named Ida.
This province was first divided into two kyngedomes: The one was called
Deyra, which contained the land from Humber to Tyne: The other Brenicia,
which included the country from Tyne to the scottyshe sea. After this day the
britayns decreased daily in lordshyp and rule, and drew them toward Wales,
so that the country about Chester, was the chief of their lordshyppe.

548
Uortiporus, the son of Conanus, was ordained king of Britayne: of whom is
little memory left, saving that Guido testifyeth, Guido.
that he was a vyctorious prince: and that he in diverse battles discomfited
the saxons: he reigned.iiii. years.

552
MAlgo, a duke of Britayne, began his reygn over the britayns, and governed
them.xxxv. years, as writers record. This Malgo was the comelyest and most
personable man of all the britaynes then living, and therewith endued with
knyghtely manhood: but he delyted in the foul sin of sodomy: and therefore
was greatly spoiled by his enemies the Saxons. The first war between the
Saxons in this realm


Ethelbert, king of the Saxones in Kent, gave bataile to Ceaulmus king of the
west Saxons: in which fight were slain.ii. dukes of Ethelberts, and himself
with his people chased. This was the first war between the Saxons, after they
had land and dwelling within this realm.

Cutwalphus, the son of Cerdicus, king of west Saxons, fought valiantly
against the Britaynes, and berefte them of.iiii. great towns.

After the death of Cutwalphus before named, his brother Ceaulmus desirous of
honor, made sharp war upon the britayns, and wan from them the cities of
Gloucester, Worcester, and Bathe.

CAreticus began to rule the Britons. 586


This man (as witnesses al writers) loved civil war, and was odible both to
God and to his subjects, they moved the Saxons to war upon him: who took
from him a great part of his land.

The Saxons heryng of the discention between Careticus and his Britains,
Gurmundus builded Gurmundchester so says Hardyng, who alle^g^th Beda.
being accompanied with Gurmundus king of Ireland, made war upon Careticus, in
such wise that he was feign to take the Town of Sicester, where they
assaulted him so sore that he with his men fled from thens into Wales: by
which means he left a great part of his dominion: and shortly after ended
his life, when he had reigned.iii. years.

589
THe Britains which were chased by their enemies into Wales (as is before said)
held them in those parties, and assaulted the Saxons some while in one coast,
and some while in an other under sundry dukes: and so continued the space
of.xxiiii. years.

In Britayne Ethelfridus governed the Northsaxons, who made such continual
war upon the Britaynes, and chased them so sore, that it is thought be slew
mo of them, then all the other Saxons kings. By this cruelty, the faith of
Christ was almost utterly extinguished among the Britayns which had continued
since ye time of Lucius about.400. years, and many of the britains were chased
out of the Island, the rest remained in Wales: who there kept the christen
faith which they had received.

The britains being chased out of their country into Wales, the Saxons
obtained the whole domynion of this Island: The Saxons had the whole possession
of this realm.
Saving a part of Scotland which was subject to the Pictes and Scotts: and the
britons kept themselves in Wales.

In Anno domini.596. S. Gregory sent Augustine Melitus Iustus, S. Augustine came
into England.
and John, with other learned men to preach the christen faith to the Angles:
which were first received of Ethelbert king of Ke^t, S. Austins at Canturbery.
whom they converted to the faith, with diverse of his people. S. Paul's church
iu London, and S. Andrews in Rochester Saint Peter's at Westminster, builded.
This Ethelberte (as some write) first began to build S. Austyns in
Canturbery. S. Paul's church in London, and s. Andrews in Rochester. he also
excited a citisen of London to build the abbey of Westmynster.

CAdwane Duke of Northewales, 613
was made sovereign of the britayns, who coming out of Wales, gave strong
battle to Ethelfride king of Northumberland their most deadly enemy: and in
diverse encountres so discomfited the said Ethelfride, that he was forced to
entreat for peace: After which concord made between those two princes, they
continued al their life time as two special and loving friends, he
reigned.xxii. years.

Edwyne, the son of Ella, which was persecuted of Ethelfryde king of
Northumberlande made sore war upon the said Ethelfride, and slew him in
plain battle, and then seysed into his possession the kingdom of
Northhumberland. This Edwine was the first christian king of that country.

Mahomete first beginning.
About this time began Mahomete among the Turks.

The vii. kingdom.
Also about this time began the kingdom of Mercia or middle England under the
strong painim and Saxon called penda: which lordshyp contained Huntyngtonshyre,
Herefordshire, Gloucestershire, and other, and was greattest of all other
kyngedomes. At that time reigned in diverse parts of this land vii. kings.
Sibertus among the east Saxons, Redwallus king of East angles, now called
Norffolke and Suffolk. Ethelbert king of Kent. Ethewolphus of Sussex:
Ringilus and Quincellinus of Weste Saxons. Penda of Mercia Edwyne of
Northumberland.

Paulinus builded the great church at Lincoln.
Edwyn king of Northumberlande was baptized of holy Bishop Paulinus: and
after him, many of his people: Iron cups fastened by wells and fountayns
for trauayling me^ to drink on.
he for the refreshyng of wayfaryng men, ordained cups and dishes of iron to
be fastened by such clear wells and fountayns as did run by the ways side.

CAdwallyne the son of Cadwane began his reign over the britaynes. 635
He was valyant and mighty, and warred strongly upon the Sarons, and made
Penda king of Mercia tributarie to him: he reigned.xlviii. years, and was
buried at London in sent Martyns church by L^dgate.

Kyngilpus king of weste Saxons was turned to the right belefe, by a holy man
called Berinus.

Segebert, King of East Angles or Norffolke, ordained good learning to be
taught and erected Schools in diverse parts of his dominion, as he sometime
had seen in France. The first School in Cambrydge builded.
By him was the first common school founded at Cambridge.

Kenwalcus king of west Saxons in Britayn was driven out of his kingdom by
Penda, and kept from thence by force, the space of.iii. years.

Penda king of Mercia warred upon Oswalde the good and holy King of
Northumberland, and slew him in battle with many of his knights.
Policronica. f. Columbe, cronicis Colmanni.


Oswye, the brother of Oswald obtained the kingdom of Northumberlande: who
slew Oswyne his brothers son: and made Odilwaldus partaker of his kingdom.

Kenwalcus king of Weste Saxons was restored to his kyngedome by the help of
Anna, king of eastangles. He builded the bishops see of Winchester, The bishops
see of Winchester builded.
and made Agelbert the first bishop of that see. And after him was one named
Wine, of whom the City took the name of Wynchester.

Glasynge brought first into Englaud
Benet the monk, and master of the reverend Beda, was famous in Britain This
Benet brought first the craft of glasyng into this land.

Chertesey in Southerye was afterward destroyed by the Danes.
Cissa begun to build the abbey of Abington, and Erkenwalde bishop of London
builded the abbeys of Chertsey, and of Barkyng in Essex.

683
CAdwallader was ordained king of britons, and ruled only.iii. years. He
vanquished and slew Lethayre king of Kente, and Athelwolde king of South
saxons, and then forsakyng his kyngly authority. he went to Rome, The king
becam a monk.
and there becamme a religious man, and was buried at saint Peter's church at
Rome. He was the last king of Britayne. And this land after this time was
called Anglia, The Island called universally England
and the inhabitants thereof Angles or Englyshmen, and the britaynes were
called Walshemen: which name they took of a duke called: Wallus. This
happened.1791. years, or as says Fabian.1822. after that Brute first arrived
in this land: After the conquest of Caesar.735. years: From the entryng of the
Saxons under their leaders Hengist and Horsus, in the time of Uortiger.236. or
nere therabout.

Thus ended the reign of the Britons: and now follows the reign of the
Saxons.

Although the Saxons had divided this realm into seven several kingdoms:
yet I will now speak chiefly of the weste saxons in order, because that (in
process of time) they subdued the other kings, and brought it again into one
monarchy.

AMong the west saxons reigned a 686
noble man called Jew, of great power and wisdom, and therewith valiant and
hardy: in feats of arms very expert: he mainteyned such war against the
Kentyshe Saxons, that he constreigned them to seek and entreat means of
peace, geuyng to him for the same great gifts. The college of Wells, and the
abbey of Glastenbury newly builded The queen of West Saxons was abbess of
Barkyng: the king her husband became a religious man.
This man builded first the college of Wells, and the abbey of Glastenbury:
he paid the Peter pens first to Rome. When he had governed the west Saxons by
the space of.xxxvii. years, by the earnest labor of his wife Etheldreda, which
was an holy woman and abbess of Backyng in Essex, gave up his royal power,
and became a poor man, and went to Rome on pilgremage. he is of Beda called
Hunne or Jew.

724 S. Beda in this time wrote in England.
AFter him Ethelarde was king of west Saxons, in whose time the reverend Beda
was famous, and wrote his book called Anglica historia, to Offrick king of
Northumberlande. Ethelarde reigned v. years.

729
^Uthred was king of West saxons.

This man made war upon Ethelwald or Mercia, and lied therein diversely. In his
time appeared two blasynge sterres, Two comets or blasynge stars.
casting as it were burning brandes toward the north. He reigned.xvi.
years. Ethelwald before named (as Hardyng writes) builded the abbey of
Crowlande. Crowlande builded.


The holy man Beda, Beda deceased
which for his lernyng and godly life, was renoumed in all ye world, ended his
last day about the year of Christ.734. he in his life compiled.lxxviii. books.

SIgebert was made king of Weste Saxons: 745
he was cruel and tyra^nous toward his subjects: and changed anciente laws
and customs, after his own will and pleasure. And because a certain noble
man, somedeale sharply advertised him to change his manners, he maliciously
caused the same person to be put cruelly to death: And for so much as he
continued in his malice, and would not amend: he was deprived of all kyngely
authority. The king deprived, and slain by a swyneheard.
and lastely, as a person desolate and forlorn, wandering alone in a wodd, was
slain of a swineherde, whose lord and master, (when he had reigned as king)
he had wrongfully put to death, when he had reigned iii. years.

KEnulphus, of the lynage and blood of Cerdicus first king of West saxons, 748
reigned in the kingdom.xxxi. years. The virtue of this manne far passed
his fame. At the beginning he appeased certain murmours and grudges, that were
among the people, for the deposyng of his predecessor Sigebert.

Winchcombe abbey builded
Kenulfe king of Mercia builded the abbey of Wynchecombe.

Offa, a noble man reigned in Mercia, or myddle England; he had war with
them of Northumberlande: and for a time subdued them. He warred also against
Etheldred king of east angles: and vanquyshed and took prisoner, Egbert king
of Kent.

The abbey of S. Albons builded.
Offa, king of Mercia builded the abbey of saint Albons, he chased the britons
or Welshemen into Wales, and made a famous dike between Wales and the utter
bounds of Mercia, which is now called Offa dike.

Kenulphus king of west saxons, as he haunted to a woman, which he kept at
Merton, The King Kenulphus slain.
was slain by treason of of one Clio, the kynsemanne of Sigeberte, late King.
He was buried at Wynchester.

778
BRithricus, of the blood of Cerdidicus, was made king of weste saxons: and
knyghtely ruled his land, ye space of.xvii. years: he married one of the
daughters of Offa, king of Mercia by whose power he expelled Egberte, that was
an under king in the lordship of west saxons. In his time (as says Fabyan) it
rayned blood from heaven, It rayned blood.
which falling on men's clothes, appeared like crosses.

The Danes first entered this land of Britayne, The Danes first entered this
land.
but by the strength and puissance of Brithricus, and other kings of the
saxons, they were driven back, and compelled to void the land, Brithricus
was poisoned by his wife Ethelburga. The king poisoned by his wife.
For which deed the nobles ordained, that from thenseforthe the kings wives
should not be called Queen's, nor suffered to sytte with them in places of estate.

EGbert the saxon, 795
which by Brithricus was chased out of the Realm, having knowledge of the
death of Brithricus, returned onte of France, and in so knightely wise
demeaned him self, that he obtained the government of Weste Saxons, he tamed
the welshe men, vanquyshed Berthulphus king of myddle England, and subdued to
his seignorie and obeisance, the Kentysh saxons, eastsaxons, and Northumbers,
and reigned as king over the more part of England, the space of.xxxvii.
years, and was buried at Wynchester.

The Danes second entryng this land.
The Danes with a great host, entered this landd the second time, and spoiled
the Isle of Shepey in Kente, against whom Egbert the king addressed him with
his power: whom the Danes forced to flee the field. After which time, some of the
Danes continually abode in one place or other of this land.

832
EEthelwolphus, the son of Egbert began his reign over ye more part of
England. Ethelwolphus gave first tithes in England, as John Harding affirms.
This man in his youth was wyllyng to have been a priest, and entered ye order
of subdeacon: howbest after he married a wife, by whom he had.iiii. sons,
which reigned after him successively. He went to Rome, where he repaired the
english school, An hospital for englyshemen builded at Rome.
which was first founded by Offa king of Mercia. This school was after
turned to an hospital for englyshemen, which came to Rome. he first founded
the university of Oxenford, Oxenforde builded.
which some writers attribute to Offa, king of Mercia, that was in the time of
Charles the great.ix. years before this time. He reigned.xxiii. years, and was
buried at Wynchester.

EThewlaldus, 855
after the death of his father, began his reign in England, he married a woman,
which his father had kept before as his concubine: and dyed when he had not
reigned fully one year.

EEthelbert, 856 The Danes third entryng this land.
the brother of Ethelwold was made king over the more part of England. In the
beginning of his reign, the Danes entered the west part of the realm, and
spoiled the country before them, till they came to Wynchester, and by strength
took it. But by the king and his dukes, they were forced to leave Wynchester:
and in retiryng toward their shyps, they lost a great number of their men. He
reigned.vii. years: and was buried at Sherborne.

ETheldred, 893 This king divided ye day and night in iii. parts. 8. hours
to serve god.8. hours where suites of his people, and viii. hours to take his
sleep and rest.
the third son of Ethelwolphus, took on him the gouerna^ce of Westsaxones,
and other Provinces of England. He was a man framed of nature, as well to peace
as war. Among his subjects, he was mylde, gentill, loving and pleasant:
against his adversaries, severe, fierce, valyant, and hardye. He lived in
continual war with the Danes: which all the time of his reign, vexed this
land with most deadly wars (as John Hardyng writes) he divided the day in
three parts.viii. hours to serve god, viii. to hear suites of his people,
and.viii. to take his sleps and rest.

The Danes landed in Northumberlande.
A company of Danes landed in Northumberlande: and after many skyrmyshes and
battayles to them given, by strength they possessed and held that country,
the space of.ix. years, and got also the City of York.

King Edmunde slain by the Danes
A company of the Danes entered the country of Norffolke, where they slew the
holy king Edmonde, which governed the province of Norffolke: because he would
not forsake the faith of Christ. Of this king Edmunde, John Lidgate, John
Lidgate
monk of Bury has compyled a goodly treatice in english meter heroical.

Women to keep their chastity disfigured them selves by cuttinge of their
noses and ouerlyppes.
At Colyngham saint Ebb abbess cut of her nose and ouerlyppe, and persuaded
all her ^yuers to do the like that they being odible to ye Danes, might
better keep their virginity: in dispite the Danes burned the abbeye, and the
Nuns therein.

Also those Danes landed again in Southery, and went forward till they came
to Readyng, and took that town and cattle: at which time, while Etheldred
was busyed against them, he had word of the landyng of Offrike king of
Denmark with an other company, to whom the King gave many strong
battayles. The king Etheldred slain by the Danes
But in the end he was put to the worse, and received a wound: whereof he
dyed, when he had reigned.ix. years. The prioryist Excetor builded.
He builded the priory of Chanons at Excetor, and was buried at wynbourne.

ALured the fourth son of Ethelwolphus began his reign over the more part
of England, 872
and reigned. xxviii. years. This man was of fair stature and comely
personage no less renoumed in marciall policy then in Ciuille governance
of his commune weal. He was wise, dyscreete, and learned, and raudured good
Letters excellentlye well.

In youth somewhat he was disposed to the vicy of the flesh: and therefore
besought god to chastise him by some continual sickness: whereby he might serve
God the better, and yet not to be made unapt to worldly busynes. Wherefore by
the ordinance of God, he was taken with the evil called Ficus, and was there of
sick a long space. The first year of his reign in sundry places, he fought
vi. times with the Danes: by means whereof his people were so weakened, that
he was glad to make peace with his enemies.

The Danes brake the league made with Alured. Wherefore in as secret manner as
he might, he assembled a chosen company, and set upon them suddenly: and after
the first conflict, held them so short: that he constreigned them to give
hostages for surety of peace.

Alured was sore ouerset with new companies of Danes: but at length, taking
to him a valiant courage, he enterprised to espy the manner of his enemies, in
this wise: The king counterfeated the mynstrell
he did on him the habit of a mynstrell; and with his instrument of musyke,
entered the tents of the Danes: and in showing theyin pastyme and song, he
espied all their sloth and idelnes: and heard much of their counsel. Then
privily returning to his army, with a chosen company fell upon the Danes in
the night, and slew of them a great number: and lastly concluded a peace, on
condition that as many of them as would be christened, should inhabit the
provinces of East Angles and Northumberlande: the other to depart into France.
Shaftesbury and Ethlingsey builded.
As Guido writes, he builded the house of nu^nes at Shaftsburye, and an other
house of religion at Ethelyngsey.

By the counsel of Nottus, The first gra^mer scole in Oxenforde builded.
Allured ordained the first Grammar school in Oxenforde, and franchised the
town with many great liberties. He builded the new mynster in Wynchester,
New abbey in winchester
and there lies buried.

Edward, 901 This K. Edward is called Edward the senior.
the Elder son of Alured, began his reign over the most part of England,
and governed this land well and nobly. xxiiii. years. In knowledge of good
letters, he was not to be compared to his father: But in honor worship and
marciall prowes nothing inferior: and was also profitable to the common
weal, in buildinge and repayringe many castelles tounes and cities which were
raced and broken by the Danes. He in his time builded Herford castle, Herford
castle builded,
and adjoined to his lordship all this Island, saving only Northumberlande,
which was possessed of the Danes. He lies buried at Wynchester by his father,
in the new mynster. and as Fabyan writes, The monastery of S. Peter at
Gloceter buyldyd
he builded the monastery of S. Peter in Gloucester.

In this time a noble woman named Elfleda, sister to king Edward, governed ye
province of middle England. This woman when she had ones assayed the pains
that women suffer in trauaylyng with child, ever after hated the imbracynges
of her husband: saying, That it was not seemly for any noble woman to use
such fleshely liking: whereof should ensue so great sorrow and pain. She tamed
the Welshmen, and in diverse battayles chased the Danes. After whole death
Edward held that province in his own hand.

ADelstane, after the death of Edward senior his father, 925 The King was
crouned at Kyngston.
began his reign in England, he was a prince of worthy memory, valiant and
wise in all his acts: and brought this land to one Monarchye: for he expelled
utterly the Danes, subdued the Scots, and quieted the Welshmen. He reigned. xv.
years, and lies at Malmsbury. John Lidgate
Of him John Lidgate monk of Bury has translated a goodly story out of Latin
into english meter, which was compiled in Latin by Girardus Cambrence.

EDmu^d, 940
ye brother of Adelstan took on him ye gouerna^ce of this realm: whose short
reign take from him the renoume of most high praises that should have
redou^ded to his posterity: for he was a man disposed of nature to noblenes
and justice. he reigned.vi. years, and was buried at Glastenburie.

ELdred succeeded Edmunde his brother: 946 The King crowned at Kings town
for his sons Edwyne and Edgar, were thought to yo^g to take on them so great
a charge. This Eldred had the earneste favor of the commons, because he
was a great maynteyner of honesty, and also most abhorred naughty and unruly
persons: for his expertnes in feats of arms, he was much commended. Whereby
he quieted and kept in due obeisance, the Northumbers and Scotts, and exiled
the Danes. He reigned.ix. years, and was buried in the cathedral church of
Wynchester.

955 He was crouned at Kyngstoune. A vicious king.
EDwine succeeded his uncle Eldred in the kingdom: of whom is left no honest
memory, for one heinous act by him committed in the beginning of his reign.
In the self day of his Coronation, he sodeynelye withdrewe him self from his
Lords and in the syghte of certain persons, ravished his own kynswoman, the
wife of a noble man of his Realm: and afterward slew her husband, that he
might have the unlawful use of her beauty. which act, and for banyshings
Dunstane, he became odible to his subjects, and of the Northumbers, and people
of myddle England, that rose against him, was deprived, The king deprived.
when he had reigned.iiii. years. he was buried in the cathedral church of
Wynchester.

EDgar, brother to Edwyne, began his reign in England. He was a prince of
worthy memory, 959 He was crouned at Bathsome say at Kyngstoune.
for his manyfold virtues greatly renoumed: so excellent in justice, and
sharp in correction of vices, as well in his maiestrates, as other subjects:
that never before his days was used the less felony by robbers, or extorcion
or briberye by falls officers. He chastised also the great negligence,
covetousness, and vicious living of the clergy he reformed, and brought them
to a better order: of stature he was but little, but of mind valyant and hardy,
and very expert in marciall policye. This king builded and repaired. xi.
abbeis, in England, as Wilton, Peterborowe, Thorney, Ramsey. etc.
he prepared a great navy of ships, which he disposed in.iii. parts of his
realm, and had souldioures always pressed and ready against the incursions of
foreyn and strange enemies be reigned. xvi. years. He builded Peter's Bury,
Thorney, Ramsey, and many other, and was buried at Glastenbury.

Ludwallus, prince of Wales, paid to him yearly, in name of tribute.3000.
wolves, by mean whereof within.iiii. years in England and Wales might scantly
be found one wolf. The wolves in England destroyed.
This Edgare in his floryshing youth was some deal given to the lust of the
flesh: which he afterward greuousely repented.

Good laws made against quaffyng and alehouses.
In his time as well the Danes as all other people in England, used the vice of
great drinking: The king therefore rode through the realm, and put down many
alehouses, and would suffer but one in a village or town, except it were a
great borough: and ordained certain cups with pynnes and nails. and made a
law, that who soever drank past that mark at one draught should forfayt a
certain pain: whereof the accuser should have the one half, and the ruler of
the Town the other half. It is written by Fabyan, and others, that Edgar
bring at Chester, entered the river of Dee, Eight pety kings rowed king Edgar
up and down the river of Dee.
and sitting in the boat, he took the rule of the helm and caused.viii.
kings to row him up and down the river unto S. John's church and from thens to
his palaice, in toke^ yt he was lord and king of so many provinces

975 The King crowned at Kyngston.
EDward, the son of Edgar by his first wife, began his ceigne over this
realm, contrary to the mind and pleasure of Elfride his stepmother and other
of her alliance. In all kinds of honest virtue, this man might well be
compared to his father: and began his Reygne with such modestye and
myldenesse, that he was woorthylye favored of all men: Except only
Elfryde, which ever bare a grudge against him: for so much as she desired to
have the governance of the Realm, for her own soonne Egelrede.

Edward, while he was huntyng in a forest (by chance) lost his company,
and rode alone to refreshe him at the Castle of Corffe: The king murdered by
his stepmother.
where by the counsel of his stepmother Elphrede, he was traitorously
murdered, as he satte on his horse: When he had reigned.iii. years. he was
buried at Shaftesbury. After his death God showed for him diverse miracles.
Wherefore he is numbered among the saints and martirs. Before the death of this
Edward appeared a blasynge star of marvelous greatness. A blasynge sterre.
It is of some authors written that the forsaid Elphrede afterward take great
penance, and that she builded two Monasteryes of Nonnes, Almesbury and
Warwell: Almsbery and Warwel builded.
in which Warwell she after lived a solitary life till she dyed.

978
EGelrede, or Etheldrede, the son of king Edgar and Alphrede, was ordained
king of England, The king crowned at Kyngston.
and crowned at Kingstoune. He was goodly of shape and visage: but wholly given
to idleness, and abhorred all princely exercises: a lover of ryotte, lechery,
and dronkennes, and used extreme cruelty toward his subjects: having his
ears open to all unjust complaints. In feats of arms of all men most
ignorant: his cruelty made him odious to his subjects: and his cowardice
encoraged strange ennemies to invade his kingdom. By means whereof, this
land was sore afflicted with war, famyne, and pestilence. In his time
decayed the noble kingdom of England, England became tributary to the Danes:
and: became tributarie to the Danes: whereby the Danes, when they had spent
the said tribute, fell straight again to robberye, and arrived in sundry places
of England: as in the Isle of Thenet, In Cornwall and Sussex: and after many
damages by them done, and rich gifts received of the King, they returned
into their countreye for a time. The Danes besieged London.
But shortly they again entered this land in so many places, that the king
Etheldrede was to seek, to which coast he should first go to withstand his
enemies. In conclusyon for aduoydyng of further danger, he was compelled to
appear them with great sums of money: but when the money was spente, they
fell to new robbyng, and cessed not to spoil the land: and lastly besieged
London. And to augment the kings sorrow, Elphricus that then was admiral of
England, traitorously fled to the Danes. And after being reconciled, fled
to them the second time?

While this cruel war continued in England, by mean of a bishop named
Elphegus, a peace was concluded: at which time (as Polidore witnesses) the
king made his land tributarie to the Danes: Great tribute said to the Danes
the payment whereof, from the sum of ten thousand pounds, in few years, was
raised to fifty thousand.

The bloody flixe, the burning fever with diverse other maladies vexed the
people throughout all England.

Etheldred king of England, took to wife Emma, the sister of Richard Duke of
Normandy: which for her beauty, was called the Flower of Normandy.
Etheldrede being greatly inhanced in his mind for this his marriage, sent forth
into al parts of his realm secret and straight co^missions, chargyng the
rulers, that upon a certain day and hour assygned, The Danes suddenly
murdered and slain
the Danes (which proudely used great cruelty in the land) should be sodeinly
slain, and so was if done. Which thing was after cause of great misery: For
Swain king of Denmark hearing of the murder of the Danes, and being sore moved
therewith, landed with a strong army in diverse parts of this realm: A great
number of Danes aryue in this land
and so cruelly without mercy and pity, spoiled the countreye, and slew the
people: that the englysh men were brought to most extreme and unspeakable
mysery. But yet after and certain space a peace was entreated: For which the
Englyshemen paid thirtye thousand pounds. Howbeit diverse princes of the
Danes still continued wasting the land in diverse places.

Swayn king of Denmark repented of the former couena^ts, made with the
englyshmen: and thinkyng to attain to the whole dominion of this land: with a
strong army entered first Northumberland, than myddle England: and so went
forth till he came to London, London besiged by the Danes
which he besieged, and destroyed the country of Kent. At this time Egelrede
the king despairyng of all recovery (not ones proferynge to resyste his
ennemies, with his wife and children fled to Richard duke of Normandy: and
then possessed Swayn ye hole kingdom of this realm: who spoiled the lands of s
Edmunds. But after his death succeeded Canutus his son: who enclosed ye same
with a deep dyche: and granted to the inhabitants thereof, great fredom. And
after builded a church over ye place of his sepulture, and ordained there an
house of monks, enduyng them with fair possessions. And after it was used ye
kings of England, when they were crouned sent for: an offering their crounes
unto S. Edmondes shryne, S: Edmondes Burye builded
and redeemed the same with a good price. The english men sent again for
Etheldred out of Normandye, who by the healpe of the Normans, and present
assistance of his commons, expelled Canutus. but shortly Canutus returned
again into England, where he spared nothing that might be destroyed with
sword and fire. In which time king Etheldred ended his life, when he had
reigned.xxxviii. years, and was buried in the North Isle of Paul's church in
London, above the altar. Fabian says, that in the second year of this
kings reign a great part of the city of London was wasted with fire: A great
fire in London
but how it began, his aucthor tells not. But ye shall understand, that this
day, the city of London had most housyng and building from Ludgate toward
Westminster: and littell or none where the chief or heart of the city is now,
except in diverse places was housynge, but they stood without order. So that
many towns and cities, as Canterbury, York, and diverse other in England,
passed London in buyldyng at those days, as I have seen (says Fabyan) by an
old book, sometime in the Guyld halle of London, named Domes day. A book in the
Guylde hall of London named domes day
But after the conquest it increased, and shortly after passed and excelled all
the other. About the.viii. year of this kings reign, dyed Ethelwald bishop of
Wynchester, who was born in Wynchester, and there builded an abbey of Nuns (as
says Fabyan.

AFter ye death of Etheldred, 1016
great variance fell between ye english me^ for the election of their king,
for ye citezens of London with certain other named Edmund the son of Etheldred,
Edmu^d with the Iron syd^
a young man of lusty and valiant courage in martial adventures both hardy and
wise, and one that could very well endure all pains: Wherefore he was
surnamed Ironsyde: but the more part favored Canutus the Dane. By means whereof
between those two princes were foughten many great battayles: in the which
either party sped diversely, to the great slaughter of the^ that took their
parts. But lastly, it was agreed, that the two Captayns should try their
quarrel between them selves only. In which fight, 1038
although Edmund seemed to have the upper hand: yet be condisce^ded to deuyde
the realm and make Canutus fellow with him in the kingdom: which agreement was
at last concluded.

In this time there was an english Earl called Edricus, which by his falshode
had wrought much hurt to his natural country, and lastelye was aucthor of
the death of the noble Edmund. King Edmunde slain with a spear thrust up into
his foundment as he sat on a privy
And thereof himself brought first knowledge to Canutus the Dane, saying in
this wise: Thus have I done Canutus for the love of thee. To whom he
answered, saying: For my love thou have murdered thine own sovereign Lord,
whom I loved most entierly: I shall in reward thereof, exalt thy head above
all the lords of England. I just reward given.
And forthwith commanded him to be headed: and his head to be set upon a spear
on the highest gate of London. John Hars dynge.
These princes reigned together.ii. years.

This Edmund was buried at Glastenburye.

When Canutus was stablished in the kingdom, 1018
he had knowledge how Olanns king of Norway in his absence invaded the country
of Denmark: wherefore in all have he sped him thitherward: and by the ma^hod of
the english soldiers, obtained of them a noble victory, and recovered Norway
to his seignory. wherefore when he returned into England, he demeaned him toward
all men as a sage gentle and moderat prince, and so continued.xx. years.

Canutus called a parliament at Oxe^ford: A parliament at Oxforde.
where it was decreed, that english men and Danes should hold the laws of
Edgare late king.

Canutus subdued the Scots, whereby he was king of.iiii. kingdoms, yt is to say
of England, Scotland, Denmark and Norway. After that he went into Denmark, and
so to Rome. And after returned again into England. Where he kept all his life
time good justice, and did many charitable deeds: And after his death was
buried in s. Swithins at Winchester. Of this Canutus Polidore has written a
notable history, Polidore Vergile.
in ye end of his vii. book of the history of England.

1038
HArold, the son of Canutus, by his wife Elgina, for his swyftnes surnamed
Harefote began his reygne over this realm of England. In the beginning he
showed some token of cruelty, in that he banyshed his stepmother Emma, and
took from her such iewelles and treasure, as she had. He reigned iii.
years. He was buried at Westmynster, and after at S. Clementes without Temple
bar.

1041
HArdikenitus, king of Denmark after the death of Harolde, was ordained king
of England. He for the injury done to his mother Emma, Reynolde of Chester
Robert Fabian
caused the corpse of Harolde to be taken out of the sepulcher: and smyting of
the head, cast it with the body into the river of Thames: where by a fysher it
was taken up, and irreverently buried at S. Clementes (as before is said.) He
burdeined his subjects with eractions and tribute: and in meat and drink was
so prodygall that his tables were spread.iiii. times in the day, and the
people served with great excess when he had reigned.iii. years he dyed
sodeinly at Lambeth, not without suspection of poysonynge, and was buried at
Winchester.

Hardikenitus being dead, the Danes were beaten, slain, and driven out of this
land, into their own country xxviii. years after that Swayn began first to
reign.

Edward, 1043
the son of Egelrede or Etheldred, by the advice of Goodwyne and Leofricus
Earl of Chester, after the death of Hardikenitus, was sent for out of
Normandy to take on him the goueruaunce of this realm of England, which he
guyded with much wisdom and justice, from whom issued as out of a fountaiue,
very godliness, mercy, pity, and liberality toward the pore, and gentylnes
and justice toward all men: and in all honest life, gave most godly example
to his people. He discharged the englyshmen of the great tribute called ye Dane
gelt, which was often before time levied to ye impouerishyng of the people. He
subdued the Wes^hemen, which rebelled and made war upon their borders.

The.xvi. year of this king Edward died ye good Earl Leofricus earl of Mercia
and of Chester, Robert Fabian
who was buried in the abbey of Couentrie, which he him self had caused to be
builded. He purchased many great privileges for the aforesaid town of
Couentrie.

William bastard duke of Normandye.
Willyam bastard duke of Normandy, about this time came with a goodly company
into England: and was honorablye received: to whom the king made great cheer.
And at his return enriched him with great gifts and pleasures: and (as some
write) made promise to him, that if he died without issue, the same William
should succeed him in the kingdom of England.

Harolde the son of the Earl Goodwin, went to Norma^die: where he made
faithful promise to duke William, that after the death of Edward, he would
keep the kingdom to his behalf: on which condition, he brought with him at
his return his brother Tosto.

Thomas Couper.
The noble king Edward fynished his last day whenne he had reigned four
and twenty years.vii. months and odd days. He purged the old and
corrupt laws, The laws of S. Edward the confessor.
and pycked out of them a certain, which were most profitable for the commons.
And therefore were they called the common Laws. For restitution whereof,
happened diverse commotions and insurrections in this land. He was buried at
Westminster.

HArolde, 1066
the eldeste soonne of Earl Goodwyne, being of great power in England, and
therewyth valiant and hardye, took on him the governance of this Land,
nothing regarding the promise that he made to Wylliam duke of Normandye.
Wherefore when William sent to him Ambassades, admonysshynge him of the
couenauntes that were agreed between them. Harolde, would in no wise
surrendre to him the kingdom, which Wyllyam claymed, not only for the promise
that was made to him: but also because he was the next of King Edwardes
bloudde.

In this mean time, Tosto which fled out of the Land, being moved against
his brother the king of Norway, who entryng in the north parts of England,
with a great puisance discomfited.ii. Earls that gave him battle. But Harold
in reskuyng his people, slew the king, and his own brother Tosto, and chased
the Norwayes with disworshyp to their shyps.

Willlia^ duke of Normandy conquered this land.
When William Duke of Normandye perceived, that he could not by any means
bring Harolde to fulfill his promise, nor by treaty to yield to him the
kingdom: by force he entered the land, to whom Harolde gave strong and
sharp battle. In the end whereof, William by policy obtained the victory,
chased the englishemen, slew Harolde, and obtained the governance of this
land, when Harolde had reigned but.ix. months. He was buried at Waltham
abbey, Waltham abbey.
which him self had builded, and was the last that reigned of the blood of
the Saxones in this Realm.

Thomas Couper.
This happened.617. years after the first arrival of the Saxons or Angles, in
which space they reigned dyuersly. First began the kingdom of Kent, the year
of our Lord.475. under Hengistus. And after that.vi. other kyngdodomes at
sundry times took their begynnyngs. Which all at the last were brought into
one Monarchy, and subject to the West Saxons by king Adelstane, the year of
our Lord.ix. hundredth thirty and eight. Which monarchy continued.129.
years: during five and twenty of which years, the Danes reigned in this land
under Canutus and Harolde.

A Summarie of King william Conqueror.
Anno regid.1.
1067
WIllyam Duke of Normandye, surnamed Conqueror, Thomas Couper.
Bastard son of Roberte the syxte Duke of that Duchye, and nephew unto king
Edward the confessor, began his dominion over this Realm of England,
the.xiiii. day of October, in the year of our Lord 1067. and deceased in the
year.1087. the nynthe day of September, and reigned.xix. years.xi. months,
lackyng five days. He used great cruelty toward the English men,
burdenynge them with grievous exactions: By mean whereof he caused diverse to
flee the land into other countreies. And like as he obtained the kyngedome by
force and dent of sweard, so he changed the whole state of this common weal,
and ordained new laws at his pleasure, profitable to him self: but grievous
and hurtful to the people. This Wylliam was wise and politic rich and
covetous, and loved well to be magnifyed. He was a fair speaker and a great
dissembler. A man of comely stature, but somdeale gross bealyed: stern of
countenance, and strong in arms, and had great pleasure in hunting, and
making of sumptuous feasts.

With this Wyllyam Conqueroure, The names of Normanes and other that came with
the conqueror.
entered into this Realm, diverse noble men and gentylmenne, whose
successoures for the most part to this day do remain in great honor and
reputation. To whom he dysposed and gave greatte possessions and revenues. And
because those houses may not be unremembered, I have thought good in this
place to record the names of them, as John Hardynge in his Chronycles
dedycated to king Henry the syrte, doothe particulerly recite them. That is
to say:

Gospatryke, to whom he gave all Cumbreland, and made him earl thereof.

Perey Bohune Malot Bewchamp Menylebyllers Umframuile Le Uause Taylboys
Musgraue Muschaump Bailiol Bruis Bepount Neuyle Sent Clear S. Poule Melchynes
Menvile Albemarle Le Fortz Courtenay Albenay Councy Gournay Gaunt Beer Latimer
Darcy Ayncorte Lescrope Maundeuile Ledespenser Purpoynt Momboucher S. Elo Seint
John Uernon Estontvile Delauale Euers Bonuile Belasyse Uescy Bouser Clarell
Fitz Raufe Fitz Roger Fitz Waltar Fitz William Bulmers Fawcomberde Claruays
Fitz Waryne Malory Longchampe Matrauersse Fitz Robert Mandit S. Quintine Fitz
Thomas Fitz Henry Caunvyne John le vicount Normanuile Forniuale Lassels
Scrutuile Mantalent Manley Mortimer Claruayle Mountforde La Poole Lucy Ualence
Lusours Longuile Ferrer Engayne Longspe S. Uay Lacy Longchamp Coluill Toures
Lisle Tracy Chauncy Bowlers Mountagu Sourdeuyle Fulgers. Belknap Coniers
Someruile Champneys Longuillers Manners Fitz Urcy Glaunuyle Bewfort Chauser
Mountpillers Mortayn Graunson Moruille Breton Broyne Gascoyne Daynvyle Chandose
Paruynke Dabrygecourt Deuerose Keruyle Cheuercourt Fitz Hugh Cornuyle Morley
Fitz Rayner Pudsay Harecourt Cheyny Dela hay Delamore Gargraue S. Omer Moyne
Poynyng S. Richar Chartenay. etc.
Hitherto gathered out of Hardyng. The rest I have collected out of other
good authors
Pyget Bertrame Tochet Camoys Hauteney Warrayne Chauent Loueney Bygotte Mohant
Marmylon Baylyffe Marrays Estraunge Monbray Audeley Ueer Souche Couderay
Brabanson Brabason Butecort Bysette Bassette Tressy Caunuyle Iaunville
Andgilham Bascoruile Chamberlain Logenton Hastynges Muriell Bures Malebraunche
Mortymer Dyne Lynnesey Fenys Boys Muse Peache Daubeney S. Amounde Rivers
Meuille Chamburnon Uerdon Rydell Hanley Mortmayn Gower Botiller Fylberde Sent
ledger Paynell Traynell Peuerell Daniell Arundell Riuell Loueday Denis
FitzNorma^duk Rous Trusbutte Corbyne Mounteney. etc.
Anno. 2.
1068
The town of Excetor, and the Northhumbers rebelled, which were both subdued
and greuoufly punyshed.

This king Willyam builded four strong castells: Two castles builded at York,
one other at Notyngham, and other at Lincoln.
Twain at York, one at Notyngham, an other at Lyncolne, which he furnished
with garrysons of Normanes.

Anno. 3.
1069
Canutus king of Denmark being encouraged thereto by certain english outlawes,
invaded the north parts of England, and passed through to York: from whens he
was driven back by William, and forced to flee into his own country.

Anno. 4.
The Scotts with their king Malcolyne, 1070
invaded Northumberland, and spoiled the country.

Anno. 6.
William king of England made such war upon the Scotts, 1072
that he forced Malcolyne to do to him both homage and fealty, he also
disherited Gospatrike, and exiled him the land, John Hardynge.
and gave all Cumbrelande with the honor of Carlylle, to Raufe Meschynes, and
made him earl thereof.

King Wylliam by the counseyle of the Earl of Hertford caused the money and
riches of the abbays to be brought into his treasory he made also the news
Forest in the countreye of Southampton, The new forest in Southhampton.
for the atchiuyng which enterprise he was forced to cast down diverse towns
and churches.xxx. miles of length, and replenysshed the same with wild
beasts, and made sharp laws for the maintenance and increase of the same.

Auno.10.
Roger earl of Hertforde and Ranulphe earl of Norffolke conspired against
king Wyllyam being in Normandye both which were by him outlawed, and chased
out of the Realm. And Waldiffe that was duke of Northumberland and Earl of
Huntyngdon and Northampton (who uttered the conspiracy) was beheaded at
Wynchester, John Hardynge.
and buried at Crowlande in Lyncolnshire. Execution at Wynchester.


Anno. 13.
1079
AT this time Oswalde Bishop of Salisburye was famous in England. The king gave
the Erledome of Northumberlande to Waltar bishop of Durham, who was after
slain by the men of Northumberland.

Anno. 15.
1081
RObert the eldest son of William by the counsel of Philippe king of France,
invaded his fathers Duchye of Normandye, wherewith Wyllyam being greatly
dyspleased, gave his son a strong battle: in which it fortuned Robert to
mete unawares in the field with his father, 10^^
and bare him to the earth. But perceiving by the voice who it was, forth
with he lept from his horse, and saved his father: By which deed he was
reconciled, and peace between them was agreed.

Anno. 16.
While king William of England was in Normandy, 1082 Srhewsbury and We^loke
bbeys builded.
the Northumbers rebelled.

About this.xvi. year, earl Waryng earl of Shrewsbury, made two abbeis, whereof
the one was in the suburbs of Shrewsbury, and the other at wenloke.

Anno. 19.
King Wyllyam caused a new manner of Tribute to be leuyed thoroughout this
Realm, 1085 The number of men of cattle, and how many hydes of land was
noted in England.
for every hyde of land (that is twenty acres) vi. s. And not long after,
commanded a valuation to be taken of all lands, fees, and possessions, and
diligent search also to be made, what number of men and cattle were within
this land. A grievous reaction.
And according to the quantity and number thereof, gathered an other payment.

Anno. 20.
England was vered with many plagues. 1086
For great morayne fell emonge cattelle, Great plages in England.
brennynge fevers and hunger among people, great bareynnesse upon the earth,
and much hurt was done in many places, by the mysfortune of fire: and
specially in Lo^dor.

A part of Poules church was brent
For Fabyan and other aucthors affirms, that a part of Poules was brent at
that same time: namely the.vii. day of July. Battle abbey and Barmondsey
abbey builded.
King William builded two abbeys in England, one at Battle in Sussex: the
other nere to London called Barmondsay. He builded the third at Cane in
Normandy. He ended his life ye ix. day of Septembre, and was buried at Cane in
Normandy. He had.v. children Robert, to whom he gave Normandy, Richard, who
dyed in his youth. William Ruffus, and Henry, which were kings after him. And
one daughter, named Adela, who he gave in marriage to Stephen Earl of Blo^s, who
got on her Stephen, that after was king of England (as says Hardyng.

William Rufus, or William the Red king. Anno regni.1.
1087
WIllyam Ruffus, the second son of Willyam conqueror began his reygne over
the realm of England, the ninthe day of Septembre in the year of our
Lord.1087. and deceased in the year of our Lord. 1100. the first day of
August: so that he reigned.xii. year.xi. months lackyng.viii. days. He was
variable and inconstant of his demeanor, very covetous and therewithal cruel.
For he burdened his people with unreasonable taxes. He pilled the rich, and
oppressed the poor. And caused many to lose their lands for small causes. And
what he thus got by pillyng of his people, be prodigally and wastfully spente
in great banketting and sumptuous apparel. It remains in record of good
authority, that the best pair of hose then to be bought for the king, cost
but.iii. s. as one Robert affirms: who wrate in the time of Henry the third.
And as one auctor writes (who wrate in the time of Henry the third) he would
neither eat drink or wear any thing, but that it cost vnmeasurably dear.
And for an exaumple, he writes (which is to be noted in these our days)
that in a morning his chamberlayne bryngyng him a new pair of hosen, he
demanded what they cost: his chamberlayn answered.iii. s. Where with the king
being wroth (as this author affirms) said as follows.

Fie a dibles q the king: who sey so vile a deed King to wear so vile cloth?
but it costened more.
Bye a pair for a mark: or thou shall a corry sore.
A worse pair ynongh, that other swithe him brought,
And said they costned a mark: and uneath he them so bought.
Ye belamy (q ye king) these were well thought, In this manner serve me: outher
ne serve me naught.
OUt of this aucthor I have taken the saying of K. William Ruffus because it
imports the simplicity of apparel in those days used: If kings in those
days ware hose of.xiii. s.iiii. d. the price, then may subjects in these
days imitate his chamberlayn to wear of inferior price of.iii. s. Which price
he thought king W. Ruffus would not have disdained: but as his chamberlayne
spared the kings privy purse in byeng hose in those days: So now some of
mean living spare not their own and others, to employe upon one pair which
would bye princes hose for a hole year, as this history reports.

Robert Curthoise his elder brother came with an army into England, against
William, whereof when the said Willla^ had knowledge, he entreated peace.

Anno. 2.
1088
Diverse Lords of this realm conspired against William Ruffus, and assaulted
diverse towns within England. They stirred in like manner against him Robert
Curthoyse duke of Normandy, the second time. But William vanquished the
traitors, chased them out of this realm, and made peace with his brother
Robert. A great earth quake.
This second year was a great earthquake, the.xi. day of harvest, that
ouerturned many houses and churches in England.

Anno. 3.
The Scotts spoiled Northumberland. 1089
Wherefore William Ruffus provided a navy, and sailed thither: where after
diverse conflictes and skirmishes a peace was concluded.

Anno. 4.
A great tempest fell on saint Lukes day in sundry places of England, 1090
Great tempest in England, The roof of Bowchurche and six hundred houses in
London blowe^ down.
and specially in Wynchecombe: where a great part of the steple was
overthrown with thundryng and lyghtnyng: and in London the wind
ouertourned.vi. hundredth houses, and the roof of Bow church in Cheap,
wherewith was slain mo than.xx. persons.

Anno. 5.
1091
In this year William Ruffus went into Northumberland, and repaired such
holds and castles, New castle upon Tyne builded. The roof of Salisburye
church consumed with lyghtnyng.
as the Scots by their wars had impaired: and builded other there besides, as
the New castle on Tyne, etc. This v. year the roof of Salisburye Church was
clean consumed with lyghtnyng.

Anno. 6.
1092
In England fell wonderful abundance of rain: and after ensued so great frost
that horses and carts passed commonly over great ryuers, Great frost.
when it thawed, the great cakes of ice brake down many great bridges.

The welshemen rebelled.
The Welshemen rebelled, but they were vanquished: and their duke or captain
named Rees slain in battle. And after when their woddes were cut down, they
becam by little and little to more quietness.

The dukedom of Normandy morgaged to ye king of England.
Robert Curthois duke of Normandy laid his dukedom to pawn to his brother
Wyllyam of England for ten thousand pounds.

This.vi. year (as says Guido) Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester sent to Normandye
for Anceime, Chester abbey builded.
to build an abbey at Chester: which he after builded, and then was made
archebyshop of Canterburye: and after was exiled by William Ruffus.

Anno. 7.
Malcolyne king of Scotts for displeasure 1093
taken with the unkindness of William Ruffus invaded the marches of England:
The king of Scots slain in England.
and in Northumberlande was slain with his eldest soonne Edward, by Robert
Monbray, which was earl of that province.

This year was so great a pestilence, Great pestilence.
that many men lay unburied.

Anno. 8.
England and Normandy were grieved with exactions, 1094 Great morein of men.
and murreyn of me^ so sharply, that tillage of the earth was laid aside
for.x. year, whereby ensued great hunger and scarsitie the years following: And
many strange and uncouth syghtes were seen, Strange sightes seen in the air.
as hosts of men, syghtynge in the sky, fyery flames, and such other.

Anno. 10.
The.x. year was seen a blasyng sterre, 1096
of great brightness.

Anno. 11.
About this time Wyllyam Ruffus builded Westmynster Hall, 1097
who mysliking the same, for that it was to small, was determined to make a
bygger, and that it should serve for a chaumber.

Westminster hall builded. John Rastall
Although William Ruffus builded Westminster Hall, yet was it sens that time
fynished or repaired by Richard the second: who gave the.iii. lions with the
flower de luce quarterly, and the white heart for his cognisa^ce, and he was the
first that gave the white heart.

Anno. 12.
1098 Great floods
The.xii. year the river of Thames rose so hye that it drowned many towns in
England.

A well cast out blood. and Great flames of fire seen in the element.
In England at a town called Fynchauster in Barkeshire, a well cast out blood
as before it had done water, and after by the space of.xv. days great flames of
fire were seen in the element.

Anno. 13.
1099
Wylliam Ruffus being at his disport of hunting by glaunsyng of an arrow that
Walter Tyrell a french knight did shoot, was wounded to death in the new
forest in Hampshire, on a Lammas day: and buried at Wynchester.

John Hardynge.
John Hardyng writes, that William Rufus to enlarge the same forest,
ouerturned.iiii. abbeyes.xvii. paryshe churches, and all the town to the^
belo^gyng.

King Henry the first, called Beauclerke.
Anno Reg.1.
HEnry, 1100
the brother of Wylliam Ruffus, and the first of that name for his lernyng
called Beauclerk began his dominion over this realm of England, the first day
of August, in the year of our Lord.1100. and reigned xxxv. years.iiii.
months. and one day.

This Henry was a noble prince, strong and mighty of body, of high stature,
black heared, and had great eyes, a comely visage, and a pleasant and amiable
countenance. He greatly abhorred excess of meats and drynkes. In three things
he was excellent, in wit eloquence, and good fortune in battle And for
these, there reigned in him three notable vices, covetousness, cruelty, and lust
of the body: but yet he was not so given to these vices, but that he far
exceded in virtue. At the beginning of his reign, he restored the state of
the clergy, aswaged the grievous paymentes, reduced again saint Edwardes laws,
and amended them.

Anno. 2.
1101
Ranulphe bishop of Durham procured Robert Curthoise duke of Normandy (which
was now returned from Jerusalem) to war upon his brother Henry for the
crown of England: who assembled a strong army, and landed at Portismouth. But
by mediation peace was made on this condition, A tribute paid to the duke of
Normandy.
that Henry should pay three thousand marks yearly to duke Robert.

Anno. 3.
1102
In this third year of king Henry (as says Fabian) the church and hospital
of saint Bartholomew in Smithfield, The priory and the hospital of S.
Bartholomewe in Smithfielde was begun to be builded.
was begun to be founded by a minstrell of the kings, named Rayer: And after
finished by good and well disposed citisens of the city of London, and
especially by Rychard Whittington. This place of Smythfield was at that day a
laystowe of all ordure to fylthe: Smith feld a laystowe.
and the place where felons and other transgressors of the kings laws were
put to execution.

Anno. 4.
1103
Robert Duke of Normandye coming into England by the entreatie of king Henry
and his wife, released to him the tribute of three thousand marks.

Anno. 5.
But it was not long ere that by means of ill reports, 1104
great malice was kyndeled between the two brethren: And shortly thereupon
deadly war sprang, In the end whereof, Robert was taken, and kept in perpetual
prison in Cardiff, by his brother, who immediately seysed the duchye of
Normandy, and held it in his possession.

Sir Robert le Fitzha^ builded Teukesbury, Teukesbury abbey builded
and there was buried.

Anno. 6.
Robert Earl of Shrewsburye, and Wyllyam of Cornewalle, 1105 Rebellion in
Shropshire, and Cornwall
rebelled against king Henry, and were taken and condemned to perpetual
imprysonment.

King Henry ordained strayte laws against thieves, and other, that used
unlawful taking of men's goods, in which was contained the loss of life, of
eyes, of stones, and other members of the parties transgressors, according as
quality of the fact required.

Anno. 7.
1106
In England appeared a blasing sterre between the south and the west: and against
that in the east appeared a great beam (as it were) stretchyng toward the
sterre, A blasynge sterre.
and shortly after were seen two moons, the one in the East, and the other in
the weste.

Anno. 8.
1107
A certain bishop of Fluentyne about this time taught that Antichriste was
come, being moved with the wonderful strange syghtes, which were seen in
those days.

Anno. 9.
1108
Henry the Emperor desired to wife Maude, the eldeste daughter of kyng^ Henry of
England, being then but.v. years of age, nor able to be married.

Anno. 10.
1109
In the.10. year of his reygne, the king married Robert his bastard son, to
Mabel daughter and heir of Robert Fitzham, and made him the first earl of
Gloucester, who after builded the strong castle of Brystow. The strong castle
of Brystow builded.
And the priorie of saint James in the nor the side of the same city, where
his body was buried. And his son Earl William began the abbay of Euishame.
Euisham abbey builded.


Debate fell between the king of England, and Jews of France, for the castle
of Gysours, and homage which the said Jews required to be done for the duchy
of Normandy.

Anno. 13.
At Shrewsbury in England was a great earth quake, 1112 A great earth quake.
and the river of Trent was so dried, that the space of one day men went over
dry^hoed.

And this year the king builded the abbay of Hyde without the walls of
winchester, Hyde abbey builded.
that of old time was within the walls.

A blasyng sterre appeared son after and thereupon followed a hard winter, A
blasyng sterre.
death of men, scarsitie of victuals, and morayne of beasts.

Anno. 15.
King Henry of England, 1114
subdued the Welshmen, which oftentimes rebelled, and made them swear to him
fealty and allegeaunce, and to deliver pledges for the more certain
confirmation and surety thereof.

He also gave his daughter in marriage to the Emperor with great dower and made
William his son Duke of Normandye, whereof began the usage and custom yt the
kings of England made their eldest sons dukes of Normandye.

War was renewed between king Henry of England, and Jews of France

Anno. 18.
1117
Jews invaded Normandye with much cruelty, and took the City of Lingnes in
Cause. Wherefore king Henry assemblyng a strong army, met with Lewys in plain
field, and fought with him a cruel and deadly battle: in the end whereof,
Jews was overcome, and constrained to flee the field. Baldwyne earl of
Flanders was there slain, and Henry recovered the town of Lingnes

Anno. 20.
1119 The kings children drouned in the sea
Wylliam Duke of Normandy and Riicharde the sons of king Henry of England,
and Mary his daughter. Richard earl of Chester, with his wife, the kings
nece, and other to the number of.160. persons, passing from Normandy into
England, by ouersyght of the ship master were drowned, saving one butcher,
which escaped the danger.

Anno. 24.
1123
In this year the abbey of Readyng was begun to be builded by king Henry the
first. he also builded Cisseter, Readyng abbey, Cisseter. Windilsore, and
Woodstocke builded.
Wyndilsore, and Woodstocke, with the park.

Anno. 27.
The gray friars came now first into England, 1126 The gray friars first came
into England
and had their first house at Canturbery, (as says To. Fabyan

Maude the daughter of King Henry after the death of her husband the Emperor
came into England to her father.

Anno. 28.
The order of saint John's Hospitalles Templars, 1127
and other like began first at this time.

Anno. 32.
In this year began Fou^tains abbey. 1131


Geffrey Plantagenet earl of Angew married Maude ye empress, Fountaynes abbey
builded
daughter of king Henry: of which.ii. descended Henry and second which reigned
after Stephen.

About this time was builded ye priory of Norto^ in the province of Chester,
The priory of Norton and the abbeye of Combremore builded
by one William, the son of Nichole. Also the abbey of Co^bremore in ye same
province was builded about the same time.

Robert Curthois dyed in prison, and was buried at Gloucester.

Anno. 33.
Henry king of England because he had none issue mal^, 1132
ordained, that his daughter Maude, which had been Empress should succeed
him in the kingdom.

Anno. 36.
1135 Henry the first took his death by a ^all of his horse.
King Henry of England being in Normandy, with a fall of his horse took his
death, and was buried at Reading: when he had reigned.35. years.iiii. months,
and one day.

King Stephen.
Anno regni. 1.
1135
STephen Earl of Boloyne, the son of the earl of Bloys and Adela, Wylliam
Conquerors daughter, and nephewe to king Henry the first took on him the
governance of this realm of England the second day of December, in the year
of our lord 1135. and left the same in the year of our lord.1154. the.xxv.
day of October, so that he reigned. xviii. years.x. months, and.xxiiii. days.
This was a noble man and hardy, of passinge comely favor and personage in all
princely virtues: he excelled: as in martial policy gentylnes, and
liberality toward all men: and in especially in the beginning. For although
he had continual war, yet did he never burden his commons with exactio^s.
Only he seemed in this blame worthy, that contrary to his oath made to Maude,
the daughter of Henry, he was thought unjustly to take on him the Croune. For
which cause he was vexed with wars all the time of his reign.

At this time was great trouble and slaughter in England: for so much as
diverse of the nobles maintained Maude the empress against Stephen, which was
in possession of the croune.

King Stephen made wars against David of Scotland, because he refused to do
him his homage, for Northumberlande, and Huntyngdon, which he held by his
wife. In this war the (Scottyshe history says) the Earl of Glouceter was
taken. Hector Boice
But at the length Stephen made peace, and agreed with David king of Scotts,
and received of him homage, after that he had won from him certain towns
and castles, and gave to Henry the son of David, the erledome of Huntyngdon.

Anno. 2.
1136
A vain rumor was spread in England of the death of King Stephen, which was
cause of much trouble and busynes in the realm. For diverse of the lords got
them to their holds, which after might scantly with great labor be quieted
and pacified. After which time Stephen passed over into Norma^dye against
Geffrey earl of Angew the husband of Maude the empress, which was right heir
to the crowne^ and when he had quieted that Province, he made Eustace his son
Duke of Normandy, and joined frendshyp and league with Jews king of France.

Anno. 4.
1138
David king of Scotts (repentyng him of the former agreement made with king
Stephen, and purposyng to recover the crown of England for Maude his nece,
cousyn and daughter of king Henry) in most cruelle wise invaded
Northumberland, where by mean of Thruston bishop of York, the Scotts had an
overthrow and slain in great number, and David was constrained to give his
son Henry in hostage for surety of peace.

In the mean season king Stephen was occupied in civil war again Robert earl
of Gloucester, and others, which favored the parts of Maude: whom the king
subdued, and part of them were forted to forsake the realm.

Anno. 6.
Maude the empress came into this land out of Normandy, 1140
by aid of Robert earl of Gloucester, and Ranulph of Chester, King Stephen
taken prisoner.
made strong war upon king Stephen. In the end whereof the kings party had
the worse, and himself taken prisoner, and sent to Bristow, there to be kept
in sure hold. But the Kentishe men and Londoners, fauourynge the king, warred
upon the rebels, and in open field took Roberte rle of Gloceter^ But shortly
after, both the king and the duke were delivered out of prison by exchange.
And Stephen without delay assemblyng a strong army, in such wise pursued his
enmies, yt he forced Maude with other of her friends to forsake the realm.
This war continued a long time, to the great damage of the realm.

About this time was founded the abbey of Stratford Langthorn within.4.
Stratford abbey builded.
miles of London, by a knight called sir William de mount Fichet.

Anno. 10.
1144
About this time the Jews crucified a child upon Easter day at Norwiche in
derision of Christ and his religion.

Anno. 11.
1144
Geffrey Plantagenet, the husband of Maude the Empress (who had long continued
the wars against king Stephen of England) wan from him the duchy of
Normandy: and straight thereupon dyed: and his son Henry succeeded in the
dukedom.

Anno. 12.
1145
Stephen king of England after long war and much trouble, was again
crowned king at Lincoln, but Robert earl of Gloucester made new war upon
him: in which he had the upper hand of the king at Wilton, so that the king
was like to have fallen into Roberts danger: and escaped with much pain.

Anno. 15.
1148 A great frost.
This year the river of Thamis was so stronglye frosen, that horse and cart
passed over upon the ye.

Anno. 17.
Henry duke of Normandy in the quarrel of his mother Maude with a great
puisance arrived in England, 1150
and at the first won the castle of Malmesbury, then the tower of London,
and afterward the town of Notyngham, with other holds and castles. between
him and king Stephen were foughten many battayles, whereby this realm was sore
troubled.

Anno. 18.
But at the last peace was agreed between Maude the empress, 1151
her son Henry, and king Stephen: upon this condition that Stephen during his
life should hold the kingdom of England: and Henry, in the mean time to be
proclaimed heir apparent in the chief cities throughout the realm.

King Stephen builded the abbey of Coggeshall in Essex. The abbeyes of
Coggeshall of Fourneys, and Feuersham builded
He founded an other at Furneis in Lancashyre, and the third at Feuersham in
Kente, where now his body rests, and deceassed the xxv. day of October: in
the year of our Lord.1154. when he had reigned.xviii. years.x. months
and.xxiiii. days.

King Henry the second.
Anno regni.1.
1154
HEnry the second of that name the son of Geffrey Plantagenet, and Maude the
Empress daughter of king Henry the first, began his reign over this realm of
England, the.xxv. day of October in the year of our Lord.1154. and deceassed
in the year of our Lord.1189. the.vi. day of July, so that he reigned xxxiiii.
years.ix. months and.xii. days. He was somewhat read of face, short of body,
and therewith fat. Of speech reasonable, well learned, noble in chivalry and
fortunate in battle. Of courageous heart, wise in counsel, and one that
loved well peace, liberal to strangers, but hard to his familiars, slow of
answers, unsteadfast of promise, given somdeale to pleasure, and an open breaker
of wedlock. By his great manhood and policy, the crown of England, was
much augmented with the annexyng of Scotland, Ireland, the Isles Orcades,
Britayne, Poytow, Guyan, and other provinces of France.

Anno. 2.
King Henry cast down diverse castles which were erected in the time of Stephen:
1155
He went into the north parts, and got from the Scots Cumberlande and
Northumberland, which they said were given to them by Maude his mother, and set
an order in that countreye.

Anno. 3.
In England were seen.ii. sons in the fyrmament: 1156 Two sons seen in the
fyrmament.
and in the Moon appeared a red cross.

King Henry went with a strong army into Wales, The castle of Rutland, and the
abbeye of Basyngwerk builded.
and quieted that country, and after builded the strong castle of Rutland,
and founded the abbey of Bassyngwerke.

Anno. 4.
About this time came into England certain Germaynes, 1157 Thomas Couper.
to the number of xxx. which taught the abrogation of the Sacraments of the
altar, Baptism, and Wedlock.

Anno. 6.
Jews King of France gave his daughter Margaret in marriage to Henry the
son of King. 1159
Henry of England. By reason whereof, was pacifyed the War and grudge,
between England and France, for the lands of Poytowe, and others.

Anno. 7.
1160
This year (as says Fabyan) king Heury went into Scotland, and made fresh
war upon their king William: so that at last he took him, and made him
yield the castle of Carlyle, the castle of Bamburgh, with diverse other, and
receued of him fealty and homage.

Anno. 8.
1161 Great fire at Canturbery.
This year the city of Canterbury was fyred by negligence, and a great part
thereof brent.

Anno. 10.
1163 Thomas Becket bishop of Canturbery.
Thomas Becket bishop of Canturbery fled to Rome to complayn upon the king to
the bishop.

Anno. 14.
1167
King Henry caused Henry his eldest son to be crouned king, as he thought to
the great quietness as well of himself as of his realm: K. Henry's eldest son
crowned, his rather being alive.
but as it proved, to the utter disturbance of them both.

Anno. 17.
1170
Thomas Becket by the mediation of Alexander bishop of Rome, and Jews the
French king, was restored to his byshoprike: and not long after by certain
gentylmen, he was slain at Canturbery.

Anno. 18.
King Henry sent ambassade to Alexander bishop of Rome to purge him self of the
death of Thomas Becket. 1171
Among other things it was enjoined him in his penance, Thomas Gouper.
that it should be laufull to his subjects as often as them lysted to appeal
to the sea of Rome, and that no man should be accounted as King until such
time as he were confirmed by the Romayn bishop.

Anno. 19.
Thomas Becket was canonised by the bishop of Rome. 1172


Anno. 21.
Henry the son of King Henry of England, 1174 The kings son the second
time crowned.
was crouned the second time with his wife Margarete, the french kings
daughter.

Anno. 22.
King Henry the son by the setting on of the King of France, 1175 Henry the
son of king Henry rebel^ against his father.
Alinour his mother, and certain other nobles, took arms, and raised deadly
war against his natural father. Diverse strong batailes were foughten as well
in England by the deputies and friends of both parties, as also in Normandy,
Poytow, Guyen, and Britain: where they were corporally present: but ye victory
fell always to ye father. There took party against king Henry the father, Lewys
king of France, William king of Scotland, Henry, Geffrey, and John his own
sons: Robert Earl of Leicester, Hughe of Chester, and other. But in the end
the sons with their alyes were constrained to yield to their father, and
desire peace, which he gentilly granted and forgave their trespass.

Anno. 24.
1177
In England fell great wetherynge and tempest of thunder and lyghtening in the
mids of winter: and in Summer following fell hayle of such greatness that it
flewe both man and beast.

Anno. 2.6
1179
At this time were many Jews in England, which against the feast of Easter
did use to sacrifice young children in despite of christen religion.

Anno. 28.
1181
Henry the eldest son of Henry of England ended his life. The Kings son
deceased.
Shortly after began the war between king Henry and Philyp of France for
homage that the French king required to be done for the lands of Poytow, and
other, and for the castle of Gysours.

Anno. 31.
Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem, 1184
which had been in diverse parts of Europe came to king Henry, desiring him
of aid against the Turks, but was denied thereof, as ye made read in Fabian
the.239. Chapter.

Anno. 32.
At Bury the Jews crucified a child in despite of Christ's passion. 1185


Anno. 34.
Richard Earl of Poytowe made war against king Henry his father, 1187
and taking part with the French king wan from him diverse cities, towns, and
castles, and namely the city of Cenomannta. For sorrow whereof shortly King
Henrye ended his life the.vi. day of June, in the year of our Lord 4189. and
lies buried at Founteuerard.

King Richard the first, called Cueur de lion. Anno regni.1.
1289
Richard the first of that name, for his valyantnesse surnamed Cueurdelyon,
being the second son of Henry the second, was crowned King of England. Thomas
Couper.
He began his reign the.vi. day of July, in the year of our Lord.1289. and he
deceased, the year of our Lord.1199. the.vi. day of Apryll: so that he
reigned.ix. years and.ix. months. He was bygge of stature, and had a merry
countenance, in the which appeared as well a pleasant gentylnesse as a noble
and princely majesty: to his soldiers he was favorable, bountiful to his
friends, and to strangers a grievous ennemy, and hard to be pleased.

Desirous of war, abhorryng idleness, inclined somewhat to pride, lecherye,
and avarice: but most of all he was to be blamed, because he seemed unnatural
toward his father, as ye have partly heard of him, and his brethren, what
wars they raised against him. In his time were many robbers and outlawes
amongst ye which (as John Maiore in his fourth book De gestis Scotorniu^,
John Maiore
writes) Robert Hoode and little John, renoumed thieves, continued in woddes,
Many outlawes in England.
despoylynge and robbyng the goods of the rich. They killed none but such as
would invade them, or by resistance for their own defense. The said Robert
intertayned an hundred tall men, and good archers, with such spoils and
theftes as he got. Upon whom four hundred, were they never so strong,
durst not give thonset. The tales and gestes of this Robert be commonly known
by songs and balades used within this realm: he suffered no woman to be
oppressed, violated or otherwise molested. Poor men's goods he spared,
abundantely releuyng them with that which by theft he got from abbeys, and
the houses of rich ^arles. Whom the said Mayor blames for his rapyne and
theft: but of all thieves he affyrmeth him to be the prince, and the most
gentle thief.

In the first year of this Kings reign, The first bailiffes in London.
the citisens of London obtained two officers to guide their City: which were
called Bayliffes, whose names shall follow here under.

Anno regni.^. Bayliffes.
Henry Cornhyll 1189
Rychard Reinery
In this year the Jews were very brag here in this realm, for that their
number was so great. But the common people, especially about London, Many
Jews slain in England.
fell upon them, and despoyled them without pity or mercy, they so hated
them for their usury, and other evil conditions.

The king though he were not little dyspleased with these offenders: yet could
he do no execution on them for the fact, the number was so great, where by they
all escaped without punishment.

Also this year the king set at liberty Elianor his mother, Queen Elianor
released out of prison.
which long before at the commandment of his father hi^ husband, had been
kept close prisoner.

But after her enlargement, the realm was much governed by her.

Ranulph of Chester.
As says Ranulph king Richard gave over the Castles of Berwyke and
Rokesburghe to the Scottyshe King, for the su^me of.x. M. li. for the charges
of his voyage. He also sold to the bishop of Durha^ his own province, for a
great piece of money, and created him earl of the same. Wherefore the king said
after in game: I am a wondrous craftesman: I have made a new earl of an old
bishop

He gave his brother John many dignities, as the provinces of Notingham,
Deuonshyre, and Cornwall, and created him Earl of Lancaster.

This year the king was assoiled of ye offense that he had committed in
rebellion against his father in recompense, Guido.
whereof (as says Guido) he voluntarily took upon him, and promised to war
upon Christ's enemies: But other authors affirm that his father had so
wylled him in his life: whereupon preparation was made toward the perfourmance
of this journey.

Anno reg. 2. Bayliffes.
John Herlyon Roger Duke
In this year king Richard betook the guidyng of this land to the bishop of
Ely then being Chancellor of England, 1290
and sailed into Normandy: and when he had appointed good gouernoures over
that country, he went to mete the french King Philyp the second, and having
made sure league one with an other: went either of them the said year onward
of their journey toward Jerusalem

In this mean time the Jews in diverse places of this Realm as at Lincoln,
Stamforde, and Lynne, were robbed and spoiled. The Jews in England were
robbd, and many of them slew them selves.
And at York to the number of four hundred and more, had their master veins
cut, and so bled to death.

Anno Reg. 3. baylyffes.
William Hauershall 1191
John Bukmotte
King Richard in his journey toward Jerusalem, subdued the Earl of Cypres,
King Rychard went to Jerusalem, and in his absence his brother rebelled in
England.
and then ioynynge his puisance with the French Kings in Asia, conquered Acon,
where there grew between king Richard and Philip the french King a grievous
displeasure. For which cause Philip shortly departed thens. And coming into
France invaded the country of Normandy. And John the brother of king Rychard
took on him the kingdom of England in his brothers absence.

King Richard of England restored to the Christians the city of Ioppa, and in
many battles put the turk to great sorrow.

Anno Reg. 4. Bayliffes
Nycolas Duke Peter Newlay
William bishop of Elye, 1192
to whom king Richard had committed the governance of England, Thomas Couper.
did many cruel deeds, and oppressed the clergy, and also the laity. He
would commonly ride with a thousand horses, and grieved abbeyes by mean of his
guestes and his lodgyng with them.

King Richard erchaunged Cypres, with Guye of Lesyngham for the kingdom of
Jerusalem. Wherefore the king of England a long time after was called king of
Jerusalem.

Anno Reg. 5. Bailiffes.
Roger Duke Richard Fitz Alyn
King Richard having knowledge that Phillyp of France invaded Normandy, 1193
and that John his brother had made himself King of England, made peace with
the Turks for.iii. years, and with a small company returning homewarde by
Thrace, King Richard taken prisoner.
was taken prisoner by the duke of Ostriches men, and brought to Henry the
Emperor, and there kept in strayte prison, a year and.v. months. Where it is
said that he slew a Lion, and took out his heart.

Anno Reg. 6. Bayliffes.
William Fitz Isabell 1194
William Fitz Arnolde
William Longshampe bishop of Ely co^tinuyng his cruelty in England was lastly
by strength of the lords banished the land. Then he came to the king being
prisoner, alledgyng for him self the best that he could: but when he saw he
might not begyle the king with his sugared words: he returned into France there
to tarry the kings coming.

This year John the kings brother by the setting on of the Frence king, when he
herd of the imprisonment of his brother, made great war within the la^d, and
took by strength the castles of Windsor, of Notyngham, and others. And the
French king made strong war in Normandy.

Anno Reg. 7. Bailiffes.
Robert Beysani 1195
Ioke le Iosue
Hubert bishop of Salisbury was by king Richard sent into England to have the
guidynge thereof, and also to treat with the lords and commons for the kings
deliverance how he might be set at liberty. The said Hubert was by the
monks of Christ's church in Cantorbury chosen archebyshoppe of Cantorburye.

Anno Reg. 8. Bailyffes.
Gerrad de Anteloche 1196
Robert Durant
This year (as says Fabyan) king Richard was delivered out of prison for
the sum of one. C.M. pounds of sterlyng money: Great ransom paid for the
king.
for payment of which ransom all the woll of white monks and chanons was sold,
and rings and crosses of prelates, with vessels and chalices of all churches
through the land, and.xvii. shrines were scraped and spoiled of the gold and
silver. etc.

King Richard being thus delivered, shortly after landed at Sandwiche, and so
came to London: where when he had arested him: with a certain number of
knights, he rode to Notyngha^, and wan the castle: and after that the castle
of Tikhil by force^ and so called a counsel of his lords at Winchester: where
he reposed his brother John then being in France, and crouned himself sone
after again king of England in ye city of Winchester, King Rychard again
crowned at Wynchester.
and the^ he called a parliament, where he called again into his hands all
such things as he had either given or sold by patentes, or otherwise: by
which means he gathered a sum of money, and sailed into France, where
shortly a peace was concluded between the two Kings for one year. Then John
which had taken part with the French King against his brother, made means
to Elianor his mother, by whose mediation he was reconciled, and became a true
Knight to his brother.

A preacher called Willliam with ye long bearde.
In this time there was one William with the long bearde, who moved the common
people to seek liberty and fredome, and not to be subject to the rich and
mighty. By which means he drew to him many greatte companies, and with all
his power defended the poor men's cause against the rich. The King being
warned of this tumult, commanded him to cease from those attemptes. But the
people still followed him as they before had done: and he made to them certain
orations openly, taking for his Theme this sentence, Haurietis aquas in gaudeo
de fontibus Saluatoris, Which is to say: Ye shall draw in joy, waters forth
of the wells of your Savior. And to this he added: I am (said he) the savior
of poor men: ye be poor, and have assayed long the hard hands of rich
men. Now draw ye therefore holsom water forth of my wells, and that with
joy. For the time of your visitation is to men. This William was commanded to
appear before the kings counsel to answer for him self in such cases as
should be laid against him: where he appeared, but with such a multitude of
people, that the lords were afraid of him, and remitted him with pleasant
words for that time: appointyng some privily when he was alone, and then to
apprehende him. By whom he was after taken in Bow church in Cheap, but not
without sheddyng of blood: for for he was forced to forsake the church, William
with the long beard forced by fire to fly out of Bowchurche in cheap.
which they fyered about him. And when he was taken, he was arrained before ye
Judges, and with.ix. of his adherentes had sentence of death, and he with those
ix. were hanged the morrow after. who of the simple people was after honored as
a martyr: in so much that they reserved relikes of him, (as it is declared at
large by Robert Fabyan.

Anno. Reg. 9. Bailiffes.
1197
Roger Blunt Nycolas Ducket
This year the war was renewed between king Richard of England, and Philip of
France, in which either of them spedde dyuersly.

Anno Reg. 10 Bailiffes
Co^stantin Fitz Arnold 1198
Robert le Beau
King Richard of England besieged the castle of Galiarde, King Richard
wounded to death with a venomous arrow
and was wounded with a quarrel that was shot from the wall, and thereof dyed
the.vi. day of Apryll, in the year of our Lord.1199. when he had reigned.ix.
years, and.ix. months. His body was buried at Founteuerard, his bowels at
Carlyle: his heart at Roan.

King John.
1199
Anno regni.1.
John, brother to Richard aforenamed, began his reign over this realm of
England the.vi. day of Apryl, in the year of our Lord.1199 and deceased in the
year.1216. the.xix. day of October. He reigned xvii. years.vi. months,
and.xiii. days. Of person he was indifferent. But of melancoly and angry
complexion. He contempned the bishop of Romes authority, which if he had
done constantly with judgment to refrain abuses, as he seemed to do for
covetousness, and of a froward mind, undoubtedly he had been worthy
commendation. By his cowardnes and slothful negligence, the crown of
England greatly decayed.

Anno Reg. 1. Bailiffes.
Arnold fitz Arnold Richard Fitz bartilmewe 1199

Philip king of France (in the quarrel of Arthur duke of Britayn, whom certain
of the Lords had named king of England) made war upon king John, invaded
Normandye, and took from him diverse castles and towns.

King John hearing of this war in Normandye, The king took.iii. s. of every
plough land.
assembled a counsel, wherein was granted to him.iii. s. of every plough
land thorough England beside the subsydie of the spiritual lands: and when
he had made ready for his dosage, he sailed into Normandy, where he spent the
time to his loss and dishonor. But about Mighelmas a truce was concluded
between the two kings of England and of France.

King John dueorsed.
This year was a deuorce between king John and his wife, the Earl of
Glocesters daughter, because of nerenesse of blood: and after he was married to
Isabel, the daughter of the Earl of Engolesym in France: by whom he had.ii.
sons, Henry, and Richard, and.iii. daughters, Isabell, Elianor, and Jane.

An. R. 2. bailifs.
1200
Roger Dorset James bartilmew alderma^
Ranulph of ^^ester.
In this secoud year (as says Fabian) Raynulph Earl of Chester, by thexa^ple
before showed by king John, left his own wise named Constance, which he before
had married, by counsel of Henrys the second, and wedded one Clemens. One
Chronicle says he did so to have issue: but he therewith displeased God so
much, that he would suffer him to have none issue, but dyed without.

This year (as is reported in Polychronicon) the king of Scotts did homage to
king John at Lincoln.

An. Reg. 3. Bailiffs.
Waiser Fitz Ales Simon de alderma^bury 1201

This year in Yorkshire were seen v. Moons, Five Mones seen in the firmament.
one in the east, an other in the weste, the third in the north, the fourth
in the southe, and the fyfthe in the mids of the other: and went compassyng
the other.vi. times, as it were the space of an hour, and vanyshed away soon
after.

Philyp of France invaded Normandy, and took diverse castles and towns which
he gave to Arthur duke of Britayne. But shortly after the same Arthure with
many other noble men were taken prisoners by kyuge John, and led prisoners into
Englaude.

In this year were chosen.xxv. of the most substantial and wysest men of the
City of London, Robert Fabian xxv. Governors of the City chosen.
to maintain and keep the Assizes of the same City, of the which yearly the
Bailiffs were chosen: and after the Mayre and Sheriffs were taken of the same
number.

Anno Reg. 4. Bailiffes.
Normand Blundell John de Ely 1202

This year fell excedyng lyghtnyng, thunders, Great tempest in England.
and other storms of wind and rayn with hayle of ye bigness of henne^ eggs,
which perished fruit and corn, houses, and young cattle. Also spirits were
seen in the air, in likeness of fowls be ring fire in their bills, which set
fire on diverse houses, as R. Fabian reports.

Philip of France continually made war upon the Duchye of Normandye, till at
the last be subdued the same to his dominion, with the provinces of Guyen,
Poytiers, and Britayn, which before pertayned to the crown of England.

King John saylyng into Normandy warred on the borders of France, but of his
victories is little written.

Anno. 5. Bayliffes.
Walter Brown 1203
William Cha^berlain
This year by means of evil weather, in the year passed, Great dearth of
wheat in England.
wheat was sold for.xv. s. a quarter, which was thought an extreme price.

King John married his bastard daughter to Lewlyn prince of Wales, and gave with
her the castle and lordeshyp of Elyngsmore, being in the marches of
Southwales.

In this year the bishop of Rome w^ate to king John fre^dly and gentilly
requiring him to admit Stephen Langton into the bishoprike of Canterbury (who
before was chosen by the monks) and the monks by him expelled from their own
abbay, to restore them again to the same: but the more his lords advised him
so to do, the more was he bent to the contrary. In so much that the bishop of
Romes messengers returned without obteynynge of their request.

Anno Reg. 6. Bailyffes.
Thomas Haueril Hamond Bronde 1204

The bishop of Rome denounced king John with his whole realm accursed because
he would not admit Stephen Langton to the byshopricke of Canterbury. England
interdicted.
but he little regarded his thretnynges, and would not obey him.

At this time in Suffolk a fish was taken like to a man, and was kept
living.vi. months upon the land with raw flesh and fish, A monstrous fyshe
taken.
and after when they saw they could have no speech thereof, they cast it again
into the sea.

Anno Reg. 7. Bailyffes.
John Walgraue Richard de Winchestar 1205

King Philip of France subdued ye country of Normandy, Normandye lost.
which sens ye time of Charles the simple (that is to say) the the space
of.300. years) was not in the possession of the kings of France.

Anno Re. 8. Bailiffes.
1205
John Holylande Edmonds Fitz Gerrard
About this time the Iryshemen and shortly after the Welshemen rebelled, Wales
and Irelande rebelled.
for that (as some aucthors affirm) he levied on them such grievous taskes to
war against France: so that the king was feign to raise a great tax
throughout this realm of England to withstand their force. He required of the
white monks.6000. mark: but they refused the payement of so great a sum,
so that the King took great dyspleasure against them: by reason whereof after
his return out of Ireland, he vexed them sore, and exacted of them more then
before he had desired: whereby he caused some abbottes to forsake their houses.

Anno Reg. 9. Bailyffes.
1207
Roger Wynchester Edmond Hardell
King John sailed into Normandye: where after certain skirmishes, he made peace
with Philip of France for.ii. years.

The.ii. bayliffes above named, were discharged: and in their place and room
ii. other chosen for the rest of that year.

Also this year was granted to the Citizens of London by the Kings letters
patentes, The first Mayre of London.
that they should yearly chose to them selves, a Mayre and.ii. shiriffes, on
S. Mathewes or Mychelmas day, whose names were as follows.

Anno Reg. 10.
Henry fitz Alwyne Maire Peter Duke S. 1208
Thom. Nelc S.
This year London bridge was begone to be builded of stone, London bridge
bnylded of stone.
where as before it had been builded of Timber and repaired by a college of
Priests, which then stood, where the priorie of S. Mary auderis now stands.
And for want of other records, I will declare the opinion of master Foul,
who was the pryor of ye abouesayd S. Mary auderis, S. Mary Ouerys in Southwark
builded.
concerning the original both of that bridge, and also of Saint Mary auderis
church. First that being no bridge but a ferrie to carry and recarye: whereby the
Feryar gat great wealth: lastly the Feryman and his wife deccasyng, left the
same to their daughter, a maiden named Mary Audery: who with the goods left to
her by her parents, and also the profits which came by the said Fery, builded
an house of sisters, which is the uppermost end of S. Mary Auderis church,
above the quire, where she lies buried, unto the which house she gave the
oversight and profyt of the same ferry: but afterward the same house of systers
was converted unto a college of priests: who builded the bridge of timber,
and from time to time kept the same in reparations: but consyderyng the great
charges in repairing ye same, now lastly in the year of our Lord.1209. by ye
great aid of the citisens of London and other, they begone to build the same of
stone: and then the abouesayde college of priests was converted unto a priory
of chano^s, bearyng still the name of the maiden, which kept the ferry: and so
called S. Mary Auderie.

Anno Reg. 11.
1209
Henry fitz Alwyne M. Peterle Iosue S William Blou^d S
The Englyshemen which were sent by king John to aid the earl of Flanders (as
says Thomas Couper) chased the Frenchemen: and in the haven of Sluice compassed
and took their whole navy of ships, which was in number.1020. sail.

Anno. Reg. 12.
Henry fitz Alwine M Adam Whetley S. Stephen le grase S. 1210

This year Pandolph a legate came from ye bishop of Rome, A legate from Rome.
monishing the king in sharp manner, yt he should restore master Stephen La^gton
to his see of Canterbury and the monks unto their abbay. the king calli^g to
mind ye dangers, he was wrapped in, both in his own realm, and also in
Normandy, made promise by oath, to be obedient to ye court of Rome, The king
sworn to be obedient to Rom^^
as at large apereth in To. Fabia^s cronicle. At that time were granted the
Peter pence.

Anno Reg. 13.
Henry fitz Alwyn M. John fitz Pet S John Garlond S 1211

This year Stephen La^gton archbishop of Canterbury with the other exiles la^ded
in England: ye king receuing the^ ioyously: and was there assoiled of the said
bishop: and after yt, the king making restitutio^ to ye bishop and other,
according to ye third article of his oath, the la^d was released of ye
interdictio^: The land released of the interdiccion.
the king being bounden that as well he as his heirs should ever after be
feuderys to the sea of Rome, payyng yearly tribute a thousand marks, and to
hold the Title of the Crowns by the bishop of Rome.

Anno. 14.
1212
Henry fitz Alwayne Mair Ra^dolph Eila^d S Co^sta^tin Iosue S
This year fell great discentiion between the king and his lords, Great
discention between the king and his lords.
partly for that he would not mainteyne the laws of King Edward, partly for
the displeasure he bare unto them: for that they aided him not against the
bishop of Rome, and other causes not here spoken of. Hereupon the king fell at
such dissension with his lords, that a great number of people were raised on
both parties: The Earl of Chester with the other lords took the City of
London, and held them there a certain time. Caxton his chronicle, with other
say, that a great part of this variance between king John and his barons, was
for because the King would have exiled the Earl of Chester, who oftentimes had
advised the King to leave his cruelnes, and his accustomed aduo^try, which he
exercised with his brothers wife and others. But by means of the archebyshop
of Canturbery, and other prelates a peace was taken for a while.

This year (as says Fabian) on the.xi. day of July, Great fire in Southwark
and London.
a great part of Southwark was brent: and in the month of August next
following, was much harm done in London by fire.

The king and his lords met with great strength on either party upon
Baramdowne: The King made a charter to his barons on Baramdowne.
where a charter or writing was made and sealed by the king: so that the Barony
was with it contented, and departed in peace every man into his country.

Anno. 15.
Roger fitz Alwyne M Martin fitz alis S. 1213
Peter Bate S.
The peace which in the last year was agreed between king John and his
barons was this year by the king violated and broken. Wherefore the lords
assembled to them great powers, and made sharp and cruel war upon the
king: in somuche that he was constrained to send into Normandy for aid. The
king forced to take ye aid of strangers to defend him against his barons.


Then came into England, a Normane knight, named Foukis de Brent, which
brought with him a company of Normans, Flemmyngs and Picardes, He and his
company were so cruel, that they destroyed as well religious houses as other,
and did much harm to the land puttyng the lords to the worse, the king
made Foukes and other of his company, wardens of castles and strong holds in
England. The lords seeing the king persevere in his wrong, and that he would in
no wise be induced to hold his own grauntes, but to do all things after
pleasure, and nothing after law or justice, cast in their minds how they might
bring the realm in a better rule and by one consent wrote to Philyppe king of
France, that he would send some noble man into England, and they would yield the
land unto him.

Piers of Po^fret and his son executed at Warham.
This year king John caused to be drawn and hanged at Warham, one Piers of
Pomfrette, and his son, for speaking of diverse things against the king.

Anno Reg. 16.
1214
Roger fitz Alwayne M. Salomo^ basing S Hugh Basing S
King John besieged the castle of Rochester, and wan the same
King John laying siege to the castle of Rochester, wan the same, and took
therein certain gentilmen that had conspired against him, and sent them to
diverse prysons, placyng strangers in the same castle. The barons held them
together at London abydyng the coming of Jews son to the French king which
la^ded in England with a great army, and so came to Rochester, and wan it with
small pain: he caused all the strangers therein to be hanged: and after came to
London, where certain alliances and covenants were established and concluded
between the lords and him, and received of them homage, as is me^cioned in
Polycronicon. Then he with the lords departed from London, Reynold of Chester.
and gat the castle of Rigate, of Gilford, and of Fernham, and from thens to
Winchester, where the City was yielded, with all other holds in those parts:
and then he with the lords came again to London. At whose coming, the Tower
of London was delivered to them: they slew all strangers that had been placed
by the king in any place.

Roger Fitz Alwine for that he was accused to the Lords to be favorable to
the kings party was discharged of that office, The Mayre of London
discharged, and an other served the rest of the year.
and one called Serle mercer was Mayre in his place, the rest of the year
which was viii. wekes.

King John being thus ouerset with his lords sent messangers to the bishop of
Rome, showing to him the rebellion of his lords, and how they labored his
destruction. Wherefore the bishop of Rome with all haste sent a Legate into
England, A Legate from Rome.
called Swalo: The which after his coming, commuanded Jews to return into
France, and labored to the vttermoste of his power, to appease the King and
his baronye: but all his labor was in vain.

Anno reg. 17.
1215
William Hardel M. John Crauers S. Andrew Newla^d S.
This year king John (the war between him and his lords continuyng) dyed of
the Flixe (as is recorded in Policronicon) at the town of Newarke, Reynold of
Chester.
he was bowelled in the abbey of Croghto^, The death of King John.
and buried at Worceter in the quier of monks. To tell the opynions of many
auctours, concerning his death, it would in this place occupy to much time. To
be brefe, William Caxton.
Caxton affirms he was prisoned by a monk of Swinsted abbey in Lincolnshire,
for saying, If he might live half a year, he would make a halfpeny lofe
worth.xx. s. others ar of other opinions: some, yt he dyed for sorrow and
heaviness of heart, as Polidorus: Polidorus Virgile.
some of surfettyng in the night, as Radulphus niger: Radulphus niger.
some of a bloody flixe, as Houeden: Houeden Matthew Paris.
some of a burning ague: some of a cold sweat: some of eating apples, pears,
or plummes, Mathewe Parisiensis writes, that as he went from Lyn to
Lincolneshire, and there hearing of the loss of his carriage and treasures,
upon the washes, fell in great heauynes of mind: and so thereby into a fervent
fever, being at the abbay of Swynsted, which agew he increased thorough
surfetyng and naughty diet by eating of peches and drinking new cider. And when
he was thus sick, was carried the^s to the castle of Laford, and from thens to
the castle of Newark: and there departed this life, and was buried (as before is
said) at Worcestor. It is written by Fabian, and diverse other, that he founded
the abbey of Bewley in the new forest, The abbey of Bewley builded.
in recompense of the parish churches, which he there ouerturned, to enlarge
the forest, and an abbey of black monks in the city of Winchester, The abbey
of black monks in Winchester.
he decessed in ye year of our Lord.1216. the.xix. of October, when he had
reigned.17. years.6. months and.13. days.

Henry the third. Anno regni. 1.
1216
HEnry the son of John of the age of.ix. years (by the counsel of William
duke of Gloucester, and the earls of Pe^broke and Chester) was proclaimed king
of England, who began his reign the.19. day October, in the year of our
Lord.1216. and decessed in the year.1272. the.vi. day of November. So he
reigned.56. years. and.28. days. The noble men before me^cioned with their
retinue kept sharp war with Lewys the french kings son, who by the
covenants made before with the englishemen claymed the crown. But after certain
skirmishes and battles, Lewis began to desire peace, which lastly was
concluded, King Henry crowned at Gloucester.
and Henry was crowned at Gloucester.

Anno. 1.
Jacob alderma^ M. Benet Coue^trie S. 1216
william Blu^tiuers S.
Jacob Alderman was mayor one part of the year, and Solomon, Basing the other
part of the same year. But the.ii. sheriffs above named stood the whole year.

Swale the bishop of Romes legate accursed Lewys the french kings son: and
after, all such as took part with him against Henry. He accursed Lewlyn
prince of Wales, and interdicted his land.

At the last, Lewys took a^ M. marks (or as some authors affirm.xv. M.
marks) of money, and departed this realm.

Anno. 2.
Serle merser M. Tho. Bokerell She. Rafe Holyland She. 1217

When the land was delivered from strangers, inquisitions were made to know
what persons assisted Lewys against the king: of which the king pardoned
many of the lay men: but the spiritual men were put to such fynes, that
they were compelled to lay all that they had to pledge to please the King:
And also besides that to sue to Rome to be assoiled:

This year Raynolffe Earl of Chester took his journey to the holy land.

Anno. 3.
1218
Serle Merser M. John Wayle S. Iosenus Spicer S.
A parliamente was holden at London, ii. s. of every plough land granted to
the king.
by virtue whereof was granted to the king.ii. s. of every plough land
through England.

The new work of westminster abbey begone.
This year as is me^cioned in Policronicon, and Thomas Couper) king Henry began
to build the new work of the church of Westminster.

Anno. 4.
Serle merser M. Rich. wimbeldeye S John Wayle S
1219
Alexander king of Scotts married the lady Jane sister of king Henry.

Spirits and fyry dragons.
This year was great harm done in England by violence of whirlwynds, and fiery
dragons and spirits were seen flying in the air, as affirms Robert Fabyan.

All strangers banyshed this land, but such as came with marchandyse.
This year was a proclamation made yt all strangers should avoid the realm,
except such as came with mercha^dise, and to make sale of them under the kings
saus conduct, which was done to avoid Foukes de Brent, and his accomplices,
who kept the castle of Bedford against the King.

This year was king Henry secondly crowned at Westminster. King Henry crowned
the second time at Westminster The castles of Chartley, Beston, and the abbey
of Delacresse builded.


This year Rainolph earl of Chester came out of the holy land into England,
and began to build the castles of Charteley and of Beston, and after he builded
the abbey of Delacresse.

Anno. 5.
Serle merser M. Richard Renger S. Iosence le Ios^e. S.
This year was a counsel holden at Oxenford of the bishops of England, 1220
wherein one was condemned, One faynyng him self to be Christ, was crucified.
which taught that he was Jesus Christ, and to confirm the same, he showed
the tokens of wounds in his hands body and feet: he was therefore crucified
on a Cross at Alburbury, till he died. This year (as some write) the gray
Friars came first into England, and had their first house at Canturbery.

Anno. 6.
Serle merser M. Richard Renger S. 1221
Iosens Iosue S.
A conspiracy was made against king^ Henry by one Constantine in the city of
London: Execution.
for the which he was drawn hanged, and quartered, the morrow after our Lady
day Assumption. Which conspiracy so moved the king, that he was in mind to
have cast down the walls of the City.

Anno. 7.
1222
Serle merser M. Richard Renger S. Thomas La^bert S.
This year John king of Jerusalem came into England, and required aid of
king Henry to win again Jerusalem: but he returned again with small comfort.

Salisburye builded.
This year the king began the foundation of Salisbury mynster.

Anno. 8.
1223
Richard Renger M William Ioyner S. Thomas La^bert S.
The first grant of wards to ye king
This year the Lords and gentllmen of England first granted to king Henry and
his heirs, the ward and marriage of their heirs, which was then by learned
me^, called the beginning of evils

Anno. 9.
^^24
Richard Renger M. John Trauers S Andrew Bukerel S
Richard the brother of king Henry overcame the Frenchemen, recovered Poyters,
and kept the Gascoyns in due obedience.

Anno. 10.
Richard Renger M. Roger Duke S. Martin fitzwillia^ S. 1225

This year the pleas of the crown were pleaded in the tower of London.

Lewis king of France wan certain castles in the country of Poyters: and
shortly after spoiled the city of Aniow.

Anno. 11.
Richard Renger M. Stephen Bokerel S. Henry Cobham S. 1226

In this year was granted by king Henry to the Sheriffs of the City of
London, Sheriffwike of London and Midlesex.
the sheriffewike of London and Midlesex for the sum of.CCC. pound by the
year.

It was also granted to ye city fre warre^ that is to say, Free wareyn
free liberty to hunte a certain circuit about the city.

It was also granted that the citisens of London should pass tole free through
out all England: Toll free.
and also granted by the king, that all weeres in the Thamis should be
plucked up, and destroyed for ever.

Anno. 12.
1227
Roger Duke M. Stephen Buckerel S. Henry Cobham S.
The cities liberties ratified.
The liberties of the City were this year confirmed, and to each of the
sheriffs was granted to have.ii. clerks and two officers, without any more.

Anno. 13.
Roger Duke M. walter winchester S. Robert Fitz John S. 1229

Thomas Couper
King Henry sailed with an army in to Britayne against Jews king of France:
where after spoilyng the country, a peace was concluded between the.ii. young
princes.

Anno. 14.
1229
Roger Duke M. Rich. Fitz William S. John Wodborne S.
This year was ordained by ye Mayor and rulers of the City of London, that no
sheriff of that city should continewe longer in office then one year, No
sheriff in London past one year
because that they should not by long continuance of office become covetous
bribers

Anno. 15.
1230
Roger Duke M. Michel of S. Cleue S Walter Guffilde S
Great fire in London.
This year was much harm done in Lo^ndon by fire, which began in the house of
a wydowe named dame Jane Lambert.

Anno. 16.
Andrew Bokerel M Henry Edmo^ton S. 1231
Gerrard Bate S.
Uariance grew between king Henry and his lords, War in England between the
king and his lords.
because he put from his service Englyshemen, and trusted strangers as well in
his counsel as other offices nere about him.

Anno. 17.
Andrew Bokerel M. Symo^ Fitzmare S Roger Blunt S 1232

In this year ye king began ye fou^datio^ of the hospital of saint John,
without the east gate of Oxenforde: Saint John's without Oxe^ford begone.
In which year also fell wonderful sore weather, with such thunder and
lightning, that the like had not ben seen. Great tempests.
And there followed an earthquake to the great fear of the inhabitauntes of
Huntyngdon, and nere therabout.

Anno. 18.
Andrew Bokerel M. Rafe Ashewy S. John Norman S. 1233

This year the king put from him the strangers, and restored the English men
to their offices.

The Jews dwelling in Norwyche were accused for stealing of a child whom
they purposed to have crucified.

Frederike the Emperor married Isabel sister of ye king of England.

Anno. 19.
1234
Andrew Bokerel M. Gerrard Batte S. Robert Ardell S.
King Henry married Elinor ye daughter of the Earl of Prouance.

There appeared as it were hosts of men fyghtyng in the element.

The statute of Merton establysht.
The statute of Merton was first enacted at the parliament of Merton.

Anno. 20.
1235
Andrew Bokerell M. Henry Cobham S. Jorden Coue^try S.
Queen Elynor founded the hospital of saint Katherins besides the Tower of
London for the relief of poor women. S Katherines by the tower builded.


Anno. 21.
1236
Andrew Bokerel M John Thesalan S. Gerard cordinaner S.
Octobonea, a legate of the nynth Gregory, came into England, and ordained
good ordinances for the Church. But not all to the pleasure of the young
clergy of England. Wherefore as he one day passed through Oxenford, the
scholars sought occasyon against his servants, and fought with them, and slew
one of the same, and put the legate in such fear, that he for his safeguard
took the belfray of Osney, and there held him till the Kings officers
coming from Abyndon, delivered him, and conueyde him to Wallyngford: where he
accursed the mysdoers, and compelled the regents and masters of the
university to go barefoote through Chepe to Paul's at London, and there to
ask him forgeuenes, and so were forgeuen.

Sir Simon Mountforde married the Kings sister, named Elianor, counties of
Penbroke.

Anno. 22.
Richard Renger M. John Withal S. John Gou^dresse S. 1237

A clerk of Oxenford, or more verily a souldior) fainyng him self mad, King
Henry the third like to have been slain by treason.
enterprised to have slain King Henry in his chamber at Wodstocke: but he was
taken and put to death at Couentrie.

This year was borne Edward the kings son called Longshankes.

Anno. 23.
William Ioyner M. Reymo^d Bingley S. Rafe Ashewy S. 1238

This year Simon Fitz Marie, who before had been Sheriff of the city of
London, procured the kings letters to the mayor and rulers of the City to
elect him again to that same office. Which the Mayor and rulers of the city
refused to do, consyderyng it to be a derogation to the liberty of the same
City.

This year on Candelmas day the king created sir Simon de Mountford Earl of
Leycester.

Anno. 24.
1239
Gerrard Batte Mair. John Gysors S. Michel Tony S.
The king subdued the Welshemen which oftentimes rebelled.

Anno. 25.
1240
Reymond Byngey M. John Uoile S Tho. Duresyne S
The first Aldermen in London.
This year were aldermen first chosen in London, which then had the rule of the
wards of the city, but were every year changed, as ye sheriffs ar now.

Anno. 26.
1241
Reymond Bongley M. John fitz John S. Rafe Ashewy. S.
King Henry sailed into Normandy with a fair company, purposing to recover
Poytiers, Guyan, and other countries. but after many bickeryngs, somewhat to the
loss of Englyshmen, Henry treated a peace.

Anno. 27.
Rafe Ashewy M. Hugh Blunt S. Adam Basyng S. 1242

This year the pleas of the crown, were pleaded in the Tower of London.

And in this year Griffith which was son of Lewlyn, Griffith of Wales brake
his neck in the tower of London.
lately prince of Wales, entendyng to have broken prison, fell over the inner
ward of the Tower of London, and brake his neck.

Anno. 28
Michel Tony M. Rafe Spicer S. Nicolas Batte S. 1243

A Jew dyggyng in the ground to enlarge his vineyarde found under a stone a
book, Thomas Couper.
wherein was written in iii. languages, greek, hebrew, and latin, of.iii.
worlds that should be: of the which he appointed Christ to the beginning of
the third world, which was expressed in this manner: In the beginning of the
third world Gods son shall be borne of a maid. By the occasyon of this book
the Jew was turned to the faith of Christ.

Anno. 29.
1244
John Gysors M. Robert Cornehil S. Adam Bewley S.
A mayor of London and a sheriff were both deposed from their romes, because
they were both proved perjured: and other were chosen in their places: as
testifies Geffrey of Monmouth. Geffrey of Monmouth.


Robert Grosthed bishop of Lincoln with other prelates, complained to the
King, of the wast of the goods and patrimony of the church, which daily was
wasted by alliant bishops, and clerks of this land, who shortly were avoided

Anno. 30.
1245
John Gysors M. Symonfitz mary S. Laure^ce Frowike S.
This year was much strife for the election of the emperor: some elected one,
some elected an other: Amongst the rest, some chose the Kings brother
Richard King of Almayne, and earl of Cornwall: But at the last Radulphus
Duke of Habspurge in Almayne was by one assent admitted thereunto.

This Richard the Kings brother builded the abbey of Hayles. The abbey of
Hayles builded.


Anno. 31.
Piers Alleyn M. John Uoile S. Nicolas Batte S. 1246

In this year was a mighty earthquake in England, An earthquake.
that the like to it, was not seen many years before.

This year the King seysed the fraunchise of the City of London for a
judgment that was given by the Mayor and aldermen against a wydow named
Margaret Uiell: The king seized the franchise of the city of London.
but shortly the Mayor and sheriffs were again restored to their offices: and
this year was a new coin, Coin changed.
and the old called in.

Anno. 32.
Michel Tony M. Nicolas joy S. Geffrey winton S. 1247

This year the wharfe of Quenebyue in London was taken to ^erme by the
Communaltye of London, to pay yearelye fyftye pound for the same.

Anno. 33.
1248
Roger fitz Roger M. Rafe Hardel S John tosalan S
Robert Fabian.
This year dyed Robert Grossehed a famous clerk and bishop of Lyncoln, who
compiled many famous Books, which remain to this day in the latin and the
french tongue: the names whereof are partly declared by master Bale in his
story of English writers. John Bale.


Anno. 34.
1249
John Norman M. Humfrey Basse S William fitz Rich. S
The great wind
This year was a great wind upon the day of Simon and Jude, which did much
harm in many places of England.

1250
Anno. 35.
Adam Basing M. Laure^ce frowike S. Nicolas Batte S.
The friar Augustins began to build or inhabit in Wales, at Woodhous.

King Henry married his daughter Mary to Alexander king of Scotts, and
received of him homage for the realm of Scotland.

Anno. 36.
1252
John Toleson M. William Durha^ S. Tho. Wimborn S.
This year was granted by the king, 1251
that where before this time the citizens of London, The Maire of London sworn
in the schequer.
did present their Maire before the king where so ever he were, and so to be
admitted, now he should come only before the Barons of the exchequer, and they
should admit him, and give him his oath.

Anno. 37.
Nicolas Batte M. John Northa^ton S. 1252
Richard Picard S.
This year in the month of January tho sea rose in such height that it drowned
many vilages and houses nere unto it in diverse places of England. The sea
arose and drowned many vylages in England.


This year also Thames sprange so high that it drowned many houses about the
waters side, by mean whereof much merchandise was perished and lost. And this
year was granted of the king that no citizen of London should pay scauage or
toule for any beasts by them brought as they before time has used.

Anno. 38.
Ri. Ha^dell Dra. M. To. Belingtoni S. 1253
Rafe Ashwey S.
This year also the liberties of London were again seized by the mean of
Rychard The liberties of London seized.
Earl of Cornwayle, because the Mayre was charged that he looked not to the
bakers for their syses of bread: so yt the city was forced to please the Earl
with.600. marks, and so they were restored again.

Alphonce king of Castle gave Elinor his daughter in marriage to prince Edward
the son of king Henry, to who^ his father gave the pryncedome of Wales, The
kings eldest son Prince of Wales.
and governance of Guyan and Ireland, whereof began that the kings of England
ordained their eldest sons princes of Wales.

Anno. 39.
1254
Rich. Hardel draper M. St. Distergate S Hen. walmode S
The liberties of London seized by ye king.
The king again seized the liberties of the city for certain money which the
queen claymed for her right of ye citizens, so that they gave unto his
grace.400. mark, and then were restored to their lyberties again.

The.22. day of Noue^ber, were brought to Westminster.102. Jews Lyncoln, which
were accused of the crucifying of a child at Lyncoln, they were sent to the
tower of London: Execution of the Jews.
of these.8. were hanged, and the other remained long in prison.

Anno. 40.
Rich. Hardel Draper M. Mat. Bokerell S. 1255
John Mynour S.
This year a peace was made between the citizens of London and the abbot of
Waltham, who had been long in controversy for toll, that he demanded of the
citizens that came to Waltha^ fair: but at the last the citizens were set free
and bond to no toll.

Anno. 41.
Rich. Hardel Draper M. Rich. Ewyll S. 1256
william Ashwy S.
Great variance was between ye king and the Londoners, in so much that the
Mayor and diverse Aldermen and sherifes, The Mayor of London diverse Alderme^ and
the Sherifes deprived
were deprived of their offices, and the governance of the city committed to
certain persons of the kings appoynting: all the controversy and ha^dlyng of
this matter is at large entreted of by Fabia^.

This year the king for so much as he had oftentimes promised the restitutio^
of certain ancient laws, but never performed the same, the lords murmuring
against him, to appeace their malice, he held a parliament at Oxenford, The
mad parliament holde^ at Oxe^ford.
which was after called the mad parliament because many things wear there
enacted, which proved after to the confusion of the Realm, and death of many
noble me^. In confirmation of these acts were chosen.xii. piers called douze
piers which had authority to correct the brekers of their ordinances. Twelve
piers chosen in England.


These piers altered and changed many things according to their own
pleasure, greatly to the discontenting of thy kings mind, and disquietinge of
the whole Realm, as in Fabian and other histories does at large appear.

Anno. 42.
1257
Rich. Hardel Draper M. Th. fitz Rich. S. To. Cathelio^, S.
Bakers punished on the tumbrell.
This year Hughe Bygot Justice, and Roger Turkeley, kept their courts in the
Guyldhall of London, and punished the Bakers upon the tombrell, where in times
passed they were punished on the pyllory, and they did many other things
against the laws of the city, but the city had so be punished of late, yt
they durst say nothing thereto.

Richard the kings brother returned out of Almayne into England.

Anno. 43.
1258.
John Gisors Peperar M. John Adria^ S. To. Cornhil S.
King Henry fearing some rebellion of his nobles, Thomas coper.
went into France, and there concluded a peace on this condition, that
Normandy, Angeow, and Cenomanna, should ever after be in the possession of the
Frenchemen, and the king of England to have Guien: and that Lewis should give
king Henry for his expe^ces in war.150000. crowns and for yearly tribute,
a.100000. crowns. After which pear finished, the king returned into
England.

A Jew of Lewkesbury fell into a privy upon the saturday, and would not for
reverence of his Saboth day be plucked out, A Jew drowned in a prime
whereof the Earl of Gloucester, hearing that the Jew did so great reverence
to his Saboth day, thought he would do as much to his holy day, which is
sunday, and so kept him there till monday, at which season he was found dead.

Anno. 44.
William Fitz Richard M. Ada^ Brown S. 1259
Ri. Coue^tre S.
A folk mote at Paul's cross.
In this year the king commanded a general assembly or meting at Paul's cross
where the king in proper person commanded the Mayre that the next day after
he should cause to be sworn before his Aldermen every stripplynge of.xii.
years of age and upward, An oath to the king.
to be true unto the king and his heirs kings of England: and that the gates
of the city should be kept with harnissed me^.

Anno. 45.
1260
Will. Fitz Richard M. Io. Northa^ton S. Rich. Pickard S.
King Henry published at Paul's cross the bishops of Rome absolution for him
and all his, that were sworn to mainteyne the articles made in the parliament
at Oxforde: for which cause the barons of England begone to utter their malice,
which they had long before conceived against the king, and caused an
insurrection that continued three years. Gylbart de Clare Earl of Gloucester
Richard earl of Gloucester decased, and Gilbart de Clare, was earl after him.

Anno. 46.
1261
Th. Fitz Thomas M. Phi. Walbroke S. Richard Tailer S.
A great frost.
This year was so great a frost ye men rode on horse back over the thames: The
barons of England rose against the king.
The barons of England armed them against their king, and all this year houered
about London and other places without any notabe act of rebellion, saying yt
they robbed and spoiled aliens and certain other persons who^ they knew to be
against their purpose: specially they slew ye Jews in all places.

Anno. 47.
Tho. Fitz Thomas M. To. Mou^tpyler S. 1262
Osbern Buckessel S.
500. Jews were slain by the citizens of London, Five hundred Jews slain at
London.
because one Jew would have forsed a christian man to have paid more then ii.d.
for ye usury of xx.s. for a weke.

Hugh le Spencer with the citizeus of London, spoiled and burnt the manours of
Richard the kings brother, which hither to had been a great stay of the war
between the king and the nobles.

Nere to Lewys in Susser, king Henry and his barons fought a cruel battle, A
battaill at Lewys.
in which the king him self with Richard his brother, sir Ed. his son, and
other noble men to the number of.25. were taken: and of the co^mo^s were slain
above.20000.

Anno. 48.
Tho. Fit; Thomas M. Tho. Lamford S. 1263
Edward blune S.
Debate and varia^ce sell between Simon Mou^tfort Earl of Lecester, and Gilbert
de Clare Earl of Gloucester, chief capitains of ye barons: which turned to their
great evil. For prince Ed. being now set at liberty, allied him with the earl of
Gloucester and gathering to hi^ a great power, warred so freshly upon Simon of
Leicester, The battle of Euisham in Worcestershyre.
that at the end he and Hughe spencer with many others of the nobles, were
slain in the battle at Euisha^ in Worcester shyre.

A parliament at winchester
The same year was holden a parliament at Wynchester, where all the statutes
made before at Oxforde, were disanulled and abrogate. And all wrytinges made
for the confirmation of the same, cancelled and broken.

London like to have been utterly spoiled.
This year the city of London was in great danger to have been destroyed by
the king for great ire and displeasure that he had conceived against it,
because of the fornamed co^mocion: of the which the citizens having perfect
intelligence, assembled them selves and took advice diverse times what was best
to be done. At the last it was agreed wholly to submit them selves both lives
and goods into the kings bands And for confirmation thereof to make an
instrument of their submission, and to seal the same with the common seal of
the city They agreed upon.viii. persons to carye the same and going to
wyndsore where the king lay, they met at Colbroke a knight called sir Roger
Leyborn, who turned them back again, and after they had discoursed the whole
matter with him, he wylled them to deliver to him their submission under seal,
and he would move the king in it, which thing they did. And after six days
this knight returned to the city, and said the king had received the
wrytinges, and would first that they should take away all the chains that
were in the streates of the city, and should pull up all the posts out of the
ground that the same were fired in, and should bring them all, both posts and
chains to the tower of London, and that the Mayre with.xl. citizens should the
next day following attend upon the king at Wynsore, to confirm the grant of
their wrytinge, and they should go and come safe. And in wytnes thereof he
delivered to the^ the kings letter and seal for the term of.4. days. The
next day the citizens being at Wynfore, attended at the gate until the king
came from huntyng, at which time the king would not once look on them. And
after the king was entered, they would have followed: but they were forbidden. But
shortly after they were called into the castle, where they were locked in a
tower al night with homely interteynment and worse lodgyng, The king gave ye
mayor of London and four alderme^ with all their lands and goods to his son
prince Edward.
and the next day the king gave five of the best of the^ unto prince Edward,
which was the Mayor and four alderme^, and the rest were committed to several
places to prise^.

Anno. 49.
1264
Tho. Fitz Thomas M. Peter Armiger S. Greg. Rockesle S.
The king gave diverse citizens of London with all their lands and goods, to
his household servants.
This year the king came to westminster, and shortly after he gave unto diverse
of his household servants, upon.60. housholdes and houses within the city, so
yt the owners were compelled to agree and redeem their houses and household with all their goods or else to avoid, and suffer such persons to enter as the
said houses were given unto: and not only that, but also all such lands and
tenements, goods and cattalles as the said citizens had in any other places
of Engla^d^ and then he made one Cuftos or Gardeyn of the city, Sir Othon
Constable of the tower, which sir Othon chose to be bayliefes under him, and to
be accomptable to him to the use of the king, John Adrian, and Walter Heruye,
cytizens of the same city. And after this, the king took pledges of the best
men's sons of the city, that his peace should be suerly kept in the same,
the which were put in the tower of London, and there kept at the cost of their
parents. And shortly after, by great labor and suit made, all the foresaid
persons which should be in the keeping of the bayliefe of the castle of
Wyndsore, eight only except, and all the other londoners.31. in number, were
delivered and came to London. Daily suit was made unto the king, to have his
grace and know his pleasure what fine he would have of the city for their
transgressions by the^ done, for ye which the king asked.xl. M. pounds, and
stuck at.lx. M. marks, but the cytize^s alleged for the^ selves ye
vnhabilitie of ye city, as that (many and not of the worst) of their cytyzens
were fled, the rest at home were spoiled and robbed of their goods. For which
consyderations and many other (which were tedious to write) the cytyzens
besought the kings most gracious favor and pytie, to take of them as they
might bear. This matter thus ha^ging, the king departed from Westmynster
toward Northa^pton, and before his departing, he ordained sir John Hind knight
And master John Waldean Clerk to be gardens of the city and tower, the
which were named in the kings wrytynges, Seneshals or Stewards of the city.
Upon the day followyng that the king was rydeyn, these two forenamed stewardes
sent for.24. of the most notable men of the city, and warned them to appear
the day followynge before the kings council at Westmynster, where at their
apparens was showed unto them, that the kings mind was that they should have
rule of the city in his absence under the aforesaid senescal^es: and that to
see good rule kept within the city, they should be sworn there before the
Council. Which being done, they departed again to the city. Such continual
labor was made to the king, that lastly it was agreed for.xx. M marks, to be
paid by the city for all transgressions and offenses by them done: certain
persons excepted. Which the king had given his son, being as before is said
in the tower of Wynsore. For the payment of which sum at days by agreement
sealed, sir Roger Leyborne, and master Robert warren clerk^, were assigned to
take the sureties for the same. After which suerties received and sent to the
king at Northampton, the king sent unto the citizens a charter under his
broad seal which ye may read in Robert Fabian. Then for the leuyeng of this
fine, were cared as well servants, couenaunte men, as householders. And many
refused the liberties of the city for to be quite of the charge: of which
number many never returned again to the city.

King Henry besieged the castle of Kenelworth, Kenelworth castle besieged
which Henry Hastynges defended against him the space of half a year, and
then gave it up into his hands.

Anno. 50.
William Fitz Richard M. T. de la fourd S 1265
Gre. Rokesly S
The old franchises and lyberties of London with a new grant for the shyre
of Middelser, were confirmed by a parliament at Northamton. A parliament at
Northamton.
Where al so many noble men that had taken part with the Barons, were
dishery^ed of their lands, and therefore fled to Ely, and strengthened it in
such wise that they held it long after.

Anno. 51.
1266
Allen Zowch Ma. John Adrian S. Lucas Bite^cote S.
The gentilmen of England which fled to Ely, robbed and did much harm to the
countries next adioynyng, namely Norfolk, Norwiche spoiled.
Suffolk, and Cambridge shyre, they took the city of Norwich and spoiled it
and raunsomed the rich men thereof at their pleasure. A legate of the bishop of
Romes labored to the king, that ye said dysherited ge^tilme^ might purchase
their lands of him, by fine and ransom. To whose request the king lastly
agreed, yt ye said ge^tilme^ should have their lands again by fine of.v. years
valor of their lands.

The statute for weyghtes and measures
About the.li. year, was made the statutes of weightes and measure, that is to
say, that.32. graynes of whete dry and round, and taken in the mids of the
ear, should way a sterling penny, John Ras^al.
and.xx. of those pence should make an ounce, and.xii. ounces should make a
pound troy, and.8. pound troy should wey a gallon of wine, and.8. gallons of
wine, should make a bushel of London, which is the.8. part of a quarter. Also
that three harly corns dry and round, should make an inche, and.xii. inches
to a foot, and three foot to a yard, and five yardes and a half to a perch
or pole. and.xl. pole in length, and.iii. in breadth to make an acre of land,
and these standards of wayght and mesurs, were confirmed in ye.xv. year of
Edward ye third. And also in the time of Henry the sixth, and Edward the fourth,
and lastly confirmed in the.xi. year of Henry the seventh. How be it in the
time of king Henry the syxt, it was ordained that the same ounce should be
divided into.xxx. parts, called.xxx. pence: The alteration of the coyns, from
iiii. pence to xii. pence.
and in king Edward the fourth his time into.xl. parts, called.xl. pence.
And in king Henry the eight his days, into.44. parts, called.3.s. S.^. but
the weight of the ounce troy, and the measure of the foot was ordained ever
to be at one stynt.

Anno. 52.
Allein Souch M. Thomas Basyng S. 1267
Robert Cornhyll S.
Gylbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, for unknown displeasure, allieng him
self with the exiled gentilmen and other nobles of England, rose against the
king, The king besieged London
and held the city of London, buildyng therein bulwarks, and cast dytches and
trenches in diverse places of the city and Southwarke, and fortified it
wonderously.

The king lying at the abbay of Stratforde, also assaulted the same city, more
then a month: as it is to be red in Fabian, but by diligent labor upon his
party, and by the Legate and the king of Romans on the other party.

Four persons for roberies put in sackes and cast in ye Thames
Agreement was made between the king and him: In this mean time many robberies
were done, wherefore four that bare the cognizance of the Earl of Darby, were
put in sackes and cast in the Thames.

Anno. 53.
1268
Aleyn South M. William de Durha^ S. Walter Haruy S.
A great riot in London.
Uariance fell between the felowships of goldsmythes and ^aylers of London,
which caused great rufflying in the city, and many men to be slain.
Execution.
For which riot.xiii of the chief capitaines were arreigned, cast and hanged.
Aleyn South was discharged of his Mayraltie by the king, and Stephen Edworthe
made constable of the tower, and custos of the city.

The disherited gentylmen were this year reconciled to the kings favor. And
the five citizens which had remained prisoners in the tower of Wyndsour, the
which the King had given to his son Edward, The Mayor of London, and iiii.
Alderme^ released out of Wynsor castle.
when they had made their end with great sums of money were delivered.

Anno. 54.
Thomas fitz Thomas M william Hadstock M 1269
Anketil de Aluern M
The river of Thamis was so hard frosen from the feast of S. Andrewe to
Candelmas, A great frost.
that men and beasts passed over on foot from Lambeth to Westmynster. The
marchandises was carried from Sandwiche, and other havens unto London by land.

The city of London with the revenues thereof was given to prince Edward. The
City of London given to prince Edward.


Anno. 55.
John Adria^ vintener M. walter Potter S 1270
John Taylour S
Prince Edward sailynge into A^ia against the infidels, by his policy and manly
acts so demeaned himself, that often times he put the Turks to great shame and
disworshyp. For despite whereof they suborned a false Sarasyn, by whose treason
he was wounded with a venomous dart, and thereof was long sick after. This
year the liberties of London were newely confirmed. And this year the steple of
Bow church in Cheap fell down, The steple of Bowchurche blown down.
and slew many people both men and women.

Anno. 56.
1271
Io. Adrian vintener M. Greg. Rokesle S. Henry walleis S.
This year deceased Richard king of Almayn and Earl of Cornwale, brother to
the king, and was buried at Hayles an abbey of white monks, by him before time
builded.

A great ryote in Norwiche
In June began a great riot in the city of Norwich, wherethrough, the
monastery of the Trinity, was burned. And for that fact the king rode down,
and made enquiry for the chief doers thereof: Execution.
whereof.xxx. young men were condemned, drawn, hanged and brent.

This year were diverse prodigies and strange tokens seen in diverse places of
England.

Anno. 57.
1272
Sir walter Haruy M Richard Pari^ S. John Bedill S.
In the beginning of this year king Henry sickned: and he called before him
sir Gilbert Clare earl of Gloucester, and caused him to be newly sworn to keep
the peace of the land, to the behofe of Edward his son, and then dyed
the.xvi. day of Noue^ber, in the year of our lord 1272. when he had
reigned.lvi. years, and xviii. dais. He was buried at Westminster upon the
southe side of saint Edward. He builded a great part of the same Church.

King Edward the first, surnamed Longshanke. Anno regni.1.
Edward the first, 1272
after the conqueste, surnamed Longshanke, began his reign over this realm of
England the.16. day of November, in the year.1272. and deceased the.vii. day of
July, in the year.1307. so he reigned ^4. years.vii. months, and.xx. days.
Of stature he was tall and mighty of body, but nothing grosse^ his eyes were
somewhat black, and in time of anger seemed fyerye. Of such a noble and
valiant heart, that his courage never faynted, in most hard and dangerous
enterprises: Of wit excellent, of great towardnes, and apt to every thing,
that he him self applied.

Anno. 1.
1272
Sir walter Haruy knight M. Io. Horn S walter porter S
In the end of this year the king returned into England. There was yet business
about chusynge of the Mayor: for diverse would have made such a Mayor as they
had lyked. But for that time they were disappoynted: which in the year
following upon the same day took further effect.

Anno. 2.
1273
Henry walleis M. Nicolas wichester S. Henry Couentrie S.
On the day of Simon and Jude when Philyp Tailor which before was chosen to be
Mayor, Great strife for chusyng ye Mayor of London.
and should as that day have taken his charge in the Guylde hall of London,
diverse citisens put him beside the maires seat, and set therein sir walter
Haruy: ye rumor whereof, came tofore ye king, who put them both out, and chose
Henry Frowike Custes of the city, who continued till Candelmas.

At which time Walter Haruy was set in authority as Mayor, and continued the
full of that year.

The king of Scotts did homage to king Edwards for the Kyngedome of Scotland.

The king ordained certain new laws for the wealth of the realm, among the
which was one, that bakers making bread lackyng weight assigned after ye price
of corn, should first be punyshed by loss of their bread, and the second by
enprisonment, and thirdly by the correction of the pillorye. Myllers for
stealyng of corn to be chastised by the tumberyll. And this to be put in
execution, he gave authority to all Mayres, Bailiffes, and other officers
through England, and specially to the Mayor of London.

Anno. 3.
Gregory Rockesle M. Lucas Batencourt S. 1274
Henry Frowycke S.
King Edward builded the castle of Flynt, The castle of Flynte builded.
and strengthened the castle of Rutland, and other against the welshmen.

Anno. 4.
Gregory Rockesly Maire John Borne S. 1275
Rafe Blunt S.
Alienynge in Mortmayne.
The statute of mortmayn was enacted by king Edward.

Execution.
Michell Tony was hanged, drawn, and quartered for treason.

Anno. 5.
1276
Gregory Rockesle M Robert de Bracy S Rafe Fenour S
King Edward gave unto David brother to Lewlyn prince of Wales, the lordshyp of
Froddesham. This David attended in the kings court, and did unto him pleasant
service, to the intent to epsy the kings secret counsel: and if any thing
were done or spoken to the hurt of his brother, that he might give to him
warnyng.

Anno. 6.
1277
Gregory Rockesley M. John Adrian S. walter La^gley S.
The term kept at Shrewesbury.
Mychelmas term was this year kept at Shrewsbury.

Anno. 7.
1278
Gregory Rockesle M. Robert Basing S William Merser S
Great execution of Jews
Reformation was made for clypping of the kings coin, for which offense 297.
Jews were put to execution.

In this year began the foundation of the church of the friar preachers or
black friars by Ludgate, and also castle Baynarde.

The town of Boston was greatly empayred with fire.

Anno. 8.
Gregory Rockesley M. Thomas box S. 1279
Rafe More S.
This year was first coined halfpens and farthings of silver, Halfpens and
farthings first coined.
where before, other coins of other metal ran among the people to their great
loss and noya^ce.

Anno. 9.
Gregory Rockesle M William Faringdo^ S 1280
Nicolas wichester S
David the brother of Lewlyn prince of Wales, Rebellion in Wales.
unkindly and traitorously moved his brother against king Edward.

Anno. 10.
Henry Waleis M. william mazerer S. 1281
Nicolas wichest. S.
King Edward sent a company of soldiers into wales, under guiding of ye earls
of Northumberland and Surrey: Of which company many were slain, and sir Roger
Clifford taken prisoner. The welsheme^ subdued certain castles and holds, and
of some towns threw down the walls.

Anno. 12.
1282
Henry Waleis M. Rafe Blunt S. Haukyn Betuel S.
Execution.
Lewlyn prince of Wales was slain by sir Roger Mortymer: and his head set upon
the tower of London.

Thomas Couper. Marton college builded at Oxenford.
William Marton Chancellor of England about this time builded Marton college in
the university of Oxenford.

Anno. 12.
1283
Henry Waleis M Jorden goodchepe S Martin Box S
Execution.
David the brother of Lewlyn prince of Wales was taken and beheaded: and diverse
holds and castles of the Welsh men, given to english lords.

A parliament at Shrowesbury.
Prince Edward of Caruaruan was born in Wales, at the castle of Carnaruan, and
a parliament was held at Shrewsburye.

Laurence Ducket, hanged in Bow church.
Laurence Ducket a citisen of London, was found dead, and hanged within saint
Mary Bow church of Chepe for the which were condemned.viii. men, which were
drawn and hanged: and one woman brent.

The great cu^dite in Chepe begone to be builded.
This year the great cono^uyte standing again saint Thomas of Acres in Chepe
was first begone to be made.

This year began a great strife between the King and the Earl of Gloucester:
which after grew to the great disturbance of diverse towns of England, and
specially of the City of London, as after some deal shall appear.

Anno. 13.
Gregory Rockeslei M Stephen Cornhil S 1284
Robert Rokesley S
This year the liberties of the City of London was again seysed into the
kings hands, The liberties of London seized into the kings hand.
and Stephen Sandwiche admytted for Custos, and the Mayor discharged (as some
write) for taking brybes of the Bakers.

The new work of the church of Westminster unto the end of the quire begone
in the third year of Henry the.iii. and continued in buildyng.66. years before
it was fynished. The new work of westminster church.


Anno. 14.
Rafe Sa^dwiche M Walter Blunt S. 1285
John Wade S.
This year were enacted by the King, Parliamente at Gloucester.
the statutes called Additamenta Gloucestria.

Anno. 15.
Sir John Bryton M. Thomas cross S. 1286
william Hautein S.
King Edward sailed to Burdeaur, and from thence rode into France, where he was
honorably received of Philyp lebeau king of France.

A hot so^mer and greatte cheap of corn and other grayn
This year the summer was so excedyng hot, yt many me^ dyed through the
extremity thereof: And yet wheat was so plenteous, that it was sold at London
for.iii. s.iiii. d. a quarter.

Anno. 16.
1287
Rafe sandwich M. willya^ Herford S. Thomas stains S.
Great hayle fell in England, and after ensued so continual rain, that the
year following wheat was sold for.xvi. d. a bushel: and so encresed yearly the
reign of this king and his son, till it was lastly sold for.xl. s. a
quarter.

Anno. 17.
1288
Rafe sandwich M. William Betain S John of Ca^turb. S
Execution for rebellion.
Rice ap Meriduck, a welshman, rebelling against Pain Tiptoft, wardeyne of the
countreye, was by the Earl of Cornwall in the Kings absence, taken, drawn,
hanged, and quartered at York.

Anno. 18.
Rafe sa^dwich M. Fulk of.s. Edmond S 1239
Salomo^ La^gford S
This year king Edward returned into England, and was honorably received of
the citesens of London.

Anno. 19.
Rafe sandwich M. Tho. Roman S. 1290
William de Lyre S.
This year the staple of woll was ordained to be kept at Sandwiche. The woll
staple kept at Sandwyche.


And this year the Jews were banished the land: Jews banyshed.
for the which cause the commons gave to the king a fyftene.

Anno. 20.
Rafe sandwich M. Rafe Blunt S. 1291
Hamond Box S.
This year died queen Elian or the kings wife, and was buried at Westminster
in the chapel of saint Edward, at the fete of Henry the third. This year
also dyed Elianoure wife unto Henry the third, Queen Elianor deceased.
and mother to this Edward, whose heart was buried at the gray friars in
London, and her body at Ambresbury, in the house of Nuns.

Anno. 21.
Rafe sandwiche M. Henry Balle S. 1292
Elys Russell S.
The King held his parliament at London, to the which with diverse lords of
his Province, came the king of Scotts.

This year.iii. men had their right hands smitten of in Westchepe for
rescuynge a prisoner, Execution.
arested by an officer of the City of London.

Anno. 22.
1293
Rafe sa^dwich M. Robert Rockesley S. Martin Aubrey S.
The.xviii. day of May fell a wondrous snow, and therewith an excedyng wynd: By
violence whereof great harm was done in sundry places of England, Great
tempeste.
as ouerthrowyng houses and trees. etc.

Anno. 23.
1294
Sir John Bryton M Henry Box S. Rich. Gloucester S.
Madocke with the Welshmen rebelled against the king, wherefore he in all have
made against them, and ouercam the^.

This year the frenchemen arrived at Dover, and spoiled the town, and brent a
part of it, Dover spoiled by French men.
in which skirmishe was slain one Thomas of Dover.

Anno. 24.
1295
sir John Bryton M John Dunstable S. Ada^ Harlingbery S.
John Baylell was by king Edward admitted to be king of Scotts, and he for the
same did his homage, and swear unto him fealty.

This year was taken Madock or Meridoke captayn of the rebels in Wales:
Rebellion in Wales.
he was drawn and hanged at London.

Anno. 25.
Sir John Britton M. Thomas Sulff S. 1296
Ada^ de Fullam S.
John Bailell king of Scotts contrary to his allegiance, by the setting on of
the frenchmen, King Edward won Barwyke.
rebelled again king Edward. Wherefore king Edward hasted him thither. He wan
from him the castles of Barwicke and Dunbarre. He slew of the Scotts (as
says Fabyan) xxv. M. and took prisoner sir Willyam Douglas, and other noble
men. He conquered also Edenbrough, where he found the regal ensigns of
Scotland: that is to wit, the croune, the scepter and cloth of estate.

In this time the englyshmen sustained many storms in Gascoyn and Guyen.

Anno. 26.
sir John Britton M. John de stortford S 1297
william de stortford S
King Henry sailed into Flanders to reskue Guy their Earl, which was grievously
ouerset by the French king, so that he had won much of his lands. But
shortly after king Edwards commyug, a peace was concluded for.ii. years: and
thens he went to Bordeaux.

The Scotts by the enticement of the frenchmen, and settinge on of one William
Wallace rebelled, and put the englishmen to much trouble and loss of many
men: among which was sir Hugh Tresyngham.

The Tun in Cornhyll is now the Cundyte.
This year certain persons of the city of London brake up the tonne in the ward
of Cornhyll, and took out certain prisoners, that thither were committed by sir
John Britton: for the which.ix. of them were grievously punished by long
imprisonment, and great sines. The tun above named is now ye cu^dit in
Cornhill.

The liberties of London granted again
The king coming again into England, and so to Winchester, the citese^s of
London made such labor unto his grace that they obtained grant of their
liberties that had in some part be kept from them by the term of.xii. years or
more.

Anno. 27.
Henry Walleis M. Richard Resha^ S. 1298
Thomas Sel^ S.
This year the king made cruel war upon the Scots, and had of them a great
victory, and then they yielded them selves again to his grace and mercy.

This year also the king called in certain coins of money called pollardes,
Crocardes, and rosaries.

Anno. 28.
Elis Russell M. John Armencer S. 1299
Henry Fringrith S.
King Edward heryng of the untruth and rebellion of the Scotts, made his
third voyage against them, wherein he subdued a great part of the land, and took
the castle of Estriuelyn with other, and made the lords swear to him fealty
and homage.

Anno. 29.
Elis Russel M Luke Haueryng S. 1300
Rich. Champeis S.
This year the King gave unto Edward his son, the Princedome of Wales, and
joined there unto the Dukedom of Cornwall, and the cry dome of Chester.

Anno. 30.
1301
John Blunt M. Robert Caller S. Peter Bosham S.
A parliament at Ca^turbery
This year the King held a great parliament at Canturbery.

Anno. 31.
1302
John Blunt Mayor Hugh Pourte S. Simon Paris S.
This year King Edward made great wars in Scotland, where he had many great
victories.

Anno. 32.
1303
John Blu^t M William Co^bmartein S. John de Burford S.
John Hardyng.
This year the King caused great inquiry to be made of the behauior of his
Justices through out his realm, which was called Broyly Baston.

Anno. 33.
1304
John Blunt M. Roger Paris S. John Lincoln S.
Execution at London.
Wylliam Wales which had don so many displeasures to King Edward in Scotland,
was taken, drawn, hanged, and quartred at London on S. Bartylmewes eve, and
his head set on London bridge.

The nobles of Scotland in a parliament at Westmynster volu^taryly were sworn
to be true to the king of England, and to keep the land of Scotland to his
use against all persons.

Anno. 34.
John Blunt M. Raynold Doderil S. 1305
Wyllia^ Causon S.
Robert le Bruise, (contrary to his oath to king Edward before made) assembled
the lords of Scotland, and caused him self to be crowned. When king Edward
heard of this treason, he went with haste into Scotland, where he chased sir
Robert le Bruise, and all the power of Scotland, and took many of the noble
men prisoners.

Anno. 35.
John Blu^t M. Simon Belet S. 1306
Godfrey de la co^duit S.
The wars continuyng in Scotland the noble king Edward ended his life the
seventh day of July, in the year.1307. King Edward the first deceased.
When he had reigned.34. years.^. months and.21. days. He lies buried at
Westmynster in the chapel of saint Edward upon the south side in a plain
to^be of marble at the head of his father.

King Edward the second. Anno Regni.1.
1307
Edward the second son of of the first Edward, and prince of wales borne at
Carnaruan, began his reign over the realm of England, the vii. day of July in
the year of our lord, 1307. who was deposed the.25. day of January: and in the
year.1326. so that he reigned.19. years. He was fair of body, but vnsted fast
of manners, and disposed to lightness: he refused the company of his lords, and
men of honor: and hanted the company of villeins and vile persous. He gave him
self to overmuch drinkyng, and lightly would disclose things of great council:
and beside that he was given to these vices of nature: He was made much worse
by the counsel and familiarity of certain evil disposed persons. As Piers of
Gaueston, Hugh Spencer, and others, whose wanton counsel he following, gane
himself wholly to the appetite and pleasure of the body, not regardyng to
govern his commune weal, by sadness, discretion; and justice. Which thing
caused first great vari^ace between him and his lords: so that shortly he
became to his lords odible: and in the end was deposed from his kingdom.

Anno. 1.
Sir John Blunt M. Nicolas Pigot S. 1307
Michel Drury S.
King Edward took to wife Isabel ye daughter of Philip ye fair, king of France

He gave Piers of Gaueston, the erledom of Cornwall, and the lordshyp of
wallingford, and was ruled al by his counsel.

Anno. 2.
Nicolas faringdo^ M. William Basyng S. 1308
John Butler S.
The king calling to mind the displesure don unto him and his familiar, Piers
Gaueston, by the bishop of Chester, commanded him to the Tower of London, where
he was streightely kept many days after. But the lords perceauyng the king
given all to wantonness, and that he was much provoked thereunto by the means
of Piers of Gaueston, caused the king to banishe him the realm, and so he
went over into Irelande, where the king notwithstanding comforted him with
many rych gifts, and made him chief ruler of that country.

Anno. 3.
Thomas Romain M. James of s. Ed. S. 1309
Roger Palmer S.
The king and his lords were at great strife for the banyshme^t of Piers of
Gauestone, in so much that the king would not be pleased until he were again
restored.

The Rhodes won by christian men from the Turks.
This year was the I Will of Rhodes recovered from the Turk, by the knights of
the order of saint John Baptist.

The crouched friars came first into England.
This year the crouched friars came first into England.

Anno. 4.
1310
Rychard Rofham M. Simon Croppe S. Pet. Blacknay S.
Piers of Gaueston more and more increased: in so much that he had the custody
of all the kings iewelles and tresure, of the which (as says Fabian and
other) he took a table and a pair of tressels of gold, A table with tressels
and all of gold, conueighed out of England.
and conueyghed the^ with other iewelles out of the land. He also brought the
king to manyfolde vices: as adultery and such other. Wherefore the lords
again banyshed him out of England into Flaunders, to the kings great
displeasure.

Anno. 5.
1311
John Gysours M. Symo^ Merwod S. Rich. Wylford S.
Piers of Gauestone, was again by the king called out of Flanders. wherefore
the lords being confederate, besieged him in the castle of Scarborough,
Execution in Gauerside.
where they took him, and brought him to Gauersyde beside Warwycke, and smote
of his head, to the great disconte^tyng of the kings mind. This year the
kings first son, named Edward, was borne at Wynsore.

Anno. 6.
John Pou^tney M. John Lambyn S. 1312
Adam Lutekyn S.
This year was many good laws made in the parliament London, where, unto the
king and his lords were sworn.

Anno. 7.
Nycolas Faringdon M. Adam Burden S. 1313
Hugh Bayto^ S.
The Englysh men encountered with Robert le Bruise and his Scotts, at
Estriualen, where was fought a strong battayl^. The battle of Estriuelyn
In the end whereof, the Englyshmen were discomfited and so egrely pursued by
the Scotts, that many of the noblemen were slain: as Gylbert de Clare, Guido
de columna.
Earl of Gloucester, sir Robert Clyford, sir Edmond of Manle, with other lords
and barons, to the number of.xlii. knights, and.lxvii. barons, beside.xxii.
men of name, which were taken prisoners, and.x. M. common soldiers slain.
After this time Robert le Bruze reigned as king of Scotland.

Anno. 8.
1314
John Gysors M. Stephen of abingdo^ S Hamo^d Chikwell S
John Hardyng.
A villain called John Poydras, a tanners son of Excester, in diverse places of
England, named himself the son of Edward the first, and said that by a
falsnourse he was stolen out of his cradel, A barkers son made claim to the
crown of England in an open parliament holde^ at Oxenford.
and Edward that was now king put in his place, which was but a carters son:
but shortly after, he was convict of his untruth, and confessed, that he did
it by the motion of a familiar sprite, which he had in his house in likeness of
a catt, whom he had served.iii. year, and he for his service was drawn and
hanged at Northampton. Execution.


Anno. 9.
1315
Stephen abingdo^ M Hamo^dgoodchepe S William Readyng S
The castle of Barwike was yielded up to the Scotts by the treason of Peter
Spaldyng.

Two cardinals being sent from Rome to conclude a peace between the king of
England and the scotts: as they went through Yorkshire, were robbed by two
knights called Gilbert Midleton, John Hardyng.
and walter Selby, with.600. me^, which.ii. knigtes had don many robberies in
those parts, or they were taken, but they were afterward condemned, drawn and
hanged at London. And the king reco^penced the Cardinals double so much as
they lost.

Shortly after sir Gosselyn Deinuile and his brother Robert, with two hundred
in habit of Friars, going about as exiled persons or outlawes, John Hardyng.
did many great and notable roberies and despites, they robbed and spoiled ye
bishop of Durhams palaces, leauyng nothing in them but bare walls, and such
like robberyes, for the which they were after hanged at York.

Anno. 10.
John we^graue M. William Caston S. 1316
Rafe Palmer S.
The scotts entered ye borders of Northumberland and most cruelly robbed and
spoiled the country, sparing neither man, woman, nor child.

To this mischief was joined so excedyng derth and scarsity, A great famyne.
ye wheat was sold for.iiii. mark ye quarter: ye common people did eat horse
flesh, and other vile beasts, and many dyed for hunger.

Anno. 11.
1317
John We^graue M. Ihon Prior S. william Furnex S.
The white battaille.
King Edward assembled a new host, and went into Northumberland, where he laid
siege to Barwike. But in the mean time the Scots by an other way invaded ye
borders of England, and wasted the country even to York, and slew a great
noumber, specially of religious people: wherefore it was called the white
battle. King Edward was constrained to break up his siege, and return again
into England.

Sir Hugh the Spencers, the father, and the son, were of great power in
England: and by the favor of the king practiced such cruelty, and bare them
self so hautie, that no lord in this land, durst contrary them in any thing
that they thought good: whereby they were greatly hated of the nobles.

Anno. 12.
1318
John We^graue M John Pou^tney S. John Dallyng S.
The Lords and nobles of England detestynge the outrageous pride of the
Spencers, in such wise conspyred against them, that they caused the king
half against his mind, to banysh them the Realm.

Anno. 13.
Hamond Chikwel M Simon Abingdo^ S. 1319
John Preston S.
This year king Edward contrary to the mind of his lords revoked the Spe^cers
from banishement, and set them in like authority as they before had been, to
the great disturbance of the realme^ and not long after pursued the barons, and
chased them from place to place: as first at Liedes castle in Kent: after in
the marches of Wales, where he took the Mortymers, and sent them to the Tower
of London.

Anno. 14.
Hamond Chikwel M Reinold at cu^dyt S 1320
william Prodha^ S
This year king Edward ouercam the barons of this realm in many batailes and
took many of them, Great execution.
whom he put to death in diverse parts of this realm, to the number of.xxii.
noble men.

Master John Baldocke, a man of evil fame was made Chancellor of England, who
extremly pilled the commons of this realm: for the which he was well rewarded
after, as ye may read in the xix. year.

Anno. 15.
1321
Hamond Chikwel M. Rich. Co^stantin S Rich. Hakeney S
This year the son appeared to men's sight as red as blood, The son appeared
as red as blood.
and so continued the space of.vi. hours. The last day of October the
Irishment by the aid they had out of England, drove the scots out of their
land. At which time many noble men of Scotland were slain. Among which was
Edward le Bruze the kings brother.

Anno. 16.
1322
Hamond Chikwell M. John Grantha^ S Rich. of Ely S
King Edward with a great army entered Scotland: but with sickness and other
misfortunes that chanced among the soldiers, he within short space was forced
to return into England: whereof sir James Douglas, and the Scots having
knowledge, pursued him in such wise, that they slew many english men, and had
welnere taken the king at an abbey called Beighla^d, from the which he was
forced to flee, and leave his tresure behynd him.

Anno. 17.
Simon Francis M. Ada^ Ealisbury S. 1323
John of Oxe^ford S.
Charles of France warred upon the lands of King Edward in Gascoyne and Guyen,
and took there many towns and castles. Wherefore king Edward sent his wife
Isabell to entreat with her brother Charles for peace, or (as Froisard says)
the Queen her self fleyng the tyranny and mischief of ye Spe^cers, fled with
her young son Edward into France, and was gentilly received of her brother,
which made great promise to aid her against the tyranny and injury of the
Spencers.

Anno. 18.
Hamond Chikwel M. Benet of Fulha^ S 1324
John Causton S
Queen Isabell by the aid and help of sir John of Heynald with a small company
of Henoways returned into England: to whom the Nobles and the commons
gathering in great number pursued the king, the Spencers, and other ennemies
so egerly, that shortly after they took them, and kept the king in prison
at Kenylworthe.

King Edward, his Chancellor, ye Spencers, and other taken prisoners.
And after at Barkeley they took master Robert Baldok, the Cha^cellor both the
Spencers, the father, and the son, the earl of Arundel, with diueres other,
and brought them to the town of Hereford.

Anno. 19.
1325
Richard Betain M Gilbert Mordo^ S. John Cotton S.
The morrow after Simon and Jude, sir Hugh Spe^cer the father was put to death
at Bristowe, Great execution.
and after buried at Winchester: and on saint Hughes day following, was sir Hugh
his son drawn hanged and quartered at Herford, and his head sent to London,
and set among other upon the bridge. After Robert Baldock the Chancellor was
sent to London to Newgate, where he dyed myserably. The earl of Arundell was
put to death at Herford: and king Edward was by parliament deposed from his
kingdom, King Edward deposed
when he had reigned.xix. year.6. months and.18. days, and not long after
was murdered by sir Roger Mortimer, and was buried at Gloucester.

Edward the third. Anno Regni.1.
Edward the third, 1326
after the deposing of his father was crowned king of England. He begone his
reign over this realm the.xxv. day of January: in the year of our
lord.1326. and deceased the 21. day of June in the year.1377. so he
reigned.50. year, and.5. months lackyng.3. dais. This man beside all other
gifts of nature, was endued with passing comely beauty and favor: Of wit
provident, circumspecte and gentle of nature: doing nothing without great
wysedom and consideration. He was a man of excellent modesty and temperance,
and advanced such persons to high dignities, as did most pass other in
integrity and innocence of life: in fears of arms he was very expert, as the
noble enterprises by him achieved, do well declare: Of his liberality and
cleme^cy, he showed many great examples. Briefly, in all princely virtues he
was so excellent, that few noble men before his time were to be compared to
him. At the beginning of his reign he was chiefly ordered by sir Roger
Mortymer and his mother Isabell.

The liberties of London co^fyrmed.
In this first year of his reign he confirmed the liberties of the city of
London, and ordained, that the mayor of the city of London should sytte in all
places of judgment within the liberties of the same for chief Justice, the
Kings person only excepted, and that every alderman that had been Mayor should
be justice of peace in all London and Middlesex: and every Alderman that had
not been mayor should be justice of peace within his own ward. Diverse other
privileges he granted to the city, which ye may read in Fabian.

The king went toward Scotland having understanding that the scotts were
entered into England, as far as Stanhop park. He beset them round about,
hoping to have brought them under his subjection. But when he thought to be
most sure of them by treason of some of his hoft, the scotts escaped clean,
and returned back into scotland. King Edward the second murdered.
About the.xxi. day of September Edward the second was murdered in ye castle
of Barkley by sir Roger Mortymer, and was buried at Gloucester.

Anno. 1.
Richard Bretain M. Rich. Roting S. 1326
Roger Cha^cellor S.
The king married the lady Philip the earls daughter of Henawde in the city of
York.

The king held his parliament at Northampton, Parliamente at Northampton.
where through the counsel of sir Roger Mortimer, and the old Queen his
mother, he made with the scotts and unprofitable and dishonorable peace: For
why he restored to them all their writyngs, charters, and patents, whereby the
kings of Scotland had bound them selves to be tributarye to the crown of
England, with other like unprofitable conditions.

Anno. 2.
Hamonde Chikwell S. Henry Darcy S. 1327
John Hawden S.
David the young prince of Scotland married Jane, the sister of king Edward,
whom the scots in dirision, called Jane makepeace. The scotts made many rymes
against thenglishme^ (as says Guido) for the fond disquised apparel by the^
at that time worn, amongst the which this was one.

Scottyshe tauntes.
Long beardes hartlesse,
Painted hoodes witless,
Gay cotes graceless,
Makes England thryftlesse.
Anno. 3.
1328
John Gantha^ M Simon Francis S. Henry Co^bmarte^ S.
Edward earl of Kent, uncle to king Edward of England, being falsely accused
of treason, Execution.
was by sir Roger Mortymer put to death at winchester.

Prince Edward was borne at Wodstocke. Who in process of time grew to a noble
and famous man: and was in his days counted the Flower of chivalry through out
the world. The.xvii. of October, sir Roger Mortimer was taken in Notyngham
castle, and sent to the Tower of London.

Anno. 4.
1329
Symond Swalond S Richard Lazar S Richard Gisours S
Sir Roger Mortimer was accused for diverse points of treason, as that he
murdered king Edward the second: and that through him the scots escaped at
Stanhope park, for receiuynge sums of money of the Scotts: for which
accusations he was shortly after drawn and hanged at London. Execution.


Edward Baylell, the son of John Baylell late king of Scotts, by license
purchased of king Edward, entered into Scotland, clayminge the crown by the
right of his father, where he vanquished the Scotts, and was crowned king at
Stone.

Anno. 5.
Symond Swaylon M. Robert Ely S. 1330
Tho. whorwod S.
The king with a great army went into Scotland, and at Halidon hill gave the
Scotts battle, wherein he obtained a triumphant victory, and slew of
them.viii. Earls.900. knights and of barons, and esquires 400. and.32000.
common soldiers: he won Edenborow, Barwicke, Barwicke won.
and many other castles, and gave the governance of Scotland to Edward
Baylell, between whom and the Scots was foughten many battles.

Anno. 6.
John Pou^tney M. John Mocking S 1331
Andrew Aubery S
The king of France sent.x. shyps toward Scotland, which were so wether driven
into Flanders, that they were little worth after that time.

Anno. 7.
1332
John Preston M. Nicolas Pike S. John Husband S.
King Edward went again into Scotland, and laid siege to the castle of
Kylbridge: He wan it by strength, and set the country in quietness, and came
back to the castle of Tyne, where shortly after Edward Baylell king of
Scotts, came and did him homage, and swear unto him fealty and fidelity, and
returned again into Scotland.

Anno. 8.
1333
John Pou^tney M. John Hamond S. William Hansard S.
Ambassadors were sent from Philyp de Ualoys king of France, for to conclude
upon certain articles of variance between their lord and the king of England,
but it took none effect.

Anno. 9.
1334
Reignold at cundyt M. John Kyngston S. Walter Turk S.
This year king Edward sent ambassadors into France, to conclude a peace,
which likewise took none effect.

Anno. 10.
1335
Reignold at conduit M. walter mordon S. Richard Upton S.
This year king Edward made claim to the crown of France, and therefore
proclaimed open war between England and France.

Anno. 11.
John Pou^tney M will. brickelsworth S 1336
John Northehall S
In this year (as says Fabian) the king consyderyng the charge he had with
wars in Scotland, and also that he intended to have against the Frenchemen,
for the obtainyng of his right, gathered together treasure by diverse and sundry
ways, whereof the manner is not expressed: but such great plenty came to his
hands, that money was very scant throughout the whole realm: by reason of
which scarsnes, vitaile and other merchandise were exceeding good chepe: for at
London a quarter of wheat was sold for.ii. s. and fat ox for vi. s.viii. d. A
fat sheep for.vi. d. and.viii. d. syx pigeons for one penny, Great cheap of
vitaye.
a fatt goose for.ii. d. a pyg for a penny: and so all other victuals, after ye
rate.

This year appeared a blasyng sterre.

Anno. 12.
Henry Darcy M. Walter Neale S. 1337
Nicolas Grave S.
King Edward for the expedition of his wars against the french King sent
ambassadors into the parties beyond the sea, to allie with him the earl of
Heynault, and other lords, which obeyed not the french king: of whom by the
means of Jacques Dartnell, he had great comfort both of the Flemmings and
diverse lords and princes of those parts.

This year the king granted, that the officers of the Mayor and Sheriffs of
London should bear maces of silver.

Anno. 13.
1338
Henry Darcy M. William of Pomfret S Hugh Marbre S
King Edward for more establishme^t of amity between him and the Hollanders,
Selanders, and Brabanders, sailed to Andwarpe, where he concluded the matter
with his aliances, and by the consent of the emperor Lewys was proclaimed vicar
general of the empire.

Southampto^ robbed by Frenchmen.
In this mean time certain French men had entered the haue^ of Southampton, and
robbed the town, and brent a great part thereof, and upon the sea they took.ii.
great ships, called the Edward, and the Christopher.

Anno. 14.
Andrew Aubery M. William Thorney S. 1339
Roger Frosham S.
King Henry held a parlyament at Westminster: A great subsedye.
and there toward his great charges, he demanded the fyfthe part of every
man's goods. The customs of the wolles to be paid.ii. years before hand: and
the ninth sheaff of every man's corn. Which was granted unto him. But before it
were all paid, the love of the people did turn into hatred and their prayer
into cursyng, etc.

The king changed his coin, Coin changed
and made the noble, and half noble: The noble at vi. s.viii. d. which is
now.x. s.

King Edward over and beside a great army of English soldiers, having with
him welnere the power of the hole Empire, The arms of England and France
entermedled.
entered the borders of France and made claim to the whole realm of France,
as his rightful inheritance. and for more authority named him self king of
France, and entermedled the arms of France, as it remains to this day.

Anno. 15.
Andrew Aubery M. Adam Lucas S. 1340
Bertholo. marys S.
John of Gaunt borne at Gaunt.
The queen of England wife to king Edward being at Gaunt, was delivered of a
son, which afterward was called John of Gaunt, which was first earl of
Richemont, and after Duke of Gloucester.

A battle on the sea.
This year K. Edward sailynge into Flanders nigh to ye town of Sluice met with
the French kings navy, where was foughten a cruel battle. whereof the king
of England had the victory and the French flete that was in number.400.
sail, was welnere destroyed, and the soldiers taken, slain and drowned, so
that of.33000. four escaped alive

Shortly after this victory, king Edward besieged Turney, and the town of
saint Omers, during the time of which siege, diverse out rydynges and
enterprises were adventured by the Heynawes, Almains, and other his friends, to
the great hurt of both parties. At the end of.xi. wekes after the siege, a
peace was concluded for.xii. months, and the king returned to Londou.

Anno. 16.
1341
John Oxenford M. Rich. barking S. John Rokesley S.
This year came into England.ii. cardinals to treat a peace between the kings
of England and of France, who concluded it for.3. years, but it lasted not so
long.

This year the queen was delivered of a man child at La^gley: which was named
Edmunde of Langley, and was king Edwards third son.

Anno. 17.
Simon Francis M. John Luskyn S 1342
Rich. Kyslingbery S
This year dyed John duke of Britain by reason of whose death, war and strife
grew, and parts taking by the French king and king Edward.

Anno. 18.
John Hamond M. John steward S. 1343
John Aysesha^ S.
This year the king called a parliament at westmynster: In time whereof, Edward
his eldeste soonne was created prince of Wales.

This year ye king made a coin of fine gold, A new coin.
and named it the florentine, that is to say, the penny of the valu of.vi.
s.viii. d. the halfpeny of the valu of.iii s.iiii. d. and the farthing of the
value of xx. d. which coin was ordained for his wars in France, for the
gold thereof was not so fine as was the noble before named.

Anno. 19.
1344
John Hamo^d M. Geff. wichingha^ S. Thomas Legget S.
This year the king held a solemn feast at his castle of Windsor: The order of
knights of the garter.
where he devised the order of the Garter, and stablished it as it is at this
day.

Then king Edward sailed into Sluice, and so into little britain with a strong
army. But for that he was disappointed of the Flemmyngs, by reason of the death
of his trusty friend Jacques Dartnell, he turned again into England, leaving
behynd him the Earl of Salisbury with a strong company, to aid John Earl of
of Mountford against Charles de bloys Which John by the aid of Englishmen wan
diverse towns and holds in Britain.

This year the king sent the Earl of Derby with a strong army into Guyen for
to aid the earl of Northampton.

Anno. 20.
1345
Richard Lacer M. Edmond He^pnall S. John Gloucester S.
This year king Edward made great preparation for the wars of France: and
Philyp de Ualoys king of France made as great preparation to defend his land
against king Edward.

Anno. 21.
Geffrey wichingha^ M. John Croydon S. 1346
william Clopton S.
This year king Edward sailed into Normandy with.1100. sail great and small,
and with him his son prince Edward, they over rode, spoiled and destroyed the
country before them unto Paris: and gathered wonderful riches of pray which
he sent into England. Shortly after, he encou^tred the french king nigh the
foreste of Cresse, when he had not in his host the eight man in comparison of
the French army, and obtained of them a triumphant vyctorie. Where was slain
the king of Bohem with.x. other great princes.80. banners.1200. knights,
and.3000. common soldiers. After this victory king Edward went toward Caleys,
and besieged it. In the mean while David of Scotland by procurement of the
French king, made war upon the borders of England: but the bishop of York
with other lords gathered a great company, as well spiritual as temporal,
and nere unto Durham did hyd the king of Scotts battle, where was fought a
cruel and fierce bataille. But in the end the victory fell unto the queen's
side. and there was taken the king of Scotts, The king of Scotts taken
with many of his greatest lords, and there was slain one and other
above.15000. soldiers.

Anno. 22.
1347
Thomas Legget M. Ada^ Bramson S Rich. basingstoke S
This year, after king Edward had lien before Caleis a year and more, Caleis
yielded to Edward the third.
it was yielded up to him, as ye may read at large in John Frosard his
chronicles.

Anno. 23.
1348
John Lufkin M. Henry Picard S. Simo^woseley S.
A great plage
In the end of this year about August the pestilence begone in diverse places of
England, and specially at London, and so continued till that time twelve month

Anno. 24.
1349
William Turk Mayor Adam Bury S. Rafe Lynne S.
This year was Calice like to have been betrayed, but the king in time
prevented it.

The King caused to be coined grotes and half grotes, Alteration of coin to a
smaller value.
the which lacked of the weight of his former coin.ii. s.vi. d. of a pound
troy. And about the end of August ceased the death in London, which was so
vehement and sharp, A great pestilence.
that over the bodies buried in churches and church yardes, monasteries, and
other accustomed buryeng places, was buried in the Charter house yard of
London (as says Fabyan.l. M. persons. And also many persons of good credit
yet living in the city of London affirm that they have read the like, written
on a plate of laton fastened on a cross of stone in the same Charter house
church yard: and also to have seen recorded in one old Book of the said
Charter house, that at that time the said mortality was so great, that there
remained not the tenthe person alive throughout the realm.

Anno. 25.
Richard Killingbury M. John Notte S. 1350
will. wocester S.
This year king Edward had a goodly victory upon the sea, against Charles the
constable of France where he took xxii. of their ships.

Anno. 26.
1351
Andrew Aubery M. John wroth S. Gibbo^ staindrop S.
This year the castle of Guynes was yelden unto the englishmen, dwelling in
Calice, by treason of a French man.

Also this year ye englishmen being in Britayn, had a goodly victory over the
Frenchemen, where they took many noble men prisoners.

Anno. 27.
1352
Adam Francis Mayor John Peache S John stodeney S
This Summer was so long dry, that it was called after, the dry summer: The dry
summer.
for from March till the latter end of July, fell little rain or none: by which
reason corn that year following was scant.

Anno. 28.
1353
Adam Francis Mayor John Welde S. John Little S.
The Duke of Brunswyke made an appeal against Henry duke of Lancaster: for
which was waged battle in the french kings court, and being both ready
within the lystes to fight, the french king stayed the matter, and took the
quarrel into his hands, so that either of them departed the field without any
stroke stricken.

Anno 29.
Thomas Legget M. william Totingha^ S. 1354
Richard Smert S.
For so much as the towns in Flanders brake their promise before time made by
Jacques Dartnell, The woll staples kept at Westminster, Chichester, Lyncoln,
Bristow and Canturbery.
and now favored the french party, king Edward removed the market and staple
of woll out of Flanders into England: as to Westminster, Chichester, Lyncolne,
Bristowe, and Canterbury.

Prince Edward the son of king Edward passed into Gascoyn, where he made
sore war, and destroyed castles and towns before him, and took the town of
Remorentine with other.

Also this year was the house of the Friars Angustines in London finished: The
friar Augustins church in London builded.
which was reedifyed by sir Humfrey Bobune earl of Hertforde and Essex, whose
body lies buried in the quier of the said house before the high altar.

Anno. 30.
Symond Francis M. Thomas Forster S 1355
Thomas Bra^don S
Edward prince of Wales, nigh to the city of Poitiers joined battle with king
John of France: of who^ the prince by his marcial policy wan a noble victory,
notwtstandyng that he had in his army but 800. soldiers: and on the french
part were 6000. fighting me^. In this conflict King John was taken with his
young son Philyp, and many of his nobles, and brought^ into England.

Anno. 31.
1356
Henry Picard M. Rich. Nofingha^ S. Thomas Dosel S.
Great and royal iustes were holden in Smythfield before the king of England
(the french king being prisoner) the king of Scotts, A great Iustes in
Smithfielde.
and diverse other nobles.

Anno. 33.
1357
John Stody M. Stephen Candish S. Barthol. Frostling S.
This year David le Bruze king of scotts was set at liberty, when he had put
king Edward surety of.10000. mark for his ransom.

Anno. 23.
1358
John Lufain M. John Barnes S. John Burys S.
The englyshemen in Britain took the town of Ancore, and diverse other, and
put them to great ransom.

Anno. 34.
1359
Simon Duffild M. Simon Bedingha^ S. John Chichester S.
King Edward with his son the prince passed the sea to Calice, and from thense
rode through France by Picard, Artois Roan, Champayn, and so forth to
Britain, ever destroying the country before him, his garrisons also made
war in Beauvoisin, in Picardye, in Brye, in Campayn, and spoiled well nere
all the counntrey. Moreover the king of Navarre vexed sore the marches of
Normandy. Thus was the realm of France miserably beset at this time on all
sides.

At the last a final peace was concluded between the kings of England and of
France, on this condition, that king Edward should have to his possession, the
countries of Gascoyn and Guyen, Poytiers, Lymosyn, Baleuile, Exantes, Calice,
Guynes, and diverse other lordships castles, towns, and all the lands to the^
belonging, without knowledge of any sovereignty or subjection for ye same: and
the king of France should pay for his ransom 300000. crowns: and so King John
returned into France.

Anno. 35.
John Wroth M. John Denis S. 1360
Walter Burney S.
King Edward returned from Caleys into England, and brought with him many
noble men of France for hostages.

This year men and beasts perished in England in diverse places with thunder and
lightning: and fiends were seen in ma^s likeness, and spoke unto men as they
travailed by the way.

Anno. 36.
1361
John Peche M. William Holbeche S. James Tame S.
The second pestilence
This year was great death and pestilence in England, which was called the
second mortality: in which died Henry duke of Lancaster: and then was John of
Gaunt the kings third son, which had married the dukes daughter, made duke of
Lancaster.

Also there were seen this year in the air castles, and hosts of men fighting
(as says Fabian.)

Anno. 37.
1362
Stephen Ca^dishe M. Io. of S. Albons S. James Andrew S.
This year was a great wynd in England, A great wind.
wherewith many steples and towers were overthrown.

King John of France came into England, and shortly after died at ye Sauoy in
London. Also this year was a great frost in England, which lasted from the
myddest of September to the month of April.

Anno. 38.
John Notte M Rychard Croydon S. 1363
John Hiltofte S.
Prince Edward sailed into Bordeaux, and received the possession of Guya^ that
king Edward had newly given unto him.

Anno. 39.
Adam of Bury M. Simon Mordant S 1364
John of Motford S
This year the king began the foundation of saint Stephens chapel at
Westmynster, S. Stephe^s chapel at westmynster begone.
which was finished by Richard the second, and son of prince Edward.

Anno. 40.
John Lufkyn M. Io. Bukylsworth S 1365
John Oreland S
This year the king commanded that Peter pence should no more be gathered nor
paid to Rome.

This year Prince Edward had his first son, whose name was Edward, but he
dyed at seven years of age.

Prince Edward entered Spain with a great puysaunce, where he overcame the
Spanyardes and French men, and expelled Henry the bastard, and set Peter in
his former estate, as kig of Spain. But not long after the princes return home
again, Henry repaired his army and warred upon his brother so fiersly, that in
the end he utterly vanquyshed him and put him to death: and the^ without
resistance possessed the kingdom of Spain.

Anno. 41.
1366
John Louekyn M. John Ward S William Dickma^ S
This year was borne the second son of Prince Edward, named Rychard.

Anno. 42.
1367
James Andrew M. Rich. Torgold S. William Dickma^ S.
This year appeared Stella cometa, A Comet or blasing star
that is a blasing star. And this year the earls of Armenak, of brett, and of
Perygort, with other nobles of ye duchy of Guyan, appealed the Prince of Wales
in the French kings court, that he had broken the peace, and wronged them, as
in exacting of them over great sommes of money, etc. But the French king
deferred it for certain causes to long here to rehearse.

Anno. 43.
Simon Mordon M. Ada^ wymbingha^ S. 1368
Robert Gyrdler S.
This year the king of France proceaded in judgment upon the appellation
before made by ye earl of Armenak, the lord of Bret, and earl of Perygort,
against Prince Edward. Whereupon, discord and variance began to take place
between ye two kings: and those lords, which before were sworn to king
Edward, did now yield diverse towns of the country of Poytiers unto the
French king.

The Duke of La^caster aryued at Caleis, and entered France with a company of
soldiers, where not far from Arde, the Duke of Burgoyne lodged, within a
mile of his army, with a great power, the space of.xviii. days, and never
proffered battle. But lastly went away by night, and then the Duke passed
further into France.

Anno. 44.
John Chichester M. John Pyell S. 1369
Hugh hoiditch S.
This year dyed Queen Phylip wife to Edward the third, The queen's College in
Oxford builded
she builded ye college in Oxe^ford, called queen's college

The third pestilence.
In this year was the third mortality or pestylence, whereof dyed much people.

Anno. 45.
1370
John Bernes M. Will. Walworth S Robert Gayton S
John Barnes Mayor of London, gave a chest with three locks, A cheste in
Guyldehaule having three locks, and never a penny therein.
and a. 1000. markee, to be lent to young men upon sufficient gage, so that it
passed not one 100. marks: and for the occupying thereof, if he were learned to
say at his pleasure Deprofundis for the soul of John Barnes: if he were not
learned, to say Pater noster. But how so ever the money was lent, at this
day the chest stands in the chamber of London, without either money or
pledges for the same.

This year the country of Lymosyn with other, became obeysaunt to the French
king, and fell from the king of England: by reason that Prince Edward had
lately assessed upon the inhabytantes of the country, a great and grievous
task: by means whereof, he lost the love of the people.

Anno 46.
1371
John Barnes M. Robert Hatfild S. Adam Staple S.
The Earl of Penbroke, as he passed the sea to reskewe the castle of Rochel,
was encou^tred with a fleet of Spanyardes, which king Henry of Castle had
sent to aid the French king. Of these Spanyardes after cruellfyght, the Earl
was taken, and sir Guystarde de Angle and other, to the number of.160. persons,
and the more part of his men slain and drowned.

Anno. 47.
John Pyel Mayor John Phylpot S. Nycolas Bre^ber S. 1372

John Duke of Lancaster, entered by Calays into France, and passed throughout
the Realm, by Uermendoys and Campayne, nyghe to turdeaux in Aquitane without
battle: not withstanding the great hurt and damage they did to the towns and
countries as they passed.

Anno. 48.
Adam of Bury M. John Aubery S. 1373
John Fisshye S.
Diverse entreatyes of peace were made between the king of England and France,
by mean of the bishop of Rome, but none was concluded.

Anno 49.
William Walworth M. Rychard Lyo^s S 1374
W. wodhous S
The entreatie of peace continued, but not concluded but for four months at
the most: in which time, of entreatie the French king wan many holds, and
towns of the Englyshemen, as well in Guyan as in Brytayne, and in other places.

Anno. 50.
1375
John Ward M. John hadley S. Will. Newport S.
Many wonderful sycknesses fell among the people, as well in Italy as in
England, whereof there used an exceadyng great number.

Anno. 51.
Adam staple M. John Northampton S Robert Launde S
Prince Edward departed out of this life, who was in his time the flower of
chyualry. He was buried at Caunterbury, and then king Edward created Richard
son of prince Edward prince of Wales: and because the king waxed feeble and
sickly, he betoketh: rule of the land to sir John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster,
who so continued during his fathers life.

Edward the third deceased
This year king Edward the third ended his life at Rychemonde, the.xxi. day of
June, in the year of our Lord, 1377. When he had reigned.50. years five
months lacking four days, and was buried at Westmynster: he left behind
him four sons, Jews duke of Clarence, John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster,
Edmond of Langley duke of York, and Thomas of Wodstocke earl of Cambrydge.

Richard the second. Anno regni.1.
RIchard the second, 1377
son of Prince Edward of Wales, was ordained king of England, being as yet
but eleven years of age. He began his reign the.xi. day of June, in the year
of our lord.1377. and left the same the.xxix. day of September, in the
year.1399. so he reigned.xxii. years.iii. months and eight days. In bounty
and liberality he far passed all his progenitors: but he was over much
given to rest and quietness, and loved little deeds of arms, and martial
prowess, and for that he was young, he was most ruled by young counsel, and
regarded nothing the aduertysementes of the sage and wise men of his Realm,
for the chief about him were of no wisdom nor estimacion: which thing
turned this land to great trouble, and him self in fine to extreme myserie.
Of him John Gower writes (as Hardyng affyrmeth) these verses in latyne
following.

John Gowre in his book entitled vox clamantes, which treats of the
unfortunate time of Richard the second.
Principio Regis oritur transgressio legis,
Quo fortuna cadit and humus retrograda uadit
Quomodo surrexit populus, quem no^ been rexit,
Te^pus ad huc plangit, super hoc quod Chronica tangit
Stultoru^ uile cepit consiliu^ iuuenile
Et sectam senium decreuit esse reiectam,
Tunc accusare quosdam presumpsit auare,
Vnde catallorum gazas spoliauit little.
Which may be englyshed thus.

When this king first began to reign,
the laws neglected were,
Wherefore good fortune him forsook
and thearth did quake for fear,
The people also whom he pol^d,
against him did rebel,
The time does yet bewail the woes,
that Chronicles do of sell,
The foolysh council of the lewd
and young, be did receive:
And grave advice of aged heads,
he did reiects and leave,
And then for gready thirst of coin,
some subjects he accusde,
To gain their goods into his hands,
thus he the Realm abusde.
Anno Regni.1.
Nycolas Brymber M. Andrew pickma^ S 1377
Nyco. Twyford S
By the entisement of the French men, the Scotts began to rebel, Froysart,
Barwick taken by.xl. persons.
and a squyre of theirs, called Alexander Ramsey, with.xl. persous, in a night
took the castle of Barwyke: which was rescued and recovered by therle of
Northu^berla^d.

Anno. 2.
John Philpot M. John Boseham S. 1378
Tho. Cornwalis S.
This John Philpot Mayor of London above named, gave to the city of London
certain tenementes, for the which the Chamberlayn of London, pays yearly
forever, to.xiii. poor people of the same city, every of them. vii. pence the
weke, which is paid to them at the.iiii. quarter feasts of the year, and as
any of those xiii. persons dye, the Mayor appoynteth one, and the Recorder of
London an other in their romthes.

This year the war was again renewed between the king of France and Navarre,
who shortly after allied with king Rychard of England.

The lord Neuile was sent with a company of soldiers, to raise the siege
before Fortayne in Poytow, and to aid the king of Navarre, against the
Spanyardes of Castill.

Anno. 3.
1379
John Hadley M. John Heylisdom S. William Barret S.
The French men with galleis and other ships, Grauesende spoiled by
Frenchmen.
entered into the Thames and burnt diverse towns, and at the last came to
Grauesende, where they spoiled the town, and set it on fire, and returned
into France with much riches. This year as John Hardyng writes, alleging
John Gower, John Hardyng alleging Govver
was such a pestilence in England that most people died. A parliament at
westmynster, where was granted, that all men and women, being of the age
of.xiiii. years or upward, should pay to the king.iiii.d. by reason whereof
great grudge and murmr grew among the commons: and this was granted
toward the wars in France.

Anno. 4.
William Walworth M. Wall. Ducket S. 1380
Will. ^mg^thod S.
This year the making of gunnes was first found, Gonnes first invented.
in this manner: a certain Almayne (whose name is not known) chanced to have
in a mortar, powder of brymstone that he had beaten for a medicine, and covered
it with a stone, and as he stroke fire, it fortuned a spark to fall in the
powder, by and by there rose a great flame out of the mortar, and lift up the
stone wherewith it was covered, a great heyght: and after he had perceived that,
he made a pype of Iron, and tempered the powder and finished this deadly engyn,
and taught it to the Uenecians, when they warred against the Genuates, which
was in the year of our lord.1380. For this invention he received this
benefit, that his name was never known, lest he might for this abominable
devise, have been cursed and evil spoken of whylest the world stands: so
says Polldore.

By the mean of the payment above named, this year the co^mo^s of this la^d,
specially of Kent and Essex, suddenly rebelled and assembled together upon black
Hethe, to the number.60000. and above which had to their captains, Watte
Tyler, Jack Straw, Jack Sheparde, Tom Myller, Hobbe Carter, and such other:
which were animated to this rebellion, by one John Wall or ball, a very
sedicious preacher. As ye may read at large in John Froysard, the first book
the.381. chapter. They caused much trouble and business in the Realm, and
chiefly about the city of London, where they practiced much vyllanie, in
destroyinge many goodlye places of the nobles, as the Sauoye, The Sauoye
burnt, and S. Iohnes in Smithfielde spoiled.
saint John's in Smythfielde and other. They let forth all prisoners and set
them at liberty: they spoiled all the books of law in the Innes of court,
the Records of the Counters and other prysons. They set the king forth of the
tower of London, compellyng him to grant al bondmen fredom, and that he
should never demand trybute or tax of his commo^s: and also required Jack
Straw, and Wat Tyler to be made Dukes of Essex and Kent, and governors of the
kings person from thenceforth, both in peace and war, which things he
granted: for he durst in no point deny them: But Wyllia^ Walworth Mayor or
London being in Smithfielde, nere unto ye kings person, and seeing him stand
hoodlesse before Jack straw, Jack Straw slain.
rebuked the said Straw of his great lewdness, and with a dagger slew him,
and brought the king into the city: Why the city of London gives the dagger
in arms.
Whereupon the rude company was dispersed, and fled as sheep, some one way
and some an other: so says Hardyng. In memory of this deed the city gives
the dagger in their shylde of arms.

Anno. 5.
John Northa^pton M. John Rote S. 1381
John Hynde S.
This year was a terrible earthquake throughout all England, An earth quake.
which threw down many castelles, steples, houses, and trees. Which John
Hardyng says he saw the.xx. day of May.

Anno. 6.
John Northa^pton M. Ada^ Bawme S. 1382
John Self S.
This year was a combat foughten at the kings pallais of Westminster, A
combat.
between one Garton Appellant, and sir John Ansley knight defenda^t, ye knight
was Uictor, and Garto^ was from that place drawn to Tyborn, and there hanged
for his false accusation.

Anno. 7.
1383
John Northa^pton M. Sy. Winthco^be S John More S
Execution at S. Albons.
This year was one Wall, or Ball, taken at Couentre, by Robert Treuillian, and
judged to be hanged at saint Albons, for that he was the anymator of the
Rebels spoken of in the fourth year of this kings reign, of whom ye may
read at large in John Frosard.

Anno. 8.
1384
Nycolas Brember M. Nycolas Exton S. John French S.
The king went toward, Scotland with a great army, but when he drew nere ye
borders, such means was songht that a peace was concluded.

Anno. 9.
1385
Nycolas Brember M. John Organ S. Io. Churchma^ S.
King Rychard married the daughter of Uinceslaus, Emperor of Almayne.

Anno. 10.
1386
Nycolas Exton M. W. Stondon S. William More S.
The Earl of Arundell went into the Duchse of Guyan, for to strengthen such
soldiers as the king at that time had in those parties, or to stoure the sea
of Rouers. The earl keeping his course, encountered with a mighty fleet of
Flemynges laden with Rochell wine, and set upon them, took them, and brought
them to diverse ports of England: whereby wine was then so plenteous, that it
was sold for.xiii.s.iiii.d. and.xx.s. a tonne of the very choice.

Anno. 11.
Nycolas Exton M. William Uenour S. 1387
Hughe Fostalse S.
This year Thomas of wodstoke duke of Gloucester, Robert Fabian
the earls of Aru^del, Warwyke, of Darby, and of Notyngham, consyderyng how
this land was mysgouerned, by a few persons about the king, entending
reformation of the same, assembled at Radecocke bridge, where they took their
counsel, and raysyng a strong power, came to London, where they caused the
king to call a parliament, whereof hearing Alexander Neuyll Archbishop of
York, Sir Lionel Uere Marquis of Deuelen, and sir Mychael de la Poole
Chau^cellour and earl of Suffolk, fearyng punishment, fled the land and died
in strange countries. The king by counsel of the above named lords during
the parliament, caused to be taken sir Robart Triuilian, chief Justice of
England, sir Nycholas Brembre, late Mayor of London, sir John Salysbury knight
of household, sir John Beauchampe, Steward of the kings house, sir Simon
Burley, sir James Bernes and sir Robert Belknappe knights, and a sergeaunt of
arms, named John Uske, the which by authority of the said parliament, were
convict of treason, and put to death at the tower hill, and at Tyborne. And
John Holt, John Locton, Rychard Gray, Wylliam Burgth, and Robert Fuithorpe
justice, with the other foresaid lords, which before had voyded the land,
were banished and exiled for ever.

Anno. 12.
1388
Sir Nych. Twyford M. Tho. Austen S. Adam Gathill S.
A iustes in Smithfielde.
This year the king kept a great iustes in Smythfielde, which continued
xxiiii. days. This year on the fifth day of August, was the battle of
Ottyrborn, The battayll at Ottyrborn
where sir Henry Percy slew the earl Douglas of Scotland, and after was taken
prisoner.

Anno. 13.
William Uenour M. John Walcot S. 1389
John Loueney S.
An esquier of Navarre accused an english esquire called John Welshe of
treason: A combat.
for the trial whereof, a day of fight was between them taken, to be fought
in the kings palais at westminster: where they fought a strong fight, but John
Welshe was victor, and constrained the other to yield. Where he was dispoyled
of his armor, Execution.
and drawn to Tyborn, and hanged for his untruth.

Anno. 14.
Adam Bawme M. John Francis S. 1390
Tho. Uiuent S.
The duke of Lancaster uncle to king Richard sailed with a company of
soldiers into Spayn, to claym the realm of Cast^le: for so much as he had
taken to wife the eldest daughter of king Peter, that was expelled his kingdom
by Henry his bastard brother: be conquered the countreye of Galice, and made
league with the king of Portugal: but by great mortality, which fell among
his people, he was feign to dismysse his army, and shortly after lost all
that ever he had won.

Anno. 15.
1391
John Hind Draper M. Io. Chadworth S Henry Uamer S
A bakers man bearing a basket of horsebread in Fletestrete, A fraye in
Fletestrete.
one of the bishop of Salisburies me^ took out a lofe, yt baker requyryng his
lofe, the bishops man brake the bakers head: whereupon followed such parties
taking, that the Mayor and Sheriffs and all the quyete people of the city,
could not order the vnrulynes of the multitude there gathered together, but
that they would have him delivered to them, who brake the bakers head, or else
to break open the gates of the said bishops palaice, who was the kings high
treasorer: for the which the king seized the liberties of the City, and
discharged the Mayor and Sheriffs of the rule of the City, and committed the
government thereof to a knight of the court called sir Edward Dalingerige. The
citisens making great suit and labor to obtein the kings favor, could not
this year obtain it.

Anno. 16.
William Stonden Grocer M. Gilbert Ma^field S 1392
Tho. Newingto^ S
This year by the great suit and labor of doctor Grauesend then bishop of
London, The liberties of London restored.
the liberties were shortly restored in reward of which pains, he desired the
Mayor with the citisens of London in their liueries to resort yearly on their
ix. pryncipall days to the Church of Poules unto the grave of the same
bishop, after his decease, who lies in the myddle of the west end of the said
church, and there to say De profundis. etc. As ye may read in Robert Fabyan.

Anno. 17.
John Hadley Grocer M. Drew Bare^tin S. 1393
Rich. whittington S.
A truce prolonged between France and England for.iiii. years.

This years dyed Queen Anne wife to king Rychard.

Anno. 18.
Io. French Mercer M Will. Bramto^ S. 1394
Tho. Knolles S.
John Wiklef
About this time was Wikliffe famous in England.

King Richard made a voyage into Ireland, which was more chargeable then
honorable. And this year was great tempest of wind in England.

Anno. 19.
1395
Will. More Uintener M Roger Elys S will. Sheringha^ S
A truce for.xxx. years was made between England and France: and king Richard
took to wife Isabell the daughter of Charles the French king.

Anno. 20.
1396
Ada^ bame goldsmith M Tho. Wilford S. william Parker S.
The duke of Gloucester king Richardes uncle with the Earl of Arundell, and
other, was put to cruel death: Execution.
for so much as they rebuked the king in certain matters over lyberally.

Anno. 21.
1397
Richard Whittingto^ Mercer M. william Askha^ S. Io. wodcock S.
This year deceased John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster: He was buried in Poules
Church, on the North side of the quyer.

The Duke of Hereforde and also the Duke of Norffolke were both banyshed the
land. The duke of Hereford banished this land.


Anno. 22.
Drew Bare^tin Goldsmith M. John wade S 1398
Io. warner S
King Richard let the realm of England to ferme to sir Wyllyam Scrope
Earl of Wyltshyre, England let to feruie.
and to.iii. knights, Busshy, Bagot and Grene. And then in Apryll he went
with an army into Irelande, leaving for his Lieuetenaunte in England, sir
Edmund of Langley his uncle, and Duke of York.

King Richard being occupied in Irelande, Henry Bolynbrooke, Duke of
Hereforde, and of Lancaster: which was banyshed into France, being sent for
of the Londoners, came into England with a small power, and landed in
Holdernesse in Yorkeshyre, to whom the Communes gathered in great number,
whereof King Richard hearing, about September he returned, and landynge at
Mylforde haven, he went to the Castle of Flynt in Wales, where he rested him,
entendynge to gather more strength: In the which time, Henry Duke of Lancaster
came unto Brystowe, where he took sir Willyam Scrope, Ealre of Wylteshyre and
Treasourer of England, sir John Bushy, and sir Henry Green. Sir John Bagot
was there taken, but he escaped and fled, the other.iii. were judged and put
to execution. King Richard taken prisoner by Henry Duke of Hereforde and of
Lancaster.
King Richard being in the castle of Flynte (his noble men forsakynge him)
was taken: and by Henry duke of Lancaster, sent to the tower of London: where
shortly after he yielded up and resigned to the said Henry, all his power and
Kyngely title to the Crown of England and France, knowledgynge that he
worthyly was deposed for his demerites and mysgouernyng of the Common weal.

King Henry the fourth. Anno Regni.1.
HEnry the fourth was ordained King of England more by force, 1399
as it appeared, then by laufull succession or election: Which thing turned
him to much unquietness, and caused often rebellyon in this Realm: of
courage he was noble and valiant, and after the Civil wars were appeased,
showed him self very gentill and loving to his subjects. He began his reygne
over this Realm, the.xxix. of September, in the year of our Lord.1399. and
left the same the.xx. day of March, in the year.1412. So he reigned thirtene
years, six months, lackyng nine days.

Henry, the soonne of King Henry was chosen Prince of Wales, and duke of
Cornwall, Earl of Chester, and heir Apparaunt to the Crown: he deposed
three Dukes, Ioh. Harding following M. Norham, doctor in Theology.
that is to say, of Albumarle, Ercester, and Surrey, and the marquis of Dorset.

Anno. 1.
1399
Tho. Knolles Grocer M. will. waldern S william Hyde S
The lord Morley appealed the Earl of Salisburye of treason, A guage of
battle.
and cast his hoode for a guage to try with him battle: the which saying he
replied, and cast from him his gloves for guage, to prove his sayings
untrue, which were sealed, and delivered to the lord Marshall.

Sir John Hollande Duke of Ercester brother to King Richard, the Duke of
Aumarke, the duke of Surrey with the Earls of Salisbury and Gloucester, and
other that favored Richard of Burdeur, conspyred against King Henry, A
conspiracy against king Henry the fourth.
and appointed pryuily to murder him at a feast, which should be holden at
Wyndsore: Exec^tion.
but their treason was disclosed, and they all put to death, with as many
knights and esquiers, as were of that alyance and confederacy.

King Rychard murdered.
King Richard was put to death in Pomfret castle, by a knight called sir
Piers of Exton, and after brought to the tower of London, and so through the
city of London to Poules barefaced, and there stood.iii. days for all
beholders: and from thense to Langley, and there buried in a house of Friars:
but he was since removed by Henry the.v. and lies at Westmynster. Upon the
death of this King Richard, John Govver in his book named Vox clamantis
John Gower does write these verses in Latin, as follows.

O speculum mundi, quod debet in auro refundi,
Ex quo prouisum sapiens acuit sibi uisum.
Cum male uiuentes, Deus odit in orb regentes
Est qui peccator, non esse potest dominator.
Richardo test, finis probat hoc manifest,
Sic diffinita fuit regia sors stabilita,
Regis ut est uita, Chronica stabat ita.
Which may be englished thus.

O myrrour for the world mete,
Which shouldste in gold be bette,
By which all wise men, by forsyght.
Their prudent wytts may whette:
Lo God does hate such rulers as
Here viciously do live:
And none ought rule, that by their life
Do ill example gyne.
As this king Richard witnesses well,
His end this plain does show,
For God allotted him such ends,
And sent him so great woo.
As such a life descrude: as by
The chronicles thou may know:
Anno. 2.
1400
John Frauncis Goldsmyth M. John wakell S. william Ebot S.
While the King was in Wales, certain persons enuyinge that he had so
shortly obtained and possessed the Realm, blased abroad amongst the vulgar
people, that king Richard was yet living, and desired aid of the common
people to reposesse his realm and royal dignity. And to the furtherance of
their invention, they set upon poastes, and cast about the streets
raylynge rymes, malicious metres and taunting verses against King Henry and kys
procedynges. He being netled with those discourteous pricks and thorns,
searched out the au^tours: Execution.
and amongst other were found culpable of this crime, sir Roger Claryngdon
knight, with two of his servants, the Pryour of Launde, and.viii. Friars
Mynoures or graye Friars, who were drawn, hanged and quartered at Tyborne in
the month of February.

Owen Glendour of Wales rebelled, Rebellyon in Wales.
and king Henry went thither with a strong army, but could not win to
them, they fled so to their mountayns.

This year was great scarsitie of wheat and other grayn, Great dearth of
corn.
so that wheat was sold at London for.xvi.s. a quarter.

Anno. 3.
John Chadworth M. will. Uenour S 1401
I. Fremingha^ S
This year the Cundite standing upon Cornehill in London was begone to be made
(where as before time it was a prison for priests called the Tonne in
Cornehyll. The cundite in Cornhyll builded.


A great battle at Srewesbury, A battle at Shrewesbury.
began by sir Thomas Percy, Earl of worcester, and other against the King,
where sir Thomas Percye was taken and beheaded, Execution.
and sir Henry Percy slain, with many other noble men.

Anno. 4.
John Walcot Draper M. Richard Marlow S. 1402
Robert Chicheley S.
The Emperor Robert came into England, only to see the country and
commodities thereof, where he was received with great triumph.

The Lord of Castile in Brytayne landed within a mile of Plymmouthe, Plymmouth
spoiled by frenchmen.
with a great compauye, he lodged all night in Plymmouth, and on the morrow
robbed and spoiled the town, and returned again to their ships.

Anno. 5.
1403
William Alkham M. Tho. Fauconer S. Tho. Poole S.
The Britaynes and Frenchemen, which the year before had spoiled and robbed
the town of Plymmouth, were discomfited and slain of the englishmen, in a
battle on the sea, nere the town of Dartmouth.

This year one willyam Serle was taken in the marches of Scotland, Execution.
and brought to London, and there hanged, drawn, and quartred for the murdring
of the duke of Gloucester at Calice.

Anno. 6.
1404
John Hynd Draper M. Will. Lowsche S Stephen spilma^ S
Sir Richard Scrope then archbishop of York, and the Lord Mowbraye then
marshall of England, with other, gathered great strength to have put down the
king (as the fame went) but they were taken, and presented to the King at
York, Execution.
where they were both beheaded.

Anno. 7.
Io. wodcock Mercer M. Henry Barto^ S 1405
will. Croumer S
This year was the bridge and Chapel of Rochester finished by sir Robert
Knolles, Rochester bridge builded
who also new reedified the body of the church of white friars standing in
Fletestrete, and there was buried: That Church was first founded by the
ancestors of the Lord Gray Cotner.

Anno. 8.
Richard Whittingto^ Mercer M Nic. wotton S. 1406
Geffrey broke S.
This year sir Henry Earl of Northumberland, Execution.
and the lord of Bardolfe coming out of Scotland, with a strong company to the
displeasure of the King as they intended, were met and foughten with, and
dyscomfyted, and their heads were stryken of, and sents to London.

This Richard Whityugton Mayor of London above named, Whityngton college
builded.
builded the house in London, named Whittingtons college. He builded a great
part of the Hospytall of Saynete Bartholomewes in west Smithfielde: he builded
the library at the Gray friars in London, now called Christ's hospital: he
also builded a great part of the east end of the guyld hall in London, beside
sundry other notable works done by him.

Anno. 9.
1407
Will. sconde^ Grocer M. Henry Po^fret S Henry Halton S
This year was a great froste which began in December, A great frost.
and lasted fyftene weeks.

Edmond Holland Earl of Kent was by the king made admiral of the sea, who
scouryng and skimmyng the sea, at the last landed in Britayn, and besieged the
Castle of Briake and wan it: but he was there wounded with an arrow, whereof he
dyed soon after.

Anno. 10.
1408
Drew Bare^tin Goldsmyth M. Tho. duke S will. Norto^ S
This year in Smithfield was held a great Iustes between the Henowayes and
Englyshemen, A great iustes ^^ Smithfield
in the which were many feats of arms done.

Anno. 11.
Richard Marlowe Ironmonger M. John Law S 1409
will. Chichley S
John Badley taylour was burnt in Smithfielde for the Sacrament of the Altar.
Execution in Smythfield.


This year the market house called the Stocks in London was begone to be
builded. The markett house called the Stocks builded.


Anno. 12.
Tho. Knolles Grocer M. Io. Pen S. 1410
Tho. Pike S.
This year a squier of Wales named Rice ap Dee, Execution.
which had long time rebelled against the King, was brought to London, and
there drawn, hanged, and quartered.

This year was the Guyld Halle of London begone to be new buylt: The Guylde
haill in London new builded.
and of an old and little cotage, made into a fair and goodly house as it
now apereth.

Anno. 13.
Robert Chicheley Grocer M. John Rainewel S 1411
William Cotton S
This year the.xii. day of October, the Thames flowed thrice in one day.

And this year the king caused a new coin of nobles to be made which were of
less value then the old by.iiii.d. in a noble.

Anno. 14.
1412
William waldren Mercer M Rafe Leue^hind S. william Seuenoke S.
This year after the great and fortunate chances happened to King Henry,
being delivered of all civil division and disce^tion, he minded to make a
voyage against the infidels, and especially for the recovery of Jerusalem: and
for that cause prepared a great army, and gathered much treasure, entendyng
to set forward in the same spring. When he had thus prepared all things
necessary for his voyage: he was taken with an Apoplerie, of the which he
languyshed till his appointed hour. During which sycknes (as auctors write) he
caused his Crown to be set on the pyllowe at his beds head, and suddenly his
pang so sore troubled him, that he lay as all his vital spirits had been
departed: such as had cure of his body, thynkyng him to be dead, covered his
face with a lynnen cloathe. The prince his son being thereof aduertysed,
entered into the Chamber, and took away with him the crown and departed: the
father being suddenly reuyued out of his trance, quickly perceived ye lack
of his crown, and having knowledge that the prince had possessed it, caused him
to repair to his presence, requirynge of him for what cause he had so misused
him self. The Prince answered, sir to my judgment you seemed dead, wherefore I
as your next heir, took it as mine, and not as yours: well son said the
king, what right I had to it and how I enjoyed it, God knows. well quod the
Prince, if you dye king, I will have the garlande, and trust to keep it with
the sword as ye have done: well said the king, I commyt all to God, and
remember you to do well, and with that turned him self, and shortly after
departed, in a chamber of the Abbottes of Westmynster, called Jerusalem, the
xx. day of March, in the year of our lord.1412. When he had reigned.13.
years, six months and nine days, and was buried at Cauntorbury.

King Henry the fifth. Anno Regni.1.
1412
HEnry ye fifte, began his reign the.xx. day of March, in the year of our
lord.1412. and deceased the last day of August in the year.1422. so he
reigned.ix. years five months and ten days. He was a Prince of great
noblenes and prowes, of stature and personage talle and sclender, of nature
gentle and lyberall, in deeds of arms expert and cunnyng, whereby he conquered
manfully his enemies, and brought France to his subjection: before the death
of his father he applied and gave him self to all vice and insolency of life,
and drew unto him riotous and wildely disposed persons: but when he was
admitted to the rule of the land, suddenly he became a new man, and turned all
that rage of wyldnes into sober and wise behauior, and vice into virtue: and
that he might not be again corrupted, he charged all his old companions, that
upon pain of their lives, none of them should come within ten miles of the
place that he was lodged in. Ioh. Lidgate,
He caused John Lidgate monk of Bery, to translate certain verses of the
psaltar into english myter, which he used in his deuyne service.

This year about harvest time, Sir John Oldecastell.
was sir John Old castle knight, appeached for an heretic, and committed to
prison, but he brake out of the tower, and went to Walis, where he lived.iiii.
years after.

Anno. 1.
Will. Crowmer Draper. M. Ioh. Sutto^ S. 1413
John Mycol S.
Certain adherentes of the forenamed sir John Oldecastel, Edward Haule.
intending the destruction of this land and subuersio^ of the same, Rebellion.
assembled them in Thickettes field, nere unto saint Gyles in great number,
whereof the king being informed, took the fyeld before them, and foke of them so
many, that all the prysons, in and about London, were filled. The chief of
them which were.xxix. were condemned by the Clergy of heresy, and attaynted
of high treason, as mouers of war against their king, by the temporal law
in the Guyldhall, Execution.
and adjudged for treason, to be drawn and hanged, and for heresy to be
consumed with fire, which was executed accordingly in January following. The
chief of these rebels was sir Robert Acton knight, John Brown Esquser, and
John Beuerley priest, as testyfieth Edward Hal.

Anno. 2.
1414
Thomas Fauconer Mercer. M. John Michell S. Tho. Allyn S.
This year the king made great provision to sail into France with an army,
and while he was shipping of his people, sir Rychard earl of Cambrydge, sir
Rychard Scrope treasorer of England, and sir Thomas Graye knight, were arrested
for treason, and so strayghtly examyned, that it was confessed that they were
purposed to have slain the king, by the corrupting of the French men:
Execution.
wherefore they were all three adjudged to die, and were headed at Hampton. Then
king Henry took shypping with a great power, Ioh. Harding following M. Norham,
doctor in Theology.
and sailed into Norma^die, and took the town of Harflewe, where he was
compassed about with a great host of french me^, to ye number of.40000. He
having but.13000. footmen, and 2000. spears. He slew of his enemies, 10000.
and took prisoners, nigh as many. This was called the battle of Agyncourt, The
battle of Agincourt.
of the which ye may read more at large, in Fabian and Hall.

Anno. 3.
Nycholas Walton Draper M. Will. Ca^bridge S 1415
Allein Euerard S
This year the Emperor Sigismo^d came into England, to entreat a means of
peace between the kings of England and France: but al was in vain, for in
the end no peace could be concluded, and king Henry went again into France.

Anno. 4.
Henry Barton Skinner M. To. Wodyngto^ S 1416
John Couentree S
This year in France king Henry obtained many victories, and got all the
towns and holds in Normandy, saving Roban, which he strongly besieged.

This year on Easter day, was a great fraye in saint Dunstones church in the
East: Robert Fabian.
the begynners thereof was the lord Strange, A fraye in S. Dunstones church.
and sir John Trussell knight, through the quarrel of their two wives, through
the which fraye many people were sore wounded and hurt, A fraie in S.
Dunstones church.
and one Thomas Petwarden Fyshmo^ger, slain out of hand, wherefore both the
frayers were brought to the Counter in the Pultrye, and the lord Strange for
beginning the said fraye, was the next sunday accursed at Paul's cross.

Anno. 5.
1417
Richard Marlowe Iremo^ger M. Henry Read S. John Gedney S.
This year sir John Oldecastell was sent unto London by the lord Powes out of
Wales, the which sir John for heresy and treason was conuicte, and for the
same was draweu to saint Gyles field, Execution.
where he was hanged on a new pair of Gallows with chains, and after
consumed with fire.

The parson of Wrotha^ with his concubine
About this time the parson of Wrotham in Norfolk, which had haunted new
market heath, and there robbed and spoiled many of the kings subjects, was with
his concubyne brought up to Newgate where he lastely died.

Anno. 6.
1418
Will. Seuenoke Grocer M. Rau^ Barton S. John Parnesse S.
King Henry conquered Rone, subdued all Normandy, and was proclaimed Regent of
France for term of the life of Charles being then king. And after his
decease ye crown of France with all ryghtes belo^gyng to the same: to him and
his heirs. For confirmation whereof, he took to wife Catheryne the daughter of
Charles.

Anno. 7.
Richard Whittingto^ Mercer M. R. Whittingha^ S 1419
John Butler S
This year king Henry returned into England and so to London and at west
mynster Catheryn his wife was crowned the.xxiiii. day of February.

Anno. 8.
Will. Ca^bridge Gro. M. John Butler S. 1420
John Wells S.
The Duke of Clarence king Henry's brother, was over set by the Dolphyn of
France, and slain, to the kings great displeasure.

King Henry went again into France and made war upon the Dolphyn.

Anno. 9.
To. Chichely gro. M. Richard Gosselyn S. William Weston. S. 1421

The beginning of this year, O. Catherin was delivered at windsor of a yo^g
pri^e^, whose name was Henry: and the tenth day of August was the new weather
cock set on Paul's steple.

And this year the Queen returned into France to king Henry, where was a
joyful metyng, but after followed sorrow: for shortly after the king being at
Bofes in Uincent, he wered syck and died, the last day of August, in the year
of our lord.1422.. when he had reigned nine years five months and ten days,
he builded the Shene and Sion, Shene and Syon builded.
and lies buried at westmynster.

King Henry the sixth. Anno Regni.1.
1422
HEnry the sixth being an infant of.viii. months of age, began his reign over
this realm of England the last day of August, in the year of our lord.1422. he
was deposed the fourth day of March in the year.1460. So he reigned.xxxviii.
years six months and four days, continuyng the time of his youth, he was
committed to the governance of Duke Humfrey of Gloucester his uncle: when he
came to man's state, he was of wit and nature, simple, gentle, and meke, and
loved better peace the^ war, quietness of mind then business of the world:
honesty then profit, rest and case, then trouble and care: all trouble,
veration, unquietness, and injuries, that ever happened to him (which were many
and great) he suffered so patiently that he reputed them to be worthily sent to
him of God for his offenses. Tho. Coper.
He favored good letters excellently well: in token whereof be erected two
famous Colleges, The kings college at Ca^brydge, and the College at Eaton
builded.
the one at Cambrydge, called the kings college, the other at Eaton: by
means whereof good learning greatly increased.

In the beginning of this his reign, dyed king Charles of France, by reason
whereof, Ioh. Harding after master Norham.
the kingdom of France should come unto king Henry, and the nobles of France
(except a few that held with the Dolphin) delivered the possession thereof
unto the Duke of Bedford Regent of France, to the use of king Henry.

Anno. 1.
William Walderne M. Will. Estfield S. 1422
K. Tattarsale S.
A subsidy was granted for three years, five nobles of every sack of woll
that should pass out of the land.

Execution.
A priest was burned for heresy, called William Tailor.

Newgate builded.
This year the West gate of London, now called new gate, was newly builded by
the executors of Richard Whittington late Mayor of London.

Anno. 2.
1423
William Crowmar Draper. M. Nicho. James S. Th. Wadford S.
This year the Duke of Bedford wan from the Dolphyn of France, many strong
holds and towns, and nere to a town called Uernell, be discomfited the
Dolphyns whole power, for in that fight were slain.iii. earls and many other
noble me^, and.5000. common soldiers.

Execution.
Sir Roger Mortimer, for treason was condemned by act of parliament, and hanged
and quartered.

The king of Scotts married at saint Mary Adries in Southwarke.
This year James king of Scotts, was delivered, who had remained prisoner in
England.xviii. years, and he married in saint Mary Adries in Southwarke, the
lady Jane daughter to the earl of Somerset, cosyn to king Henry.

Anno. 3.
John Michel M. Simon Seman S 1424
John Bywater S
This year the king of Portingale came into England, and was honorably
received.

This year by the parliament holden at Westminster, The first custom paid by
the merchants.
was granted to the king for three years, to help him in his wars, a subsedy
of xii. d. in the pound of all marchaundyzes brought in, or carried out of the
Realm, Robert Fabian.
and.iii. s of every tonne of wine, the which was then called tonnage and
pondage, but since it has been renewed at sondrye parliamentes, and now is
called custom. Furthermore, it was enacted that all merchant strangers
should be lodged within an englysh host, within.xv. days of their coming to
their port sale, and to make no sale of any marchandyse or they were so
lodged: and then within.xl. days following, to make sale of all that they
brought, and if any remained unsold at the said.xl. days end, that then all
such marchandyse so unsold, to be forfeyte to the king.

Anno. 4.
John Coue^tre Mercer M. Will. Milrede S 1425
John Brokle S
A parliament at Leicester, where the duke of Bedforde endued king Henry the
sixth with the order of knyghthode, and then the king dubbed nere 40. knights
Grudge and variaunce between the Duke of Gloucester protector of England, and
his half brother the bishop of Wynchester, which was appeased by the regent
of France, and debated by a parliament at Leicester, as ye may read at large
in Edward Haull.

Anno. 5.
1426
John Raynewell Fishmo^ger M. John Arnolde S. Io. Nightham S.
This John Raynewell Mayor of London before named, gave certain lands or
teneme^tes to the city of London, for the which the same city is bound to
pay for ever, all such fyftenes as shall be granted to the king (so that it
pass not three fyftenes in one year) for three wards of the same, that is to
say, Dougate ward, Bellynsgate ward, and Algate ward.

This year the englysh men besiegyng Orliaunce, the noble and valiant knight
sir Thomas Mountague, was slain by a great misfortune, whose death was the
beginning of al mischief to the Englysh men: for after this mishappe they lost
by little and little, all their possessions in France.

Anno. 6.
John Gidney Draper M. He^. Frowick S. 1427.
Rob. Otley. S.
This year a woman dwelling in white Chapel paryshe without Algate of London,
was in the night murdered by a Bryttaine or Frencheman, whom she had cheryshed
and brought up of alms. Who conueying such iewelles and stuff as he might
carry, A murder quit with murder.
was taken in Essex, and brought up to London: but a sone as he came in the
parish where he had committed the murder, the wives cast upon him so much
fylthe and ordure of the street, that not withstanding the resistaunce made by
the Co^stables, they slew him out of hand.

Anno. 7.
Henry Barton Skinner M. Th. Dushous S 1428
John Abbot S
This year the Duke of Norfolk was like to have been drowned, passinge through
London bridge, his barge being set upon the pyles whelmed over, so that he and
very few escaped, being drawn up with ropes, the rest were all drowned.

Anno. 8.
1429
William Estefield Mercer. M. William Russe S. Ranfe Holland S.
This year was king Henry crowned at Westmynster, of whom John Lydgate mu^ke of
Bury, made many goodly verses in praise and commendation of him and his
coronatio^, John Lidgate
as ye may read them in Robert Fabian, both of this coronation, and also of
his coronation at Paris in France.

Anno. 9.
1430
Nicholas Wotton M. walter Chertsey S Robert Large S
A commotion at Abyngton.
This year at Abyngton, began an insurrection of certain light persons, that
intended to have wrought much mischief, but they were quieted by the lord
protector, and the chief author being baily of the town, named Wylliam
Maundeuyll, a weaner, otherwise namyng him self Jack sharp of wygmores land
in Wales, with other were put to death.

Execution at Tyborne.
This year was one Richard Russel, a woll man, drawn, hanged, and quartered at
Tiborne for treason.

Anno. 10.
1431
Ioh. Wells Grocer M. John Adyrlee S. Step. Brown S.
This John Wels of his goods, The Sta^dard in cheap builded.
caused the conduit named the Standarde in cheap, to be builded in Anno.1442.

This year king Henry was crowned at Paris by ye Cardinal of Winchester. The
king of England crowned at Paris in France.


And this year the king returned into England, and so to London, where he was
received with great joy and triu^phe.

Anno. 11.
Io. Parneis Fyshmo^ger M. John Olney S. I. Paddesley S. 1432

This year was seen in the southwest, a sterre called a Comete or blasing ster.
A comete.


Anno 12.
Ioh. Brokley Draper M. Tho. Chalton S. John King S. 1433

The Earl of Huntyngton, was sent with a company of soldiers into France,
where he achieved many great feats of arms.

Anno. 13.
Roger Otley Grocer. S. Th. Barnwel S Simond Air S 1434

This year was a great frost, A great frost.
that such merchandise as came to the Thames mouth, was carried to London by
land. This frost endured from the xxv. day of November unto the.x. day of
February. which was.x. wekes.

And this year deceased John Duke of Bedford regent of France, after whose
decease, all things went backwarde with the Englyshemen in France.

Anno. 14.
1435
H. Frowick Mercer M. T. Catworth S. To. Clopton S.
Charles of France, recovered the city of Paris, and wanne by force the town
of Harflewe, and of saint Denis expelling and murdering the Englyshmen in great
number.

Calleis besieged.
The Duke of Burgoyne besyegyng Calieis, was feign to fly and leave much of his
ordinance behind him, at the coming of Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, who
pursued him eleven days, and destroyed the country as he went, unto saint
Omers.

Anno. 15.
1436
John Mychel M. Tho. Morsted S. William Gregory S.
This year on the third day of January, dyed Queen Catheryne mother to king
Henry the syxt, and wife to Henry the fifth, and lies buried at Westmynster.

This year on the fourtene day of January, the gate on London bridge with the
tower upon it next to Southwarke fell down, A part of London bridge fell down.
and.ii. of the furdest arches of the said bridge: but as God would no man
therewith peryshed.

This year it was enacted by a parliament, Every stranger paid to ye
King.xvi. d. the week.
that every alient householder in this realm should pay wekely to the
King.xvi. d.

This year all the lions in the tower of London dyed, which had been there a
long time.

Anno. 16.
William Eastfield Mercer M. Will. Chapman S. William Hallis S. 1437

The king caused a great obyte to be kept in Poules church, for Sigismund the
Emperor, who was knight of the Garter.

Anno. 17.
Stephen Brown Grocer May. Hugh Dyker S. Nicolas Yod S. 1438

This year on new years day, Three hundred men slain.
a stacke of wodde fell down at Baynardes Castle, and slew.300. men, and
hurt many other.

There was so great a dearthe in England, Great dearth
that the poor people made them bread of fetches, peason, and fern roots.

Xviii. persons murdered.
This year by the fall of a strayre at Bedford.xviii. persons were slain.

Robert Fabian.
In this year the Cundyte in Fletestrets was begone by sir Wylliam Eastfield
late Mayor of London: The Condyt in Fletestrete builded.
and fynished of his own cost, without any one penny charge to the City.

This year dyed Roberte Chicheley grocer, An obyte for master Roberte
Chicheley.
and twice Mayor of London, who wylled in his testament, that upon his Mind
day, a good compete^t dinner should be ordained for.2400. poor men, householders
of the City, if they might be found, and.xx. li. in money distributed
amongst them, which was to every man.ii. d.

Anno. 18.
1439
Robert Large Mercer M. Robert Marshall S. Philyp Malyas S.
Execution at Tower hill.
A priest was burned at the Tower hill on the.xvii. day of June, which of the
common people was counted an holy man, for that he said, the poster n should
synke (as afterward it did) and such like things: they made their prayer to
him, and arrered a great heap of stones, and pyght there a Cross by night,
until a commandment was given by the king to the contrary.

The postern of East Smythfielde against the tower of London sanke by night
the.xviii. of July. The posterne sanke.


Anno. 19.
John Paddisley goldsmith M John Sutton S. will. Wetynhale S. 1440

Elianor Cobham, wife to Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, and other persons namely
master Roger Bolynbroke, Robert Fabian.
a cunning negromancer, and Margerye Iourdemayn, commonly called the witch of
Eye were accused, Edward Hal Thomas couper.
that by sorcery and enchantmentes, they practiced the kings death: as by an
image of ware, which through their diuelysh incantations should little and
little wast and consume, and so like wise the King to wear out of his life.
Wherefore being examined and conuicte, Elianor Cobham was judged to do
penance, as to bear a taper.iii. days, thorough the chiefest streets of the
City of London, and so to be exiled to the I Will of Man, under the keeping of sir
Thomas Stanley knight, Roger Bolyngbroke was drawn hanged and quartered at
Tyborne, Execution.
and Margerye Iourdemayn the witch, was burnt in Smythfielde.

Anno. 20.
1441
To. Clopton Draper M. Will. Combis S Richard Rich S
This year the Town of Deep was besieged by the Lord Talbot, and rescued by
the Frenchemen.

A great fraye in Fletestrete
This year was a fray in Fletestrete between the Innes of Court, and the
inhabitants of the same street: which fray began in the night, and continued
till the next day, where were many me^ slain and hurt on both parties.

Anno. 21.
1442
John Thirley Iro^mo^ger M. Tho. bewmou^t S Rich. Nordon S
Paul's steple a fire.
The steple of Paul's church in London was set on fire with lightnyng, and
lastly quenched by great diligence of many men: but chiefly through the labor
of a priest of Bow in cheap.

Anno. 22.
Thomas Carworth Grocer M Nicolas wilford S John Norman S 1443

An act was made by the common cou^ sail of London, that upon the sunday
should no manner of thing within the francheses of the City be bought or sold

Anno. 23.
Henry Frowicke Mercer M. Stephen Foster S Hugh Wyche S 1444

King Henry by the advice of the earl of Suffolk took to wife Margaret, the
kings daughter of Sicile, and refused the daughter of the Earl of Arminake,
with whom he had made his first contract: which thing was cause of much
misery and trouble in England: as first the losyng of Normandy: the division
of the lords within the realm, the rebellion of the Commonaltie against the
Prince: and finally the King deposed, and the Queen with the prince feign to
flee the realm.

Henry Chicheley bishop of Canturbury dyed, Alsoulne college and Bernarde
college builded in Oxenford.
who in his life time builded two houses for students in the university of
Oxenforde, called Alsolne college, and Bernarde college.

Anno. 24.
1445
Symond Air Draper M. John Derby S Godfrey Fildyng S
Leaden Halle builded.
This Simon Air before named, builded the Leaden hall in London, and also a
beautiful chapel in the east end of the same: Over the gate whereof was
written, as follows: Dextera Domini exaltauit me, That is to say: The Lords
right hand has exalted me. Whereby be doing so notable a work for the common
weal, also left a notable example to other Citezens coming after him, whom
God likewise exalts with such temporal blessings, that they be not
unthankful to God, and their common weal, wherein they have receued them.

This year was a peace concluded with France for one year.

Anno. 25.
1446
John Only Mercer M. Robert Horn S. Godfrey Boloyne S.
Hu^frey duke of Gloucester arested at Burye.
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, and protector of England was at the parliament of
Bury, arrested, and.vi. days after he was found dead in his bed: of his
death are diverse opinyons, which I ouerpasse. He was huryed at Saint Albones.

William Wamflete a man of great devotion, Mary Magdalen college builded in
Oxenford.
wisdom, and Justice, was made bishop of Winchester and Chancelloure of
England: this man to the fortheraunce of letters, and studious young men,
erected the famous college of Marye Magdalene in Oxenford.

Anno. 26.
John Gidney Draper M. William Abraham S. Thomas Scotte S. 1447

This year was taken the town of Fogers from the Englyshemen, which was the
cause that all Normandye was lost after ward.

Anno. 27.
Stephen Brown Grocer M. William Catlow S. William Marrow S. 1448

This year Roan was yielded to the French King. Roane yielded to the French


Anno. 28.
Thomas Chalton M. William Hulyn S. Tho. Canynges S. 1449

The Marquis of Suffolk was banished the land for.v. years, to appeace the
rumor of the commons of England, for the death of the duke of Gloucester: who
saylyng toward France, A Murder.
was met on the sea by a ship of war, and there presently beheaded, by the
capitayn called Nicholas of the tower, and the dead corpse cast up at Dover upon
the sands the first day of May.

A commotion in Kent by Jack Cade on Black heath.
The commons of Kent in great number assembled on Black Heath, having to their
captain Jack Cade, naming him self Mortimer. Against whom the king sent a great
army, but by the said capitain and rebels they were discomfited, and sir
Humfrey Stafford and William his brother with many other slain: After this
victory the Captain and rebels came to London and cut the ropes of the
draw bridge, and entered the city, and stroke his sword on London stone,
saying: Now is Mortymer lord of this city. Upon the third day of July, he
caused the lord Say to be brought to the Guylde Hall of London there to be
arraigned. Which before the Kings Justices, desired to be tried by his peers
but the capitayn perceiving his delay, by force took him from the officers,
and at the standarde in Cheap smote of his head. He also beheaded sir James
Cromer at the mylls end: And pytchynge these two heads on two polles entered
the City: and in despite caused them (being borne before him) in every
street to kiss together. After this murder, succeeded open robberye within the
City: But the Mayor and other sage Maiestrates, perceiving theymselues,
another to be sure of goods nor life, determined to expulse this ungracious
company, and sent to the Lord Scales, keeper of the tower, who promised his
aid, with shootyng of ordinance: and Mathewe Gough was appointed to assyst
the Mayre: so the capitaines of the City took upon them in the night to keep
the bridge, prohybytyng the Kentyshe men to pass. The rebels hearing the
bridge to be kept, ran with great force to open that passage: where between
both parts was a fierce encounter. The rebels drove the Citelyns from the
stoulpes at the Bridge foot, to the draw bridge, and set fire in diverse
houses: In conclusyon, the rebels gat the draw bridge, and drowned and slew
many. This conflict endured till.ix. of the clock in the morning, in
doubtful chance: so that both parts agreed to desiste from fight till the
next day, upon condition, that neither Londoners should pass into Southwarke,
nor the Kentishmen in to London. Then the archbishop of Canturbury being
Chancellor, with the bishop of Winchester, passed into Southwarke, where they
showed a general pardon for all offenders, under the kings great seal,
which they caused to be proclaimed, whereupon the whole multitude retired
home: but through a proclamation being made, that who so could apprehend the
said Jack Cade, should have a M. marks, one Alexander Iden found him in a
gardein, who in his defense slew the said Jack Cade and brought his body to
London, where his head was set on London bridge.

The bishop of Salisbury was murdered by ye commons of the west country.

Anno. 29.
1450
Nicolas Wiford grocer M Io. Middleton S William Dear S
The whole duchy of Normandy was yielded to the french king, by means of the
Queen, and the duke of Somerset: which caused so much trouble in England,
that mortal war ensued.

Anno. 30.
William Gregory skinner M Matthew Philip S. Christop. warto^ S. 1451

A commotion began this year by the duke of York, The duke of York begane a
commotion.
and other noble men, which was appeased for a time, and the malice
dissembled.

Anno. 31.
Godfrey M. Feldyng M. Richard Lee S. Richard Alley S. 1452

This year the Queen was delivered of a Prince, who was called Edward.

Anno. 32.
John M. Norman M. Draper M. John Waldern S. Thomas Coke S. 1453

Before this Majors year, the Mayor, sheriffs, and commons were wont to ride
to Westmynster, when the Mayor should take his charge: but this Mayor was rowed
thither by water: For the which, the water men made of him a song, beginning,
Row the boat Norman etc.

The fire of envy that a good space had couertely smouldered between the Duke
of York, and the Duke of Somerset, with other of the Queen's counsel, at this
time brake out in hot and fierce flames of wars. In so much, that between
the King, who defended these persons, and the Duke of York, with his alies,
A battle at saint Albons.
at Saint Albons a cruel battle was fought: In the end whereof, the
victory fell to the Duke of York. And on the kings party was slain the Duke
of Somerset, the Earl of Northumberlande, the Lord Clyfforde, with many other
honorable men knights and Squyers. After which time, the Duke with great
reverence brought the King from Saint Albons to London. Where by a
Parlyamente, he was made Protector of the realm, the Cry of Salisbury
Chancellor, and the Earl of Warwyke captain of Calice.

Anno. 33.
1454
Stephen Maf. Foster Maf. John Field S. william Tailor S.
This year in London was a great fray at saint Martyns le grand, A great
fraye in London by saintuary me^
by sainctuary men, who issued forth and hurt diverse citisens: but it was
appeased by the Mayor and other. There was such grievous complaints made thereof
to the King by the deane of Saint Martins, that the liberties of the city
were in peril to be seysed.

Anno. 34.
William M. Marrow M. Grocer M. John Young S. 1455
Tho. Dulgraue S.
By means of the Queen and other lords, A riot in London against ye Lombardes.
the duke of York was discharged of his protectorshyp: which thing was cause
of new grudge and malice.

A great riot committed in London against the Lombardes and Italians, because a
mercers servant was cast in prison for strikyng an Italian.

Anno. 35.
Thomas M. Caninges M. Grocer M. John Steward S. Rafe Uerney S. 1456

At Erith within.xii. miles of London were taken.iiii. wonderful fishes: Great
fyshes taken.
whereof one was called Mors Marina, the second a swoorde fyshe, the other two
were whales.

A fleet of Frenchemenne landed at Sandwych, Sandwitche spoiled.
and spoiled the town with great cruelty.

Anno. 36.
Godfrey M. 1457
Boleyne M. Mercer M. William Edward S. Tho. Rayner S.
A fained agreement was made between the King, the Queen, and the Duke of York
with his retinue: A great procession.
for joy whereof, a general procession was celebrated in saint Paul's at
London. At which solemn feast, the King in habit royal and his diadem on
his head, kept his state in procession: before whom went hand in hand, the
Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Salisbury: the Duke of Excester, and the Earl of
Warwike: and so one of the one faction, an other of the other sect. And behind
the king, the Duke of York led the Queen, with great familiarity to all
men's syghtes. But woe worth dissimulation: for their bodies were joined by hand
in hand, whose hearts were far in sunder, as appeared shortly after.

Anno. 37.
Tho. Scot M Draper M Rafe Iosselyn S. Rich. Medtha^ S. 1458

The noble scyenco of printynge was found in Germany at Magunce by one John
Cuthenbergus, The Science of pryntynge
a knight: he found moreover the Ink by his deuyce, that printers used.xvi.
year after printyng was found, which was the year of our Lord.1458. one
Conradus an Almayn brought it into Rome: and Nicolas Johnson a french man did
greatly polyshe and garnishe it. And now it is dispersed thorough the whole
world, as says Poliedore Virgile. William Caxton mercer of London first
brought it into England: about the year of our Lord.1471. and practiced the
same in the abbey of saint Peter at Westmynster.

The Duke of York, the Earls of Salisburye and Warwick, with a great host
met the King and other lords of England upon Bloreheath nere to London:
Bloreheathe fyeide.
where because Andrew Trollop a captayn of Calice, the night before the
battle should have been, fled with a company of the best soldiers to the
Kings part. The Duke of York, the Earls of March, Salisbury, and Warwyke,
mystrustyng them selves to be to weak, departed with a preuye company, and
fled: The Duke into Irelande, the.iii. Earls into Gernesey: and after to
Calais, without any notable battle.

Symo^d Air deceased.
This year deceased the famous citesen of London Symond Air: Who (as before is
said) builded the Leaden hall in London: and in the chapel of the said hall
was written in Latin, as follows in Englisshe: The honorable and famous
merchant Symond Eire founder of this work, once Mayor of this City, Citezen
and draper of the same, departed out of this life, the.xviii. day of
September, the year of the Incarnation of Christ.1459. and the.38. year of
the reign of King Henry the.vi.

Anno. 38.
1459
William M. Hulyn M. Fishmonger M. Io. Plu^mar S. Io. Stocker S.
The.iii. Earls coming from Calice with a pussaunt army, the.ix. day of
Iulie met King Henry at Northampton, and gave him strong battle. A
battle at Northampto^
In the end whereof the victory fell to ye earls, and the kings host was
dispersed, chased, and many slain: among which was the Duke of Buckingham,
the earl of Shrewesburie, the lord Egremount, with other, and the king taken
in the field.

The Duke of York retornyng into England, The Duke of York made claim to
the crown.
made such claim to the crown, that by consent of a parliament he was
proclaimed heir apparaunte, and all his progeny after him.

Margarete the Queen, in this mean time in all haste possible, had gathered a
company of Northern men: and near to a town in the North, called Wakefielde,
in a cruel fight discomfited and slew the Duke of York, A battle as
Wakefielde.
with his son the earl of Rutlande, the earl of Salysbury, was taken prisoner
with diverse other noble men.

Anno. 39.
Rich. Lee M. Grocer. M. Rich. Flemyng S 1460
John Lambard S
The Queen with her retyne we near saint Albons, The second battle at S.
Albons.
discomfited the earl of Warwick and the Duke of Norfolk, and delivered king
Henry his husband.

Edward earl of March, and eldest son to the Duke of York: came up to London
with a mighty power of Marchme^, accompanied with the earl of Warwycke, and by
agreement of a council, was proclaimed king of England, and called Edward
the fourth: shortly after, he pursued king Henry toward York, where he gave a
sore battle to the king and his company. A battle at Sherborn on
Palmesondaye.
This fight was so cruel and fyers, that in the field and chase were
slain.xxx. thousand of the commons besyds men of name: of the which were the
earls of Northumberlande, and Westmerlande, the lord Clyfford, Androwe
Trollep, and other, to the number of eleven. King Henry the syxt feign to fly
the la^d
And king Henry lost all, and was feign to flee the land, when he had reigned
eight and thyrty years.vi. months, and four days. And Queen Margaret with
the young prince fled to her father the Duke of Angeowe.

King Edward the fourth. Anno Regni.1.
Edward the fourth, 1460
began his dominion over this Realm of England, the fourth day of March, in
the year of our lord.1460. and left the same the.ix. day of April, in the
year 1483. so he reigned.xxii. years one month and five days. He was a man of
noble courage, and great wit: but in his time was much trouble and unquietness
in the realm.

Anno. 1.
Hughe Wiche M. John Look. S. 1461
George Irelande. S.
This year the Staplers of Calless demanded of king Edward.18. thousand pou^ds,
which they had le^t him to mainteyne his wars against king Henry, but their
suit was smally regarded, and lastly denied.

Anno. 2.
Thomas Coke M. Will. Hampton S 1462
Barth James S
Margarete the Queen, and wife to Henry the sixth, landed in England about the
beginning of November, but having small succor and evil fortune: was feign to
take the seas again, and by tempest of weather, was driven into Scotland.

Anno. 3.
1463
Mathewe Philippe Goldsmyth M. Robert Basset S Th. Muscha^pe S
The lord Mountague, having the rule of the North, A battle at Exham.
discomfited king Henry, coming out of Scotland with a great power, to
recover the crown: this is called the battle of Exha^, in which were taken
the Duke of Somerset, the lord Hungerford, the lord Roas, which were after put
to death with many other.

King Edward secretly married.
King Edward was secretly married to Elizabeth Gray, late wife of sir John Graye:
at which marriage was none present, but the king, his spouse, the Duches of
Bedford, the priest, two gentle women, and a young man to help the priest to
mass. For which marriage rose great variance between the king and the earl of
Warwick, his chief fryende and mainteyner.

King Henry taken prisoner
This year was king Henry taken in a woodde in the North country, by one named
Cantlowe, and arested by the earl of Warwick, and presented to the king
Edward, and sent to the tower, where he remained long after in the Dungyon.

Anno. 4.
Raufe Iosselyn Draper M. John Tate S. 1464
John Stone S.
This year the king ordained a new coigne, A new coign
as the ryall, the angel, the half angel, and the farthyng: ryals were x.
s. the angel.vi. s. viii. d. And the grots were made of less value then they
were by.viii. d. in an ounce. The silver that before was at.ii. s. viii. d. the
ounce, was now inhaunced to.iii. s. iiii. d. the ounce, and fine gold that
before was.xxx. s. the ounce, was now inhaunced to.xl. s. the ounce.

And this year was Queen Elizabeth crowned at westmynster on Whytsondaye, or
the.xxvi. day of May.

Anno. 5.
Raufe Uerney Mercer. M. Sir He^. weuer S Will. Co^sta^tin S 1465

This year the.xi. day of February, the Queen was delivered of a daughter,
who was named Elizabeth.

Anno. 6.
S. Io. Young Grocer. M. John Brown S 1466
Henry Brice S
John Darbie Alderman, for that he refused to pay for the carriage away of a
dead dog lying at his gate, and for unmeet language, which he gave unto the
Mayor, was by a court of Aldermen assessed with the fine of five pound, which
he paid every penny.

Anno. 7.
1467
Thomas Owlegraue M. Hu^f. Heyford S Th. stalbroke S
Sir Thomas Cook, alderman of London, was accused of treason, and arraygned of
the same, and found not gyltye: but yet by reason of the Lord Treasorer, who
was not his friend, he was deteyned in prison, and could not be delivered
until he had fined with the king for.8000. pounds which he paid.

A great iustes was in Smythfyelde between the lord Scales, and the bastard
of Burgoyne.

Anno. 8.
1468
Will. Tailor Grocer. M. Symo^ Smith S. Will. Hariot S.
This William Tapler Mayor of London before named, gave to the city of London
certain tenementes, for the which the city is bound to pay for ever, at
every fiftene to be granted to the king, for all such people as shall dwell in
Cordwayner street ward, that shall be sessed at.xii. d. the piece, or under.
Which charitable work ought not to be forgotten, but remain in remembrance
to the example of them who are able to do the like.

The grudge which the earl of Warwyke had conceived against king Edward for
the forsayde marriage, declared it self openly, so that he adjoined him with
the Duke of Clarence the kings brother, and by their means styrred so the
Northren men, that they diverse times rebelled and turned the king and the
realm to much trouble. A battle at Banbery.
But shortly the king so demeaned him self, that the rebels were suppressed.
Wherefore the earl of Warwych, perceiving his part to be weakened, fled with
the duke of Clarence, and other into France.

Anno. 9.
Rich. Lee Grocer. M. Rich. Gardener S. 1469
Robert Drope S.
The Duke of Clarence, the earls of Warwycke, Penbroke, and Oxenford, landed
at Darthmouth, to whom by means of proclamations, that were publyshed in the
name of king Henry, the commons gathered in so great companies, K. Edwards fled
into Fla^ders.
that Edward fearyng his part, fled into Flanders to the Duke of Burgoyne.
Then was Henry the syxt set at liberty, and again proclaimed king by means
of the earl of Warwyck and other, and Edward proclaimed usurper of the crown:
but that continued not long.

Execution.
The earl of Worcester was beheaded at the tower hill, and his body with the
head was buried in the black friars church.

Anno. 10.
1470
Io. Stockton Mercer M. John Crosby S. John Ward. S.
Queen Elizabeth wife to Edward the fourth, being in the sanctuary of
westmynster, was delivered of a prince, who afterward was Edward the fifth.

King Edward being returned out of Flaunders, arrived in the North part of
England, with a very small company of soldiers: but by means that he used and
through his brother ye Duke of Clarence, who turned now to his part, he came
so puisaunt to London that he entered the city, and took king Henry in the
Bishops palaice, and than went against the earl of Warwick, Barnet find on
Easterday.
whom he vanquyshed and slew with his brother Marquis Mountag^e, on
Glademoreheath nere Barnet, ten miles from London. Shortly after, at
Tewkesbury, A battle at Teukesbury.
he overthrew Queen Margaret, the wife of Henry. In which battle was taken
the said Margaret with Edward the Prince her son, the Duke of Somerset, and
diverse other. King Edward again received his royalty, and was taken for
king, and discourteously slew prince Edward son of Henry the.6. after he had
taken him prisoner: Cruelty.
as by smyting him on the face with his gau^tlet: after which stroke, his
servants suddenly fell upon him, and slew him out of hand: so says Halle,
Fabian, and Raistall.

A commocion styred by the bastard Fawcombrydge, The suburbs without Algate
and Byshopsgate burnte.
and the commons of Kent, and Essex, who robbed and spoiled the suburbs of the
city of London, and fyred Bishops gate and Algate.

Henry the syxt was murdered in the tower of London, Murder.
and buried at Chertsey, and after removed to Wyndsor: he founded the College
and schole at Eaton, nyghe to Wyndsor.

Anno. 11.
1471
William Edward Gro. M. John Alleyn S. Ioh. Chelley S.
The earl of Oxenforde was sent prisoner to Guynes, where he remained prisoner,
so long as Edward the fourth reigned, which was twelve years in all, which
time the lady his wife, might never come to him, nor had any thing to live
upon, but what people of their charities would give her, or what she got by
her nedle.

Anno. 12.
1472
William Hampton Fyshmo^. M. John Brown S Th. Bledlowe. S
This Mayor was a good iusticer, he punyshed in his year many Bawdes and
Strompettes, and caused them to ride with raye hoodes, and made a pair of
Stocks to be set in every ward of the city.

Anno. 13.
1473
John Tat Mercer M. William Stocker S Robert Bellisdon S
In this year the earl of Excester was found dead in the sea, between Dover
and Calleys.

One John Gose, was burned at the tower hill for heresy. Execution ^^ tower
hill.


Anno. 14.
To. Drope Draper. M. Edmu^d Shaw S. Thomas Hill S. 1474

This Robert Drope Mayor of London, The conduite in Cornehyll enlarged.
before named, builded the east end of ye conduite in Cornehyll.

King Edward required of his subjects a benevolence, which they gave him,
and so he sailed into France with a great army, to aid the Duke of Burgoyne:
but by suit of the French king, a peace was concluded for seven years.

Anno. 15.
Robert Basset Salter. M. Hugh prince S. To. colwich S. 1475

This Mayor did sharp correction upon Bakers, for making of light bread, in so
much that he set diverse of them on the pyllory, whose names I pas^e over. And
a woman named Agnes Deyntie, was also there punyshed for selling of false
mynged butter.

Anno. 16.
Rauf Iosseleyn Dra. M. Rich. Rawfo^ S. 1476
Will. Horn.
A part of London wall new builded.
This year by the dyligence of this Mayor, the new wall of London, from
Creplegate to Byshopsgate, was made as it now is, the Mayor with his company
of the Drapers, made all that part betwyxt Alballowes church in the same wall
and Bishops gate, of their own proper costs: and the other companies made ye
other deal, which was a great work to be done in one year, considering the
purueyaunce of the stuff.

Anno. 17.
1477
Humfrey Heyford Goldsmith M. Henry Colet S. John Stocker S.
This year the Duke of Clarence second brother to the king, Murder.
being prisoner in the tower, was secretly put to death, and drowned in a
barell of maluesey, within the said tower.

Anno. 18.
1478
Richard Gardyner Mercer M. Rob. Herding S. Robert Byfeld S.
A great pestilence.
This year was a great dearth, and also a great death at London, and in dy^ers
other parts of this Realm.

Anno. 19.
Bartholo. James Draper M. Thomas Ilam S. John Ward S. 1479

This Thomas Ilam sheryffe before named, newely builded the great conduyte in
Cheap of his own proprecostes.

This year at the tower hill were Execution.
.4. felons hanged and burned for robbyng of a church.

Anno. 20.
John Brown M. William Daniel S. William Bacon S. 1480

This year the king required great sommes of money to be lent him of the
citizens of London, who after diverse assemblies granted to lend him.5000.
mark, which was repaied again in the next year following.

Anno. 21.
William Hariate Draper M. Robert ae S Will. Wykyng S 1481
Rich. Chawry. S
This year the Scotts began to stir, against whom king Edward sent the Duke
of Gloucester, and diverse other, which returned again without any notable
battle.

Anno. 22.
1482
Edmond Shawe goldsmith M. Will. White S. John Matthew S.
This Edmund Shaw builded Criple gate in London.

King Edward making great provision for war into France, ended his life
the.ix. of Apryll, in the year of our Lord.1483. when he had reigned.22.
years.i. month and v. days. He was buried at Wyndsor, leauyng after him two
sons, Edward the prince, and Richard Duke of York, with.v. daughters, as
Elizabeth that after was queen Cicelie, Anne, Katherine, and Bridget.

King Edward the fifthe. Anno. 1.
1483
EDward the fyft of the age of.xi. years began his reign over this Realm of
England the.ix. of Apryll, in the year of our Lord.1483. and was murdered by
Richard Duke of Gloucester the same year, the.22. day of June. so he
reigned.2. months and.xi. days. This Edward was never crowned, but cruelly
murdered by Richard Duke of Gloucester his unnatural uncle: who after usurped
the Crown, and was called Richard the third.

King Richard the third. Anno Regni.1.
RIchard the third brother to Edward the fourth, 1483
thorough many cruel deeds lastly obtained the Crown of England: First to
compass his wicked and dyuelyshe purpose: he put to death those noble men,
which he thought would not consent to his mind in all things: the other he
corupted with rich gifts: then by his untruth and falshode, Queen Elisabeth
took saintuary at west mynster.
he wrested from the queen Elizabeth (being than in sanctuary:) Rychard her
younger son, and brother to the Prince: Thyrdly he caused to be publyshed at
Poules Cross, by one doctor Shawe that Edward the fourth, his elder brother
was not ryghtely begotten of his mother, but by aduoutrye: and therefore that
neither he, nor his children had right to the Crown: or as some write, he
caused to be publyshed, that the prince and his brother were not ryghtfully
begotten of Queen Elizabeth: and therefore the right of the crown to be his,
which in fine he took upon him, and to make a perfect work of his cruelty,
shortly thereupon shamefully murdered the two young children in the tower of
London, Murder.
and usurped the crown two years and two months.

Anno Regni.1.
1483
Robert Bylisdo^ Habardasher. M. Tho. Norla^d S. W. Martyn S.
Grudge began between king Rychard the third, and his nere friend the Duke
of Buckyngham: in so much that for displeasure thereof, the Duke co^spired with
diverse other noble men against him, and intended to bring into the land Henry
earl of Rychmonde, as ryghtful heir to the crown. This Henry had fled into
Brytayne, fearyng the cruelty of Edward ye fourth: for which conspiracy, the
said Duke of Buckingham with diverse other, was shortly after taken and put to
death.

Henry earl of Rychemounte, aided with the Britaynes, intended to arrive in
Wales: but his navy was so scattered with a contrary wynd, that he was feign
to retire back again into Brytayne for that time. Diverse noble men detestyng
the tyranny of king Richard, fled into Britayne. and there adjoined them with
the Earl of Richemount.

Anno. 2.
Thomas Hill Grocer M. Richard Chester S Tho. Britayne S 1484
Rafe Astrie S
This Thomas Hill builded the Cundyte in Gracious street.

The noble prince Henry earl of Richmount, with a small company of Frenchemen,
landed at Mylford haven, nygh Pembroke, whose coming when it was heard of in
Wales, diverse noble men with their retinue, forsakyng Rychard, gathered to him
in great number: so that his strength in short space greatly increased. At a
village nere to Leicester, called ^osworthe, he met with his enemies; where
between them was foughten a sharp battle: A battle at Bosworth.
In conclusion, king Richard with diverse other, was slain, and Henry obtained
a noble victory: After which conquest, he was immediately crowned king of
England in the field: K. Richard slain in the field.
and the dead corpse of king Richard was brought to Leycester and there buried
at the Gray friars church.

King Henry the seventh. Anno Regni.1.
1485
Henry the seventh began his reign over this realm of England the.22. day of
August in the year of our Lord.1485. and deceased in the year.1509.
the.xxii. day of Apryll: So he reigned.xxiii. years, and.viii. months: he
was a prince of marvelous wisdom and polycie, and of great justice,
temperaunce, and gravity. He so behaved him in the time of his Reign, that
not withstanding many and great occasions of trouble unquietness and war.
He kept his Realm in right good rule and order. Wherefore he was greatly
esteemed and reverenced of foreyne princes.

Anno. 1.
1485
Hugh Brice M. Goldsmyth M. John Tate S Io. Swanne S
This year master Thomas Ilam Alderman of London and merchant of the Staple
at Calaice new made the great Cundite in Cheap, The great Cundyte in Chepe
new builded.
of his own goods.

The King ordained a number of chosen Archers, The first yeomen of the guard.
and other strong and hardy persons, to give daily attendance on his person,
whom he named yeomen of his guard.

This year was the sweatyng sycknes, A sweating sycknes.
of the which a wonderful multitude dyed: and in London besides other there
dyed.ii. Majors, within.viii. days, and.vi. aldermen.

This year the beautyfull Cross in Cheap was new builded and made. Arnolds
chronicle of London. The Cross in Cheap builded.
Toward the buyldyng whereof, Thomas Fysher mercer, gave.vi. C. marks.

Anno. 2.
Sir Henry Colet mercer M. John Perciuall S. 1486
Hugh Clopto^ S.
This year the king married Elisabeth eldest daughter of Edward the fourth: King
Henry the.vii. married lady Elisabeth, daughter to K. Edward the.iiii.
by which means the two famylyes of York and Lancaster, the which had long
caused division, was knytt together in one.

About this time Francis Louell, and Humfrey Stafford rebelled in ye north:
with them was Martin Swart. Which commotion was quieted by the policy of the
Duke of Bedford, A battle at Stoke the 16 day of June
but not without blood shed: For there was slain the Earl of Lyncoln, the
lord Louell, Martyn Swart, and other, above.iiii. thousand.

And this year was borne prince Arthure, in the month of September.

Anno. 3.
1487
William Horn Salter M. John Fenkyll S. william Remingto^ S.
This year was queen Elizabeth crowned at Westmynster upon saint Katherines
day.

Anno. 4.
1488
Robert Tate Mercer M. william Isake S Rafe Tinley S
This year was a task of the.x. penny of all men's goods and lands: A great
tax, the Earl of Northumberlande slain.
through which the commons of the north slew the Earl of Northumberlande,
wherefore Chamberlayne their capitayn with other was hanged at York.

Anno. 5.
William white Draper M. william Capel S 1489
John Broke S
This year one Roger Shauelocke slew him self: Desperation.
For whole goods was much busynes between the kings amner and the sheryffe.

Anuo.6.
John Mathewe mercer M. Henry Coot S. To. Revel S. 1490
Hugh He^berton S.
Sir Robert Chamberlain beheaded. Execution.


This year the King required a benevolence, which was to him granted toward his
journey into France.

This year Creplegate of London was new builded at the costs and charges of
sir Edmu^d Shaw goldsmith late Mayor of the same city. Creplegate of London
builded.


In July was Henry the kings second son, borne at Grenewiche.

This year the beautiful Cundyte in Gracious street, Arnoldes cronicles of
London.
was begone to be builded: The stone work whereof was fynished in the
year.1494. The Co^dite in Gracious street.
But the first water ran out thereof, on the.xix. day of March, in the
year.1503. the.xix. year of Henry the.vii. and not before. Which Cundyte was
builded at the costs and charges of sir Thomas Hill grocer: as it does appear
by certain verses, written on the same Cundyte, as hereafter follows.

Thomas Hill knight, late Mayor of this city,
with his wife dame Elisabeth, of their charity
For the love of God, and weal of the co^monaltie
Of their costs only, this thing did edyfie,
Out of the ground with all things necessary.
Anno. 7.
1491
Hugh Clopton mercer M. Tho. Wood S. Will. Brown S.
This year king Henry took his voyage into France with a great army to aid
the Brito^s against the french king

Anno. 8.
1492
Will. Martin skinner M. Will. Purchase S will. Welbecke S
This year was a peace concluded between the kings of England and France, and
king Henry returned again into England. A fray in London against the Styliard
men.
And this year was a fraye or ryote made upon the Easterlynges or Stilliard
men, by Mercers servants, and other: For the which diverse of them were sore
punished, and the chief aucthors were kept long in prison.

Anno. 9.
Rafe ^stry fish monger M. Robert Fabia^ S 1493
John wynger S
This year wheat was sold for.vi.d. the bushel, Good cheap wheat and baye
salt.
and baye salt at.iii.d. ob. the bushel.

Anno. 10.
Rich. Chawry salter M. Nicol. Alwin S. 1494
John warner S.
This year was white hearing sold at.xl.d. a barell being good. Herrynges at
iii.s.iiii.d. ye barreli.


Diverse gentylmen in England were appeached of treason, and for favoring the
conspiracy of Parkyn Warbeck: of which some were pardoned, and some put to
death.

Perkyn Warbecke, which by the counsel of Margarete of Burgoyne, Perkyn
warbecke.
namyng himself Richard of York: King Edwardes second son, arrived in
Kente: where he was driven back by the Uplandyshe men, and other of the
inhabitauntes of the countreye, with the loss of diverse of his men: Great
execution of.160. persons.
and shortly after were hanged an hundred and three score persons of the
forenamed Rebels, in diverse and sundry coasts of England.

The.v. captains were Mountford, Corbet, Whitebelt, Quintin, and Genyne.

Anno. 11.
1495
Sir Henry Colet mercer M. Tho. Kneisworth S Henry Somer S
The Scots brake into the north parts of England by the setting on of Perkyn
Werbecke, and did much harm to the borderers.

Anno. 12.
1496
John Tate mercer M. John Shaw S Rich. Haddon S
This John Tate builded saint Anthonies in London: a goodly foundation, as
shall hereafter be declared.

Where king Henry made preparation for war into Scotland, Black heath ficide.
by means of a payment that was granted to the King by act of parliament, a
new commotion was made by the Commons of Cornwall: which under the leadyng of
the lord Audeley, with Mighell Joseph the Black smyth, and diverse other came
to Black heath, where the king met with them, and discomfited the rebels,
Execution.
and took their Captains, which were shortly after, drawn, hanged, and
quartered: The lord Audeley was beheaded at the tower hill, the.xxviii. day of
June.

King Henry sent an army into Scotland under the guydyng of the Earl of
Surrey, and the lord Neuell, which made sharp war upon the Scots.

A marriage concluded between prince Arthur, and lady Katherine the kings
daughter of Spayn.

Perkyn Werbecke landed again in Cornwall, Perkin Warbeck besieges Excetor.
and assaulted the town of Excetour and other places: but finally he took the
saintuarie of Beaudly, and was after pardoned his life.

Anno. 13.
William purchase mercer M. Bartholo. Read S. 1497
Tho. windought S.
A peace proclaimed between the kings of England and Scotland for the term
of both their lives.

Perkyn Warbecke endeavored to steal away secretly out of the land: but he was
taken again by his kepers, and by the kings commandment cast in the Tower
of London: where after he was showed at westminster, and in Chepe on
scaffoldes, and stocked, to the great wonderment of many people.

This year one Godfrey a carpenter, took down the Wethercock of Paul's and
set it up again. Edward Haule.


English marchantes received with procession.
This year the English merchants (being long absent out of Flaunders) coming
into Flaunders with merchandise, were received into And warpe with general
procession: so glad was the town of their returnyng, which was by their
absence sore hyndred and impoueryshed.

Anno. 14.
1498
Sir John Perciuall mar. tailer M. Tho. bradbury S Stephen Ienins S
Execution at saint Thomas watrynges.
At saint Thomas Watryng a strypling was put to execution, which called
himself Edward Earl of Warwycke, and son of George Duke of Clarence:
which George since the beginning of King Henry's reygne was kept secretly in
the tower of London. S. Antonies church in London builded.
This year master John Tate alderma^ of London began to edify S. Anthonies
church iu London with a notable free schole to the same adioynynge, and also
one alms house for poor people.

The.xvi. day of July, being sunday, and the next sunday following.xii.
persons bare faggots at Paul's cross.

Anno. 15.
Nicholas Alwyn mercer M. James wilforde S. 1499
Richard Bronde S.
This year the.xvi. day of November was arraygned at Westmynster, Perkin
werbecke and other hanged, drawn and quartered at London.
Perkyn Warbeck and.iii. other, which Perkyn, and one John a Water, were
executed at Tyborne, the.xxiii. day of the same month of November. Execution
at London.


And soon after, on the.xxviii. day of November was the Earl of Warwike put
to death at the Tower hylle, and one Blewet and Atwood at Tyborne.

This year was a great death in London: A great pestilence.
Whereof (after Fabyan) dyed.xx. thousand, but after Halle his Chronicle.xxx.
thousand.

In May the King and Queen sailed to Calaice: The king and queen sailed to
Calyce.
and at saynct Peter's, they met with the Duke of Burgoyne,

Anno. 16.
1500
William Remington Fishmo^ger M. John Dawes S. william Stead S.
Arnolds chronicles. Richmonde Baynards castle and Grenewich builded
This year the King builded new his manor at Shene, and changed the name
thereof, and named it Richemont: and he builded new his place called Baynardes
castle in London, and repaired his place at Grenewiche, with much other
building.

Sir Edmund de la Poole, Duke of Suffolk, departed secretly: by mean of whom,
was like to have been a new insurrection.

King Henry trouthplighted his daughter Margaret to James the King of Scotts:
and the.4. day of October landed at Plymmouth, Katherin daughter of the king of
Spain: s. Anthonies church fynyshed.
and this year was fynished by master Tate the church of saint Anthonies.

Anno. 17.
1501
sir John Shawe goldsmith M. Sir Lau. Ailmer S Henry Head S
This sir John Shawe mayre of London before named, caused the kitchens and
other houses of office to be bnylded at the Guylde hall of London, and sens
that time the Mayors feasts has been there kept: where as before that time
they were kept either at the Grocers or the merchant Taylers Halle.

On saint Erkenwalds day, prince Arthur, Prince Arthur married.
being but.xv. year old, was married unto Katherin, daughter to Ferdinando
King of Spain, the.xiiii. of November, Arnolde.
which Arthur shortly after departed this mortal life at Ludlow and was buried
at Worcester.

The dyche from Thames to Holborn bridge was new cast.

Anno. 18.
Bartho. Read Goldsmith M. Henry Keble S 1502
Nico. Nines S
In this year began the new work of the Kings chapel at Westmynster, The
death of Queen Elisabeth.
and Elizabeth Queen of England dyed at the Tower of London in chyldebed, and
was buried at westminster. Shortly after was dame Margarete the Kings
daughter, The king of Scotts married.
married to the King of Scotts.

This year the fellowship of Taylers in London purchased a grant of the King
to be called Merchaunts Tayloures.

Anno. 19.
1503
sir william Capell Draper M. Christo. Hawes S. Robert wattes S. Tho. Granger S.
The.xxi. day of November, was a dreadful fire upon the north end of London
bridge. Fire on London bridge.
And upon the.vii. day of January were certain houses consumed with fire
against saint Botulphes church in Thames street: and the xxvii. day of March
was an house burned against saint Martins le grand, and the same day was hurt
done with fire in the parish of saint Peter the poor.

This year was holden a parliament where was ordained a new coin of silver: A
new coin
as grotes, half grotes, and shyllinges with half faces: and in the same
parliament was granted to the King the loan of.36000. li.

Anno. 20.
1504
John Winger Grocer M. Roger Achilley S William Brown S
This year the lyberties of the City of London were again confirmed.

Anno. 21.
Thomas Kneisworth Fishmo^ger M. Rich. Shore S. Rog. Grove S. 150^

This Thomas Kneysworthe Mayor of London, The cundite at Bishops gate builded.
of his own goods, builded the Cundyte at Bishops gate. Moreover, he gave
to the company of the Fishmongers, certain tenements, for the which they be
bound to find iiii. scholars that study art: two to be at Oxenforde, the
other two at Cambridge: every of them to have.iiii. li. the year for their
exhibition. They be bound also to give to.xiii. aged poor people of their
company, to every of them every weke.viii.d. and to every of them at
Bartylmeutide a winter garment of frise, or such like for ever. And also to
give to ye prysons of Newgate and Ludgate, every year.xi.s. whose notable
works by him done, are well worthy of remembrance, and to be followed of others.

Edmonde dela Poole was conveyed through the city unto the tower of London,
and there left as prisoner.

This year Philip king of Castile and his wife, The king of Castyle la^ded in
England.
were weather driven into England, as they were passing toward Spayn^, who
were honorably received by the Earl of Arundell at the kings appointment
with.iii. C. horses all by torchelyght.

Anno. 22.
1506
Sir Rich. Haddon mercer M. will. Copinger S Tho. Johnson S will. fitz william S
Prisoners delivered.
This year the king of his goodness delivered out all prisoners in London,
which lay for.xl. s. and under.

Anno. 23.
1507
William Brown mercer M. William Butler S. John Kyrkeby S.
In the end of April dyed william Brown mayor, and for him was chosen
Laurence Ailemer draper, who served out that year.

This year sir William Capell was put in suite by the King for certain
things by him done in the time of his Maioraltie.

Anno. 24.
1503
Stephen Genings M. M. tailer M. Tho. Ermeu S. Rich. Smith S.
This year was finyshed the goodlye hospital of the Sauoy, The hospital of
the Sauoy builded.
nere unto Charing cross, which was a notable foundation for the pore done by
king Henry. the seventh.

This year dyed this most noble and famous prince king Henry the seventh which
was in the year.1509. the.xxii. day of April, The new chapel at Westminster
builded by king Henry the.vii.
when he had reigned.23. years, and eight months, and was buried at
Westminster in the new chapel, which he had caused to be builded: and left
behynd him Henry prince of Wales, which after him succeeded, lady Margaret
queen of Scotts, and lady Mary promised to Charles king of Castile.

King Henry the eight Anno Regni.1.
THe renoumed prince Henry the eight, 1509
being.xviii. years of age, succeeded his father in the governance of this
realm, and began his reign the.xxii. day of April, in the year of our
Lord.1509. and deceased in the year.1546. the.xxviii. day of January: so he
reigned.37. years.ix. months and.vi. days. Of personage he was tall and
myghtie, in wit and memory excellent: of such majesty tempered with
humanity and gentleness, as was comely in so great a prince.

Margaret mother to Henry the.viii. builded.ii. colleges in Cambridge: and
Willyam bishop of Lyncolne builded Brasenos in Oxenford.

King Henry married lady Katherin his first wife.
King Henry married the lady Katherin late wife to prince Arthure.

Richard bishop of Wynchester builded Corpus Christi College in Oxenforde.

Anno. 1.
1509
Thomas Bradbury mercer M George Monoxe S John Doket S
This year sir Richard Empson knight, and Edmund Dudley Esquier, who had been
great counsaylours, to the late king Henry the seventh, were beheaded at the
tower hill the.xvii. day of August: Whose attachement (whereupon followed ye
execution) was thought to be procured by the malice of them, who with their
authority, in the late Kings days were offended, orels to shyft the noise of
the straight execution of penal statutes in the late Kings days, by
punishment of those persons, so says Halle. This Edmonde Dudley compyled one
notable book, and named it the tree of common wealth: The oryginall copy
whereof, I have seen, though rudely written, worthy (for the excellency
thereof) to be written with letters of gold. A copy whereof, I have given to
the right honorable lord, the Earl of Leicester.

Sir Wyllia^ Fitz wyllia^s was disfranchysed because he would not be sheriff.

This year master doctor Colet deane of Poules erected a free schole in Paul's
church yard in London, Paul's scole builded.
and committed the ouersyght thereof to the masters and wardeynes of the
company of Mearcers: because him self was borne in London, and son of Henry
Colet, who was a Mearcer, and Mayor of London.

Anno. 2.
Henry Keibell mercer M. John Milborn S John Rest S 1510

Henry, the first son of king Henry the right, was borne on new years day: for
ioy^ whereof, a great iustes was kept at Westminster: and on saint Mathewes day
following the child dyed.

Anno. 3.
1511
Roger Achiley Draper M. Nico. Shelton S Tho. Mirfyn S
King Henry sent the lord Darcy with a goodly company of men into Spain to
aid the king his father in law against the Moors: but ere he arrived, a
peace was concluded between them: wherefore shortly after he returned home
again.

The same time sir Edward Poynyngs (accompanied with the lord Clinton, and
diverse other, was sent into Gelderland, with.xv. C. archers, to aid the
prince of Castile, at the request of Margaret Duches of Sauoye, and Regent of
Flanders.

Sir Edmond Haward and the lord Thomas Haward took Andrew Barton, and.150.
Scots, with.ii. great ships.

The king of Scotts required his shyps that were lately taken to be restored,
according to the league: but answer was made by king Henry, that the matter
perteined nothing to the league because that Andrew Barton was a pirate, and
robber on the seas.

The.xv. day of January was holden a parliament, in the which two fiftenes and
two tenthes of the clergy were granted to aid the king in his wars, that he
intended against the French king.

Anno. 4.
William Copinger fishmo^ger M. Rob. Holdernes S Rich. Haddon S 1512
Rob. Fe^rother S
This year was finyshed the beautiful steple with the lantern of Bowechurche
in cheap.

The lord Marquis Dorset (with diverse other lords and knights) was sent into
Spain with an army of.13000. men, who (a good part of the summer) did much
harm in Guyon by spoilyng the countries. But in winter returned by means of a
flixe, which fell among his men.

Sir Edward Haward admiral of England, with a great navy scowred the seas,
and then went toward Britayne.

King Henry sent forth a navy of.xxv. ships: among the which the Regent a
ship royal was chief.

Sir Edward Haward lord admiral of England through his to much hardiness
was slain in Britayn, after who^ his brother sir Thomas Hawarde was made
admiral by the King.

The nauies of England and France metynge at Britayne Baye, A battle on the
sea.
fought a cruel battle, in the which the regent of England and a Caricke
of France, being crappled together, were burned and their captains with their
men all drowned, the english capitayn was sir Thomas Kneuet, who had with him
700. men, in the french carricke was sir Piers Morgan with.900. men.

Anno 5.
1513
William Brown mercer M. John Dawes S. John Bridges S. Roger Basforde S.
King Henry being confederate with the Emperor and the king of Spayn, passed
with a great power into France, where having in wages under his banner the
Emperor Maximilian, and all the nobility of Brabant, Flaunders and Holland: he
discomfited the whole power of France, Turney and Turwyn.
and conquered Turwyn and the great city of Turney. In this time the king of
Scots, not withstandyng that he was sworn on the sacrament to keep peace,
invaded this land with a mighty Army: but by the good diligence of the Queen,
and the policy and manhood of the Earl of Surrey the kings lieutenant, he was
him self slain, with.xi. of his earls, and the Scotts discomfyted, but not
without great loss of Englyshemen.

Before this time the towns about London, Edward Haule.
as Islington, Horton, and such other had so enclosed the common fields with
hedges and dyches, that neither the young men of the city might shoot, nor the
ancient persons walk for their pleasure, except either their bows and arrows
were broken or taken away, or the substanciall persons arested or endited,
saying: That no Londoner should go out of the city, but in the high ways.
This saying sore grieved the Lo^doners, and suddenly this year a great number
of the City, assembled in a morning, and a turner in a fools cote came crying
thorough the city, shouels and spades: and so many people followed, yt it was
wonder and within a short space all the hedges about the towns were cast down,
and the d^ches filled, and every thing made plain. The kings counsel hearing
of this assembly, came to the graye friars, and sent for the Mayor and
counsel of the city to know the cause, which declared to them the noysance
done to ye citisens, and their commodities and liberties taken from them,
though they would not, yet the co^minaltie which were anoyed would pluck up
and remedy the same. When the kings counsel had heard the answer, they
dissimuled the matter, and commanded the Mayor to see that no other thing were
attempted, and to call home the citisens, which when they had done their
enterprise, came home before the kings counsel, and the Mayor departed without
any more harm doing: and so after the fields were never hedged.

Sir John Wallop burned diverse tounes and villages in Normandy.

Anno. 6.
1514
George Monore Draper M. James Yarforde S. John Mundye S.
A peace concluded between England and France, and Jews the french king
coupled in marriage with lady Mary the kings sister: on new years day
following, he ended his life: wherefore king Henry sent again for his sister by
the duke of Suffolk and other.

This year Richard Hunne a marcha^t taylour of London was found hanged in
Lollers tower.

Anno. 7.
sir william Butler grocer M. Henry worley S. Richard Gray S. 1515
William Baily S.
Lady Mary king Henry's daughter was borne at Grenewich in February. Lady Marye
borne at Grenewyche.


Lady Mary the kings sister before married to the French king, returned into
England: and shortly after was married to the duke of Suffolk.

Margaret Queen of Scotts, king Henry's eldest sister, fled into England, and
lay at Harbottell, where she was delivered of a child, called Margaret. In
May she came to London, where she tarried a whole year before she departed
into Scotland.

Anno. 8.
John Rest Grocer M. Tho. Seimer S. Rich. Thursto^ S. 1516

A great frost.
This year, was such a frost, that all men with carts might pass between
Westminster and Lambeth.

All May day.
On May even this majors year, the beginning of the.ix. year of king Henry was
an insurrection of young persons, against aliens: of the which diverse were put
to execution, with their captain John Lincoln, a broker, and the resydue
came to Westminster with halters about their necks, and were pardoned. This
was called Evil May day, whereof ye may read in Edward Hall.

And in May the Queen of Scotts returned to her country again.

Anno. 9.
1517
Sir Thomas Erme^ Goldsmith M Th. Balorie S. Rich. Symo^ S.
Many dyed in England of the sweating sickness, The sweatyng sycknes.
and in especially about London: wherefore the term was one day kept at
Oxenford, and adiourned again to westminster.

The admiral of France came into England as ambassador with a great company
of gentylmen.

The city of Turney was delivered again into the French kings hand: The
City of Turney yielded french.
for the which he should pay vi. C. thousand crowns: and for the castle
that the king builded.iiii.C. thousand and 23000. pounds turnoys.

A peace was concluded between the kings of England France and Castile for
term of their lives.

Anno. 10.
Thomas Myrfyn Skinner M. John Alleyn S. 1518
James Spencer S.
This year the Earl of Surrey was sent into Irelande as deputy, and the
Earl of Kyldare was of his office dyscharged.

Anno. 11.
sir James Yarforde Mercer M. John wilkinson S. Nicol. partrige S. 1519

This year was great preparation made for the kings going into France to mete
the french king at Arde.

As King Henry was at Canterburye with the Queen, in a readynesse to have
passed the sea, he heard of the Emperoures coming, with whom he met at
Dover, and accompanied him to Canterbury: where after the Emperor had saluted
the queen his aunt: he took shypping into Flanders: the last day of May king
Henry passed over to Calais, and met with Francis the French King, at the
camp between Arde and Guysnes: where was great triumphs and many goodly
sightes, in so sumptuous manner, as the like had not ben seen. Immediately after
he met with the Emperor, with whom he went to Grauelyn, and the emperor
returned with him to Calais, where he had great chere: after which time they
departed, and king Henry returned into this realm.

Anno. 12.
1520
sir John Bruge Draper M. John Skeuingto^ S John Remble S
In this Majors year the.xvii. day of May, which was in the.13. year of the
King, The duke of Buckyngha^ beheaded.
was the duke of Buckyngham beheaded at London for treason: as ye may read at
large in Edward Hall his chronicles, the.12. and.13. year of Henry the.viii.
his body with the head was buried at the friar Augustins at London.

King Henry wrate a book against Luther, and therefore the bishop of Rome named
him defender of the faith. To which book Luther answered very sharply,
nothing sparing the authority or majesty of the king.

The french King attached all English men's goods at Bordeaux, and deteyned
the kings tribute, and the French Queen's dower.

All frenchemen were attached in the city of London, and cast in prison.

The.v. day of July the cardinal rode through London to Dover to mete with the
Emperor, being accompanied with ii. Earls.xxxvi. knights, an.C.
gentilmen.viii. bishops.x. abbots.xxx. chaplains all in velvet and satyn,
and.700. yeomen.

This year was a great pestilence and death in London, Edward Halle.
and other places.

Anno. 13.
Sir John Milborne Draper M. John Britain S. 152^
Tho. Pargeter S.
This sir John Mylborne (to his great commendation and the ensaumple of other
the worshypfull of this city, builded certain almost houses, wherein be
placed.xiii. aged poor people, who have their dwellynges rent free, and
also.ii. shillinges.vi. d. the piece paid to them the first day of every
month, for ever.

King Henry first nawed defender of the says.
The second day of February, the Cardinal declared, how the bishop of Rome
had sent king Henrye the fif^e of defender of the christen faith, and to his
successors for ever.

The Emperors coming to London.
This Charles the fyfthe Emperor of Rome came into England, and was honorably
received into London, by the Mayor, the Aldermen, and commons of the City, the
syrt of June, the king him self accompanying him: from thens he went to
Wyndsour, and sat in the stall of the garter. At this time was talk between
the Emperor and king Henry, for the marriage of Lady Mary the kings daughter,
being about the age of.vii. years, after great feasts iustes and honorable
entertaynment, he departed to Hampton, and sailed from thense into Spayn.
During this time, the Earl of Surrey Lord Admyrall burnt Morles in Britayne,
and than retuurned into the Realm. Not long after (having an army appointed
to him by the King) he passed over to Calaice, and entered Pycardye, and brent
diverse towns and castelles. He besieged Hesdyng, but because winter drew
nere, he raised his siege, and returned home.

The Duke of Albanye began to enter this land with a great army: but hearing
that the Earl of Shrewesbury was coming, he took a truce for vi. months.

Anno. 14.
Sir John Mondye goldsmith M. John Rudston S Jo. Champneis S 152^

The lord Rosse and lord Dacres of the North, burned the Town of Kelsey in
Scotland, with four score Uyllages, and also did overthrow eyghtene towers
of stone, with all their bulwarks.

The Emperor Charles King Henry of England. Ferdinando, duke of Austrige, the
bishop of Rome, the city of Venice, and diverse other in Italy were confederate
against the french men.

The Rhodes taken by the turks.
The Turks besieged Rhodes, and on Christmas day took it, to the great shame
and rebuke of Christen men.

The lord Marquis Dorset wardeyn of the East marches, brent diverse villages,
holds, and other places in Scotland.

The king of Denmark came into England.
The.xv. day of June the King of Denmark, and his Queen aryued at Dover, and
the.xxii. day of June, they came to London, and lay at the bishop of Bathes
place.

King Henry by letters complained unto the princes of Germany of Luther, who
had written to sharply against him, and desired them that he might not
translate the new Testament into the vulgar tongue.

Sharp war and often skyrmishes between the borderers of England Scotland
and France.

The Earl of Surrey burned.37. villages in Scotland, and despoiled ye country
from the east marches to the west, and ouerthrewe diverse holds and castles.

Anno. 15.
Sir Tho. Baldrie Mercer. M. Michel English S Nich. Ienyngs S 1523

In Dece^ber, at the city of Couentry one Philip Scholemaister to the kings
henxme^ Christopher Pykeryng clarke of the Larder, and Anthony Maynuile
gentlemen, intended to have taken the kings treasure of his subsidy, as the
Colectors of the same came toward London, and therewith to have araysed me^ and
taken the Castle of Kylyngworth, and then to have made battle against the
king: for the which they were drawn, hanged, and quartered at tyborne.
The.xi. day of February, the rest that were taken were executed at Coue^tree.

The Duke of Suffolk, with many other lords and knights, was sent in to
France by king Henry, with an army of.10000. men: who passing the water of
Some without battle, took diverse towns and castelles, and destroyed the
country before him. In December he returned again into England.

The earl of Surrey brent Iedworth in Scotland, and took diverse holds.

The Duke of Albanye, besieged the castle of Warke, and had in a redynes a
great army to invade England, but when he heard the earl of Surrey was
coming, he fled back into Scotland.

The soldiers of Guynes took a great booty at a fair in the town of
Morguyson, and sir Robert Iernyngham, and certain dimilaunces of Calys, took
diverse French prisoners.

Anno. 16.
1524
Sir Will. Bailie Draper. M. Raufe Dodmer S Wyllia^ Roche S
The first weke of Lent, the Lord of Camphier and other, came from the
Emperor to king Henry. The bishop of Dunkell and other Ambassadors, came out
of Scotland, and a legate from the bishop of Rome, to entreat a peace between
England and France.

Sir Raufe a Fanwycke, Leonarde Musgraue, and bastard Hearon, were slain in
Scotland, by to much hardines in pursuing their enemies: at which time.300.
Scotts were taken prisoners by the englyshemen.

Clement bishop of Rome, sent unto king Henry in token of great love, The
golden rose sent from Rome.
the golden rose, that he uses every year to consecrate before Easter.

Great triumph in England for ye taking of ye French king by ye Emperor.

The Cardinal obtained license of the bishop of Rome, The Cardinal first
suppressed abbeis
to suppress certain abbayes, to the intent to erecte two colleges, one at
Oxenforde, an other at Ipswyche, and to indue the^ with lands: which
colleges he began so sumptuously, that it was not like they would come to
good end.

King Henry was like to have been drowned by leapyng over a diche in followyng
his hawk. King Henry in ieopardie to have been drowned.


This year was the castle or tower, set up at Grenewyche.

This year the coin was enhaunsed in England. The coin enhaunced.


Luther by the counsel of Christerne king of De^marck, and certain other,
wrate very humble letters unto king Henry of England, acknowleging a fault in
him self, that he had written before so sharply unto him: but when the king in
his answer blamed Luther much, and noted him of lyghtnes and inconstancy,
Luther repented his doing, and wrate that he was deceived when he thought to
find John Baptist in princes courts and among them that were arrayed in purple.

A murmuring was in all parts of the realm for payment of money, and in
Suffolk.4000. men rose against the Duke and other commissioners, which were
appeased by the Duke of Norfolk and other.

A truce between England and France for a certain space, and Ambassadors
were sent into Denmark for restoring of their king (which was then in
England) but the Danes would grant nothing, they did hate him so extremely
for his cruelty.

Anno. 17.
1525
Sir John Allen Mer. M. John Calton. S. Christ. Askew S.
The.xi. day of February being shrofe sunday, five men of the Styliarde, did
penance, three of them bare fagottes at Paul's, and two of them bare tapers of
wax. And an Austen friar, called doctor Barnes of Cambrydge, bare a faggot at
Paul's the same day, and there was present at that time the lord Cardinal
with a.xi. bishops, ye bishop of Rochester made the sermon against Martin
Luther and his doctrine.

The same year the.vi. day of September, The goulde enhaunced.
was a proclamation for goulde, the French crown was valued at.iiii. s. vi.d
the Angel at.vii.s. vi.d. the Ryall at.xi.s.iii.d. and so every piece after that
value.

Anno. 18.
sir Tho. Seymer Mercer M. Ste. Pecock S 1526
Nich. La^bert S
The third day of July, which was in the.xix. year of king Henry, the lord
Cardynall of England with great po^pe rode through Cheap, and so toward
France, where he concluded a league between king Henry and the French king,
which both sent their defiaunce to the Emperor, and a strong army into
Italy, to deliver the bishop, and drive the Emperors power out of that
country. The great master of France, came to London with great triumph, for
the conclusion of ye ^ornamed league.

The.xv. day of July, was one Harman drawn from newgate to tyborne, Execution
at Tyborne.
and there hanged for coyninge of false gold.

Also in July and Auguste, was the sleweis made in Fynsebury field, to co^uey
the ill waters over the town dyche by pipes of lead into ye river of Thames.

Great scarcity of bread.
In the same year was such scarcity of bread at London, and all England, that
many people died for defaulte thereof. And the bread carts that came from
Stratforde to London, were met by the way at Miles end by the cytyzens of
London, that the lord Mayor and Sheryfes of London, were feign to go and
rescue the said bread carts, and see them brought to the markettes appointed
for the same.

Anno. 19.
1527
Sir James Spencer Uyntener. M. John Hardy S. Will. Hollis S.
General peace proclaimed.
The first day of November, the lord Cardynall with the Ambassadors of
France, were at Paul's, and there was proclaimed a general peace between king
Henry of England and Fraunces the French king, during their lives, and a twelne
months and a day after.

The.viii. day of December, three scholars of Cambridge, and one Forster a
gentilma^ of ye court, bare fagots at Paul's.

The fyfth day of January, the Cardinal with many bishops, abbottes, and
priors, went a procession at Paul's, General procession.
and sang Le deum, for the escapyng of ye Pope from the Emperor.

The.xiii. day of January, was a great fire at Andrewe Moris keye in Thames
street, Fire in Thames street.
and at an other keye by it, where was much harm done.

This year a french Crayer of.xxx. tonne, being ma^ned with.xxxviii. french
men, A ship chased to the tower wharfe.
and a flemish crayer of.xxviii. to^ne and.xxiiii. flemynges, metyng at
Margate, the one chased the other along the river of Thames to the tower
wharffe of London: where sir Edmond Walsyngham, lieftenant of the Tower, stayed
them both, and took both the captains and their men.

The vii. day of April, the lord master of the Rhodes, came to London and
lay at saint Iohnes in Smythfielde.

The.17. day of June, ye term was adiourned to Mighelmas after, A sweating
sickness.
because of the sweting sickness that the^ reigned in London, and other places
of this Realm.

This year because of ye sweting sickness there was no such watch in London at
Midsomer, as beforetime had he^ acustomed.

The vii. day of October, came to london a legate from Rome, A legate came from
Rome.
called Cardinal Campegius, who afterward with Cardinal Wolsey, sat at the
Black friars in London, where before them was brought in question the kings
marriage with Queen Katheryne, as to be unlawful, but they long time
protracted the conclusion of the matter, which delay king Henry took very
displeasauntly: in so much that shortly after, the Cardinal Wolsey was
deposed from the Chauncelorshyp of England, etc. as ye may read in Edward
Haule.

Anno. 20.
1528
S. John Rudstone Draper. M. Ra. warre^ S. John Long S.
The.xxix. day of November, the parysh priest of Honey lane, and a young man
that some time was usher of saint Anthonies schole, bare fagottes at Paul's,
and two other, one a ducheman, the other an Englysheman, bare tapers of ware.

The.viii. day of May, a pouchmaker bare a faggot at Paul's. The.vi day of
September, one John Scot woodmonger did penance in Chepe, and other places of
ye city, going in his shert bare legged and bare footed, and proclamation made
at the standard, at Leden hal, and at Erace church upon his demeanor against
the Mayor Aldermen, and the shirifes.

The.xviii. day of October, was the Cardynall discharged of his
Chauncelorshyp, The Cardinal discharged of the chauncelorshyp.
and the king seized al his goods and his palaice at Westmynster, called York
place into his hands, and the 25. day of the same month, the Cardinal went
from York place to Ashere with xxx. persons and no more, and there to abide
till he knew further the kings pleasure.

The.xxvi. day of October, S. Thomas More made chauncelour.
was sir Thomas More made Chauncelour of England, and sworn and kept his rome
all one day.

Wyllyam Tyndale translated the new testament into englysh, The new testament
printed in english.
and printed the same beyond the seas.

A peace was agreed upon, between king Henry of England, the Emperor, the
French king, the king of Boheme, and Hungary. The third day of October, the
king came to his place of Brydewell, A parliament at the Blackfriars.
and there he and his nobles put on their robes of parliament, and so came to
the black friars, and there sat in their robes, and began the parliament.

Anno. 21.
1529
Sir Raufe Dodmer Mercer M. Mich. Dormer S Wall. Cha^pion S
Commandment was given by king Henry to the bishops, that Tyndales
translation of the new testament should be called in, and that they should see
an other set forth to the profit of the people.

Fire in the Uyntrie.
The xiii. day of January, was a great fire in the Uintry, and much hurt done.

Execution at the tower hyl
The.24. day of January were.iii. me^ one a Gascoyne, and two Irishe men,
drawn from newgate to the tower hill, and there hanged and quartered, for
cou^terfeityng the kings coin.

Execution in Finsbury field.
The.xvi. day of May, was a gybet set up in Fynsbury field, and a man hanged in
chains for murderyng doctor Miles Uicar of saint Brydes.

Execution.
The.v. day of July, was one hanged in chains in Fynsbury field, for murdering
mistres Kneuets maid at saint Antolins parish.

To send to the court of Rome forbidden.
King Henry, upon occasion of delay yt the bishop of Rome made in his
controversy of diuorceme^t, and through displeasure of such reports as he
heard made of him, by the Cardinals to the court of Rome, and thirdly pricked
forward by some counselors, to follow the example of the Germaynes: lastly
caused proclamation to be made in September, forbyddynge all his subjects to
purchase any manner of thing from the court of Rome

Anno. 22.
sir Th. Pargitour Salter M. will. Dau^cie S 1530
I. Choping S
The.v. day of April, was a cook named Rychard Rose, One boiled in Smythfield.
boiled in a cauldron of brass in Smythfield, for poisoning ye bishop of
Rochesters servants and other.

The Cardinal being before cast and co^uict in a praemunire: The Cardynall
deceased.
in November was arrested by the earl of Northumberland at Cawood, and died at
the abbey of Leicester, the.28 day of Noue^ber, and was there buried, as he
should have been brought to the tower of London.

The whole clergy of England, The Clergy condemned in the praemunire
being judged by the kings learned counsel, to be in the praemunire, for
maintaining ye power legatiue of ye Cardinal, were called by process into the
kings benche to answer: wherefore in their conuocatio^, they concluded a
submissio^, The king first named supreme head.
wherein they called the king supreme head of ye church of England, and were
contented to give the king.100000. pounds to pardon them their offenses,
touching the praemunire by act of parliament.

The kings palace builded at S. James
This year the king purchased (at his pleasure) ye whole house of saint James
and all the meadows about ye same. And there made a fair ma^sion and a park,
and builded many costly and commodious houses for great pleasure.

The.xix. day of August, the bishop of Norwich burned a batcheler of law
called Thomas Bilney.

The.xxii day of October, one Paitmer a merchant and a glasier, bare fagottes
at Paul's cross.

Anno. 23.
1531
S. Nich. Lambert Grocer. M. Ri. Gresha^ S Ed. Altam. S
Execution in Smythfield.
The.xxvii. day of November, was a monk of Bury burned in Smithfielde.

Execution at Tybornd.
The.iiii. day of December, was one Ryce Grifyn a gentylman of Wales, beheaded
at the tower hyl, and his man hanged drawn and quartered at Tyborne for
treason.

The.xxvii. day of January, a Duche man bare a faggot at Paul's cross.

Execution in Smithfield.
The last day of April, was one Baynam burned in Smithfield.

The.xxv. day of May, Great fishes taken.
was taken between London and Grenewiche, two great fyshes called Herlpoles,
both a male and a female.

This year, The Clergy sworn to the king.
the oath that the clergy was wont to make to the bishop of Rome, was made
doyde by statute, and a new oath confirmed, wherein they confessed the king to
be supreme head.

Sir Thomas More, S. Thomas More discharged of the cha^celorshyp.
after suit made was discharged of the Chauncelorshyp the.xvi. day of May.
And the fourth of June, the king dubbed Thomas Audeley knight, and made him
keeper of the great seal. And not long after, lord Chauncelour of England.

Thomas Cromwell master of the kings Jewel house, S. Thomas Cromwell.
began to be in great favor with king Henry, and was now of his counsel.

The.xv day of June, Execution at the tower hyl
were five men drawn from newgate to the tower hill, and there hanged and
quartered for coynyng of silver, and clyppyng of gold.

The fyfth day of July, was a priest dwelling at saint Androwes beside the
wardrop, Execution at the tower hyl
drawn from newgate to the tower hill, and there hanged and quartered for
clippyng of gold.

The priory of Crichurche put down.
Also in July, the king put down the priorie of Chrichurche in London, and all
the Chanons of the same place: the king sent to other places of the same
Religion.

The tower of London repaired.
This year in August and September, the king repaired the tower of London, and
made there much buyldyng.

The first of September, was my lady Anne Bulleyne, made Marquis of Penbroke at
Wyndsore.

The.vii. day of October, the king went to Caleys and to Bulloyne, and came
over again the.xiii. day of November followyng.

Anno. 24.
1532
Sir Steue^ Pecocke Haberda. M. Rich. Rainold S. John Martyn S. Nich. Pyncho^ S.
The.xv. day of December, Great fire at Holborne.
was a great fire at the bishop of Lyncolnes place in Holborne, which did
much hurt.

Haule the famous chronicler, common Sergeant of London.
The.xvii. day of March, was Edward Haule gentylma^ of Graies Inn, chosen to
be common sargeant of the city of London. Which Edward Haule made the notable
book of Chronicles.

The.x. day of April, was a dole given at saint Marie Audries in Southwark:
Four me^.ii. women and a boie smouldered.
at the which was so much preace of poor people, that there was smouldred
iiii. men.ii. women, and a boie starck dead.

This year on saint Erkenwaldes day king Henry had married the lady Anne
Bulloyne at Caleyce, King Henry married the lady Anne Boleyne.
and the.xii. day of April being Easter eve, next followyng, she was
proclaimed Queen of England.

The.12. day of May, one Pauiar being the town clerk of London, Desperation.
ho^g him self.

This year on Whitsonday, being the last day of May, Queen Anne crowned.
was ye lady Anne Bulleyn solemnly and honorably crowned at Westminster.

The.xvii. day of July, were two marchantes slain on the water of Thames
toward Westminster, A murder.
by one Wolf and his wife, who suffered for the same, as ye shall here after.

The.7. day of September, was the lady Elizabeth daughter to king Henry, Lady
Elizabeth borne.
borne at Grenewich, and there christened at the friars church the.x. day of
September. The.5. day of October, was a great fire at Baynardes castle, A fire
at Bernardes castle
and did great hurt.

The.24. day of October, being sunday there was a scaffold set up at Paul's cross
and thereon stood a nonne, Anne Barto^.
named Anne Barton of Courtopstrete beside Canterbury, and two Monks of
Canterbury, and two obseruaunt friars, and the parson of Aldermary in London
called master Gold: an other priest-confessour to the said nonne, and two
lay men: and there preached at that time the bishop of Bangor, called the
abbot of Hyde, where he showed their offenses, and so from thence they were
sent to the tower of London.

Anno. 25.
1533
sir Christoper Askew Draper. M. Will. Forma^ S. Tho. Kitson. S.
This year Pope Clement cursed king Henry and the realm of England.

This curse was hanged on a churchdore at Dunkirke in Flaunders, and taken
down by one William Lock, a Mercer of London.

A great fish taken.
The.xxviii. day of January, was a great fyshe taken at Blackwall, called a
whale, and was brought up to westmynster to the king to see, and so brought
down to broken wharffe, and there cut out.

Commissioners were sent all over England, to take the oath of all persons to
the act of succession, An oath to the king.
for the refusal of which oath, doctor Fysher bishop of Rochester, and sir
Thomas More late lord Chancellor of England were sent to the tower of London.

The first day of April were Wolf and his wife hanged on two gybets, Wolf and
his wife hanged at Lambeth.
at the turnyng tree in Lambeth marshe, for murdryng of the two merchant
strangers before named.

The.xx. day of April were.ii. monks of Canturbery.ii. obseruant friars,
Execution at Tyborne.
the person of Aldermary in London, and the Nonne called the holy Maid of
Courtopstrete in Kent: all these were drawn from the tower of London unto
Tyborne, and there hanged and beheaded, and their heads set on London bridge,
and other gates of the City of London, and their bodies buried.

The.xx. day of April all the crafts and companies in London were sworn to
the King, Oath to the king.
and to the Queen Anne, and their heirs.

The.xxvi. year of the kings reign, the.xv. day of May was a great fire at
Salters hall in Breadstrete, and much harm done.

The.v. day of June were all servants and prentices of the age of.20. years, or
above, sworn to the King, and Queen Anne his wife, and to the issue of them.

Lord Dacres of the north.
The.ix. day of July was the lord Dacres of the north, arrained at Westminster
of high treason, where he so wittyly and directely confuted his accusers, that
to their great shame he was found by his peers, not gyltie.

Edward Halle. John Frythe bre^t in smithfielde.
The.xxii. day of July, was one John Frith a young man of excellent wit and
learning, burned in Smythfield for his opinions concerning the sacrament, and
with him a young man called Andrewe Hewet a taylours servant.

The.xi. day of August was all the places of the obseruant Friars, Friar houses
suppressed
as Grenewyche, Canterburye, Rychmounte, Newarke, and new castle put down,
and Austen Friars set in their places, and the same obseruauntes were put in
places of gray friars.

The.xiii. day of Auguste was a great fire at Temple bar, A fire at temple
bar.
and much hurt done, and certain persons burned.

The.xvi. day of Auguste was burned the kings stable at Charyng cross
otherwise called the mewes, The kings stable brent.
wherein was burned many great horses, and great store of hay.

The.xxi. day of September doctor Taylour, Master Thomas Cromwell master of
the Rolls.
master of the Rolls was discharged, and for him master Thomas Cromwell was
appointed and sworn, the.ix. day of October, who afterward bare great rule.

Anno. 26.
Sir John Champneis skinner M Nicol. Lewson S. Will. Denham S. 1534

In November was held a parliament wherein the bishop of Rome with all his
authority was clean banyshed this realm, The bishops of Romes authority
abrogated.
and commandment given, that he should no more be called Pope, but bishop of
Rome, and that the king should be reputed and taken as supreme heads of the
Church of England, having full authority to reform all errors, hereses and
abuses in the same. The first fruits given to the king.
Also the first fruits and tenthes of all spiritual dignities and promotions,
were granted to king Henry by act of parlyament.

The.xxix. day of April, the pryor of the Charter house of London, the prior
of Beual, the prior of Exham, and a brother of the same called master
Reignoldes, and a priest called master John Hail, vicar of Thistilworth were
al condemned of treason, and judged at westminster to be drawn, Execution at
Tyborne.
hanged and quartered at Tyborne, who were there executed the fourth day of
May, and their heads and quarters set on the gates of the city of London, and
at the Charter house of London was set one quarter.

The.viii. day of May the king commanded all about his court to poll their
heads, Polled heads
and to give them ensample, he caused his own head to be polled likewise.

The.xxv. day of May was a great examination of heretics, Examination of
Holla^ders.
borne in Holla^d, there was examined.xix. men, and.vi. women of the same
country borne.

The second day of June Edward Halle the famous Chronicler was chosen an
under sheriff of London by the Mayor and common counsel, Master Halle under
sheriff of London.
who was before the common sergeant of London as is aforesaid.

The.iiii. day of June a man and his wife borne in Holland were burned in
Smithfield for the arrians heresy. Execution in Smythfield.


The.xviii. day of June were.iii. monks of the Charterhouse, Execution at
Tyborne.
named Ermewe, Midlemor, and Nudygate, drawn to Tyborne, and there hanged and
quartered.

The.xxii. day of June was doctor Fysher bishop of Rochester, The bishop of
Rochester beheaded.
beheaded at tower hill, his head was set on London bridge, and his body
buried within Barkyng church.

The.vi. day of July sir Thomas More was beheaded at the tower hill for denial
of the kings supremacy. Sir Thomas Moore beheaded.


The earl of Kyldar dyed in the tower of London: and his son Thomas Fitzgarret,
rebellyng in Ireland, slew the bishop of Deuelyng, and took the kings
ordyna^ce. Wherefore king Henry sent thither sir William Skeuington, with a
company of soldiers.

In October the king sent doctor Lee to visit the abbeys, A visitation of the
abbeys
priories and nonneries in England, and to put out all religious persons that
would go, and all that were under the age of.xxiiii. years, and all such
monks, chanons, and friars that were so put out, the abbot or prior should give
every one instead of their habit, a priests gown, and.xl. s. of money. And
the nonnes to have such apparel, as secular women wear, and to go where they
would, he took out of monasteries and abbeyes their relics and chiefest
iewelles.

Anno. 27.
1535
sir John Alleyne mercer M. Hu^fr. Monmothe S John Cottes S
A general procession.
The.xi. day of November was a great procession at London by the kings
commandment, wherein the waits of the City going foremost, followed the
children of the grammar schole of the mercers chapel with their master, the
scholars of Saint Antonies with their master and usher, the scholars of Poules
schole, with their master and usher, and then all the minstrels of London in
their best apparel, and the master of the said mynstrelles, with his collar
next went the crouched friars, the Austen friars, the white friars, the graye
friars, the black friars, all in copes, with their crosses and Candelsticks:
The chanons of saint Mary Auderies, of saint Bartholomewes, of Esyng Spittle,
of saint Spyttle, with the pryours of the same houses, with their Crosses,
candelstyckes, and vergerers before them, then the clerks of London in copes,
the priests of London in their copes. And then the Monks of new abbeye, of
Berdmondsay abbay, and of Westminster, al singing the Letanie with Faburden,
their Crosses, candelstyckes, and Uergerers before them. After them came
Poules quier with their residensaries, The bishop of London, and the abbottes
mytered in their Pontificalibus. After them came the Bachelors of the company
of the lord Mayor in their best apparel: After them, the Lord Mayor in a
gown of black velvet, with a hoode of the same, and the Aldermenne in their
gowns of scarlette: after them the crafts of London in their degrees: The
number of copes that were worn in this Procession, was.vii. C. and.xiiii.

The last day of December, the Lord Mayor of London gave commandment to all
paryshes in the same, The names of all Chauntries taken.
to bring in before him the names of all the Chauntries in their paryshes, and
who had the gift of the same.

Lady Katherine deceased.
The.viii. day of January dyed lady Katherine do wager at Kymbalton, and was
buried at Peterborowe. Queen Anne ware yelow for the mournyng.

The small houses of religion given to the king.
In February were given to the king by a parliament with the consent of the
abbottes all religious houses that were of.300. mark, and under.

On May day being the.xxviii. year of king Henry, he being at a Iustes at
Grenewiche, to the admiration of all men, suddenly departed to Westmynster,
having only with him.vi. persons. The next day lady Anne Bullein Queen was
had to the tower: Edward Halle.
and there for things laid to her charge, shortly after beheaded the.xix. day
of May. Execution.
And on the ascension day following, the king ware white for mournyng.

The same time were apprehended the lord Rocheforde brother to the said Queen,
Execution.
Henry Noris, Mark Smeton william Brierton, and Francis weston all of the
kings privy chamber, which also about matters touching the Queen were put
to death the.xxii. day of May.

The weke before whitsontyde being the.20. day of May, the king married Lady
Jane daughter to sir John Seymor knight, The king married lady Jane.
which at Whytsontide was openly showed as Queen.

The.viii. day of June the King held his high court of parliament. In the
which parliament time the bishops and clergy of this realm held a solemn
convocation at Paul's church in London: where after much disputynge and
debatyng of many matters, they publyshed a book of religion, entitled, Articles
devised by the kings hyghnes. In this book is specially mentioned but.iii.
sacraments, A commotion in Lincolneshyre.
with the which the Lincolneshice men were offended, and fearyng the utter
subuertion of their old religion, which they had lived in so many years,
raised a great commotion, and gathered together well nere.20000. men: against
whom the king did send a strong power, whereof when the rebels had knowledge
they desired pardon, brake up their army, and departed every man to his home:
but their capitains were apprehended and executed.

This year the.xix. day of June being saint Peter's day, the king held a great
iustyng and triumph at Westmynster, A triumph at westminster.
where were ordained.ii. lyghters made like shyps to fight upon the water, the
one of them burst in the myddest, and a servant of master Kneuets in his
harneys, leapyng between both ships, was drowned. And in the other ship a
gunne burste her chamber, and mayned.ii. of the mariners.

The men of Lincolnshyre being pacified and quieted, as ye have heard:
immediately within six days after, began a new Insurrection in Yorkeshyre,
A co^motio^ in Yorkeshyre.
for the same causes: But the rude people were more incensed thoroughe tales
which were spreadde by certain persons, as that all their silver Chalices,
Crosses, ^ewelles, and other ornaments should be taken out of their churches.
That no man should be married, or eat any deyntie meat in his house, but he
should pay a tribute for the same to the king. These people were gathered
together, to the noumber of forty thousand, having for their badges, the.v.
wounds, with the figure of the Sacrament, and Jesus written in the myddest,
and called their rebellion, a holy pylgremage, in token that they intended to
fight for the maintenance of christen religion.

Anno. 28.
Sir Rafe Warren Mercer M. Rich. Paget S. 1536
Will. Bowyer S.
The.xii. day of November, sir Thomas Neweman bare a faggot at Poules Cross
for that he sange Mass withgood ale.

The.xiii. day of November, one master Roberte Pagyngton, Master Pagyngton
slain
a Mercer of London, was slain with a gunne, as he was going to Mass at
saynet Thomas of Akers, now called the Mercers chapel, but the murderer was
never openly known.

Against the rebels of Yorkshyre above named, the King sent the duke of
Norffolke, the Duke of Suffolk, the Marquis of Excester, and other with a
great army, by whom after the day and place was appointed to fight, suddenly
the night before the battle should have been, the water that was between them,
rose in such wise, that the two armies could not come together, by occasyon
whereof, the capitaines of both parties had communication of peace: and
promise was made to the rebels, that such things as they were grieved with,
should be redressed by the kings authority, wherewith they being contented (by
the providence of God, departed without bloudshedyng. Ask that was chief of
this rebellion, in Dece^ber came to London, and was not only pardoned, but
also received and rewarded with other gifts of the king, but he did not long
enjoy his prosperity.

Execution at Wyndsor.
About the same time a priest and aboucher were hanged at wyndsor, for speaking
in the behalf of the Yorkshyre me^.

A great frost.
This year in Decembre the Thames at London was all over frosen: Wherefore the
king with his beautiful spouse Queen Jane rode thorough London to Grenewyche.

Execution at Tyborne.
The third day of Februarye was Thomas Fitzgarret late Earl of Kyldare, and
five of his uncles, drawn, hanged, and quartered at Tyborne for Treason.

Also in this month of February Nicolas Musgraue, A new commotion in
Yorkeshyre.
Thomas Gilby, and other, stered a new rebellion, and besieged the City of
Carlisle, from whense they were driven, and many of them taken and put to
death.

In the same month of February, sir Francis Bygot, sir Robert Constable, and
other, began an other conspyracie, and for the same were attainted, and executed
in the month of June.

The.xxix. day of March being Mandy thursday, Execution at tyborne.
were.xii. men of Lincoln drawn from Newgate to Tyborn: and there hanged and
quartered.v. were priests, and.vii. were lay men: one was doctor Makerel, a
white chano^, an other was ye vicar of Louth in Lincolneshyre.

The.15. day of May, in the.29. year of Henry the.viii. the lord Darcy and
the lord Hussy were had from the tower of London, unto Westminster, and there
condemned of treason.

In June the Lord Darcye, Execution for treason.
the lord Hussy, sir Robert Constable, sir Thomas Percye, sir Francis Bigot,
sir Stephen Hamelton, sir John Bulmer and his wife, William Lomley, Nicholas
Tempest, and the abbots of Ierney and Rivers, and Robert Ask were all put to
death: sir Roberte Constable was hanged on Beuerley gates, Ask was hanged in
chains on a tower at York: Sir John Bulmers wife burned in Smithfield, the
lord Darcie beheaded at Tower hylle, the lord Hussy at Lincoln, and the
other suffered death at Tyborne.

Cromwell knight of the garter.
This year at the feast of saint George the lord Cromwell was made knight of
the Garter.

The birth of prince Edward.
In October on saint Edwardes eve, was borne at Hampton court, the noble
Prince Edward, and shortly after, Queen Jane left her life, the.14. day of
October.

Anno. 29.
1537
Sir Rich. Gresham Mercer M. John Gresham S. Tho. Lewen S.
The.viii. day of November the corpse of the Queen was carried to Windsore, and
buried with great solempnitie.

The Kings majesty kept his Christmas at Grenewyche in his mourning apparel,
and so was all the court till the morrow after Candelmas day.

The.xviii. day of January a salter of London was set on the pyllory for
packyng and sellyng of rotten herryng, and using of false weyghtes.

The.xviii. day of February a servant of my lady Pargetours was drawn,
Execution at tyborne.
hanged, and quartered for clyppynge of gold.

The.xxv. day of February sir Allyn a priest and a gentylman were drawn to
Tyborn, Execution at tyborne.
and there hanged and quartered for treason.

The.xxi. day of March Henry Harffam customer of Plymmouth was drawn from
Newgate to Tyborne, Execution at Tyborne.
and there hanged and quartered for treason. And one Thomas Ewell likewise was
hanged and quartered.

The.xxii. day of May in the.30. year of Henry the.viii. friar Forest was
hanged and brent in Smithfield for deniyng the Kings supremacy: Execution in
Smythfield.
with him was burnt the Image of Daruell Gathern of Wales.

The.xxvii. day of May was a great fire at saint Margaret Pattens called
Roode Lane, A fire in Rode lane.
where were many houses burned: and.ix. persons were there burned to death in
that fire.

In July was Edmonde Conyngslie attaynted of treason for counterfaityng of the
kings sign manuell. And in August was Edward Clyfforde for the same cause
attaynted, Execution at tyborne.
and both put to execution as traitors at Tyborne.

The hangma^ hanged.
The first day of September being the sunday after Bartilmew fair was one
Cratwell hangman of London, and two persons more hanged at the wrestlyng place
on the backeside of Clerkenwell beside London, for robbynge of a bouthe in
Bartylmewe fair: at which execution was above.20000. people, as it was judged.

Edward Halle. The images in churches taken down
In September by the special motion of the lord Cromwell, all ye notable images,
unto the which were made any special pilgremages and offerings were utterly
taken away, as the Images of Walsyngham, Ipswyche, Worcester, the Lady of
wilsedon, with many other and likewise all shrines.

The abbeyes suppressed.
In October and November the abbeis were suppressed, and al friars, monks
chanons, nonnes, and other sects of religion, were roted out of this realm.

Anno. 30.
Sir Will. Forman Haberda. M. Will. Wilkinso^ S 1538
Nicho. Gybson S
This Nicholas Gibson sheryfe and Grocer of London before named, build a free
schole at Ratclyffe, nere unto London, appoyntyng to the same schole for the
instruction of.lx. poor men's children in lernyng and virtuous educatio^, a
schole master and an usher, with a stipende of ten pound by the year to the
master, and.vi. pound.xiii.s.iiii.d. to ye Usher. He also builded certain
alms houses, adioynyng to the said schole, for xiiii. poor and aged
persons, such as through impotencie and age are not able to sustain the
travel and toil of the world: who quarterly do receive vi.s.viii.d. a piece
for ever. And the said worshypfull and devout gentleman, during his life,
dysdayned not in his own person, many times to vysite them. Addyng to their
living in the time of his abode and house keeping there, relief of his own
board: whereby appeared the great zeal he bare to the relief of the poor, and
not only by words (after the manner of many in these days,) but in works, he
manifested the fruytes of charity, according to such example as many of his
predecessors had left to the posterity. And like as of his own free
lyberalytie he has begone this commendable monument, I mean the maintenance
of this poor house of christ: so I pray that some of his successors, or other
of ability will add to ye same some further relief and increase of living,
whereby (in these dear days wherein things be at great pryces) not only
learning, the honor of all common wealths, but also those nedy and impotent
persons, may be better furnyshed of necessaries.

The friars in London suppressed.
The.xvi. day of November, was the Black friars in London suppressed, and the
next day the white friars, the next day the Graye friars, and the Monks of
the Charterhouse, and so all the other immediately after.

La^bert burnt in smythfield.
The.xxii. day of November, was one John Nycholson, otherwise Lambert a priest,
burnt in Smythfielde.

Also in November, were Henry Marquis of Excester, and earl of Deuo^shire, and
sir Henry Pole knight, the lord Mountague, and sir Edward Neuell, brother to
the lord of Burganysent to the tower. The two lords were arraigned the last
day of December at Westminster, before the lord Audley of Walden, lord
Chaunceller, and high steward of England, and there found gilty: the third
day after, was arraigned sir Edward Neuell, sir Geffray Pole, and two priests
called Croftes and Collyns, and one Holland a mariner, and all attainted, and
the ix. day of Dece^ber, were the said two lords and sir Edward Neuel
beheaded at the tower hill: Execution at the tower hyl
the two priesies and Holland were drawn to tyborne and there hanged and
quartered, and sir Ieffray Pole was pardoned.

The.22. day of Dece^ber, a priest, Henry Dance a Brycklayer, and an Organ
maker, bare fagottes at Paul's cross.

On Ashwensday, Execution in Paul's churcheyarde.
were John Iohnes, John potter, and William Manering; hanged in the princes
liveries (because they were the princes servants) on the south side of Paul's
churchyard, for killing of Roger Cholmeley Esquier in the same place of malice
pretended.

The third day of March, was sir Nicholas Carewe of Bedingto^ in Surrey,
Execution at lowre hill.
knight of the gartar, and master of the kings horse, beheaded at tower hill.

The third day of March, the king created at Westmynster, sir Willyam Pawlet
knight, treasorer of his household Lord saint John: and sir John Russell
comptroller of his household, lord Russell.

The same time, the king caused all the havens to be fortyfied, and rode to
Dover, and sent commisioners through out all the Realm, to have his people
muster: and at the same season on Easter day, was there.ix. unknown ships
liyng in the downs, wherefore all Kent arose, and mustered in harness the same
day.

The.xxviii. day of Apryll, being in the.xxxi. year of Henry the eight, began
a parliament at Westmynster: in the which Margaret Countess of Salisbury
Gertrude wife to the Marquis of Excester, Execution.
Reinold Pole, sir Adrian Foskewe, and Thomas Dingley knight of saint Ihons,
and diverse other, were attaynted of treason: Folkewe and Dingley were beheaded
the.x. day of July.

The great mustar at London.
This year, the.viii. day of May, the citezins of London mustered at the Miles
end, all in bright harneys, with coats of white sylke, and cloth and chains
of gold, in three great battayls, the number was.xv. thousand, beside
wyffelers and other wayters: who in goodly order passed through London to
Westmynster, and so through the sanctuary, and round about the park of S.
James: and so up through the field, and came home through Holborne.

The.viii. day of July, Execution at S. Thomas Wateryng.
the Uicar of Wandsworth, with his chaplayne, and his servant, and friar
Wayre, were all four drawn from the Marshalsey, unto saint Thomas a
Wateryngs, and there hanged and quartered for treason.

In August, the great Onele and Odonele of Irelande, invaded the English pale,
and burned almost.xx. miles within the same: wherefore the Lord Graye being
deputy there, assembled a strong power and drove him back.

The.xvi. day of September, Duke Frederick of Bauarie, the Palsgraue of Rhine,
the Marshal of duke John, Frederick electour of Saxony, with other, came to
London, by whom the marriage was concluded between king Henry and the lady Anne,
sister to Wyllyam the Duke of Cleue.

Anno. 31.
1539
Sir William Hollis Mercer. M. Tho. Feyrie S. Th. Hu^tlow S.
This Thomas Huntlow shryue, before named, gave to the company of the
Habardashers certain tenementes, for yt which they be bound to give to.x. poor
alms people of ye same company every one of the^.viii. d. every friday, for
ever. And also at every quarter diner to be kept by the masters of ye same
company, to be gene^ to every one of those.x. poor people before named, a penny
lose of bread, a potle of ale, a piece of bief, worth.4. d. in a platter with
porage, and.4. d. in money.

Execution at Redyng.
The.14. day of Noue^ber, Hughe Feryngdon, abbot of Reding, and.ii. priests:
the one called Rug, and the other named Onion, were attainted of high treason,
for deniyng ye king to be supreme head of the church, were drawn, hanged, and
quartered at Redyng. The same days was Richard Whiting abbot of Glaste^bury,
likewise attainted, hanged and quartered on tower hill beside his Monastery,
Execution at the tower hill.
for the same cause.

Execution.
The first day of Dece^ber, was John Beche, abbot of Colchester, put to
execution for the like offense.

In Dece^ber, The pencioners first began.
were appointed to wait on the kings highness person.50. gentlemen, called
Pencioners or speres, like as they were in the first year of ye king.

The third day of January, was the lady Anne of Cleue, King Henry married the
lady Anne of Cleue.
received at Black heath, and brought to Grenewych with great tryumphe: and
the syxt day of the same month, she was married to king Henry.

The.18. day of Apryl, Thomas Cro^well earl of Essex.
was Thomas lord Cromwell, created earl of Essex, and made great chamberlayne
of England, which ever the earls of Oxenforde had before that time.

In A parliament which began the xviii. day of Apryll, The order of the
Rhodes put down in England.
the relygion of S. Iohnes in England, which of most men was named the
knights of the Rhodes, was dissolved, whereof hearing sir Wyllyam Weston
knight, Edward Haule.
prior of S. Ihones, for thought dyed on the Assention day, being the fifth day
of May.

In May, the.xxxii. year of his reign was sent to the tower, doctor Wilson
and doctor Samson bishop of Chichester, for releui^g certain prisoners, which
denied the kings supremacy: and for ye same offense, was one Richard Farmer
Gro. of London, a rich and a welthy man, and of good estimacion, Edward
Haule.
committed to the Marshalsey, and after in Westmynster hall was arraigned and
attainted in the praemunire, and lost all his goods.

Thomas Cro^well sent to ye tower, and be headed at tower hyil.
The.ix. day of July, Thomas lord Cromwell, late made Earl of Essex, being in
the counsel chamber, was suddenly apprehended, and committed to the tower of
London. The.xix. day of the same month, he was attainted by parliament, and
never came to his answer: which law, he was the autour of, he was there
attainted of heresy and high treason. And the.xxviii. day of July, beheaded
at the tower hill, with the lord Hungerforde.

Queen Anne deuorced and called lady Anne of cleue
King Henry by authority of parliament and conuocatio^, was dyuorsed from his
pretensed marriage made with the lady Anne of Cleue: and it was enacted that she
should be taken no more as Queen, but called, the lady Anne of Cleue.

Execution both in smithfielde and at Tyborne.
The.xxx. day of July, Robert Barnes, Thomas Gerrard, Wylliam Jerome priests,
were burned in Smythfield. The same day, Thomas Abell, Edward Powell, and
Rychard Fetherstone, were drawn hanged and quartered, for denying the king to
be supreme head of the church of England.

The fourth day of August, Execution at Tyborne.
were drawn from the tower to tyborne, syx persons, and one led between two
sergea^tes, and there hanged and quartered: one was the Priour of Dancaster, an
other a Monk of the Charterhouse of London, master Gyles Horn, a monk of
Westmynster, one Philpot, and one Carewe, and a friar, all were put to death
for treason.

This year the ditches about London were new cast.

The.viii. day of August, was the lady Katheryne Haward showed openly as
Queen, King Henry married lady Katheryne Hawarde.
at Hampton court: which dignity she enjoyed not long.

The latter end of this year was great death of hot burning agues and flyxes,
and such a drought, A great drouth
that wells and small ryuers were dried up, and many cattayle dyed for lack of
water: the salt water flowed above London bridge.

Anno. 32.
Sir Will. Roche Draper M. Will. Laxton S. 1540
Mart. Bows S.
Execution.
The.xxii. day of December, was Egerton and Harman, put to death for
counterfaytyng the kings great seal.

In other commotion in Yorkeshyre.
In April, the.33. year of Henry the eight, certain priests and lay men,
began a new rebellion in Yorkeshyre, which were shortly taken and put to
execution in diverse places: of which Leigh Tatorsale and Thornton, were put to
death at London the.28. day of May: Execution.
and sir John Neuel knight, was executed at York. The same day the countess
of Salisbury, was beheaded in the tower of London, Edward Halle.
she was the last of the right line and name of Plantagenet.

Execution at Grenewiche.
The.ix. day of June, were Damport and Chapman, two of the kings guard hanged
at Grenewich, for robberies, in example of all other.

Execution at the tower hill.
The.xxviii. day of June, the lord Leonard Graie, which before was deputy
general of Irelande, was beheaded at the tower hill, for certain treason
which he had committed.

Execution at S. Thomas of waterings
The.28. day of June, were hanged at S. Thomas a waterynges, Mantell, Royden and
Froudes, gentylme^, for a spoil and murder that they had done in one of the
kings parkes upon May morning, the lord Dacres of the South, being in company
with them: and on the morrow which was saint Peter's day, the lord Dacres was
led from the tower a foot between the two sherifes, through the city to
tyborne, Execution at tyborne.
and there put to death for the same offense.

This summer the king took his progress to York. The kings progress into
York.


The first day of July, was a Welsheman drawn, Execution.
hanged, and quartered, for prophesying the kings majesty's death.

Anno. 33.
Sir Michel Dormer Mercer M. sir Roula^d Hill S 1541
Henry Suckley S
The lady Katheryne Haward, whom the king had married, for her unchaste living
committed with thomas Culpeper and Frauncis Dereham, was by parliament
attainted. Culpeper and Dereham, were put to death at tyborne, Execution at
tyborne.
the x. day of December. The xiii. day of February, were beheaded within ye
tower, Execution at tower hill.
the lady Hawarde (otherwise called Q. Katherine, John Sleidan
and the lady Rocheforde. And shortly after, king Henry married the lady
Katherine Parre, King Henry married his sixth wife.
that had been wife to the lord Latimer, and sister of the Marquis of
Northampton.

King Henry first named king of Irelande.
At this parliament the king was proclaimed king of Irelande, which name his,
predecessors never had, but were called lord of Irelande.

In the beginning of March, dyed sir Arthur Plantagenet, Uicecounte Lis^e,
bastard to king Edward the fourth, in the tower of London unattained.

I maid boiled in Smithfielde.
The.x. day of March, a maid was boiled in Smythfielde, for poysonynge many
persons.

In May, the.xxxiiii. year of his reign king Henry took a loan of money of al
such as were above the value of.50. pound and upward.

The fourth day of July, the Scotts began to invade the borders, spoylyng and
burning, as it had been in open war: for which cause a garryson was sent
thither, then the Scotts pretended a peace, and yet nevertheless in the mean
space spoiled the borders. In reuengement whereof, sir Robert Bows made a rode
into Scotland, where he with other were taken without puttyng to ransom. Then
the king sent the Duke of Norfolk with an army royal, but at York the
army was stayed. And after long consultation, the Scotts would not agree to
any reasonable conditions, wherefore the Duke went forward, burning and wastyng
all the marches, and there tarried without any battle proffered by the king of
Scotts, until the myddest of November followyng.

Anno. 34.
Io. Coats Sal. M. He^. Hoblethorn S. 1542
Hen. Hancotes S.
After the departure of our army from Scotland, the king of Scotts made a
rode into England, and did much harm: but at the last, sir Thomas Wharton, and
sir Wyliyam Musgraue, with a few of the borderers, met with the Scotts on
saint Katheryns eve, the.xxiiii. of November, where (by the great power of God)
they being in number.15000. were overthrown, in which conflicte was taken the
lord Maxwel, the earls of Glencarne and Sassilles, with all the capitaines of
the army. And on saint Thomas even the Apostell, they were brought to the
tower of London, where they lay that night: the next day followyng, they were
by the kings charge apparelled all in sylke, and rode through the city to
Westmynster, where they were sworn to be true prisoners, and then were they
delivered to the custody of diverse noble men, which honorably entertained
them.

Execution for slayinge an Haraulde.
In this season, an Harold of England rydyng on the borders side to do a
message, was met by certain rebels, which cruelly against all law of arms,
slew him in his cote armor, but they for this deed, were sent to the king the
year followyng, who executed the^ for ye offense.

At neweyeres tide, the Scotts that were taken by Carlyle, were by the king
sent home again with great gifts upon condition to agree to certain
artycles, for the wealth of both Realms.

The third day of June, in the.35. year of Henry the eight, the Abrine a lord
in Ireland, with diverse of the wild Irysh submitted them to king Henry.

And in July, the said Abrine was created Earl of Clawricarde.

The going to Laundersey.
This year in July, king Henry sent over.6000. men to Landersey, whether also
came the Emperor in proper person with a great army, and shortly after came
down the French king in proper person with a great army, and offered to give
battle to the Emperor, by reason whereof the siege was raised.

The.28. day of July, Execution at Wyndsore.
were burnt at Wyndsore three persons, Anthony person, Robert Testwood, and
Henry Filmer.

This year was a great death in London of the pestilence: A great pestilence.
and therefore Mighelmas term was adiourned to saint Albons, and there was kept
to the end.

Anno. 35.
Sir Will. Bowyer Draper. M. John Toules S 154^
Rich. Dobbes S
Sir Wyllyam Bowyer deceased the xiii. day of April, about Easter, and sir
Raufe Warren, served out the resydue of that year.

The beginning of this Majors year, that is to say, at Alhallontyde, a road
was made into Scotland by the garryson there, who burned.60. villages, and took
great prays both of men and beasts.

In November, the Englyshmen that were sent to Laundersey, came home again.

A little before Christmas, the Uiceroye of Sicill, came from the Emperor to
king Henry in Ambassade, of whom he was honorably entertained, and shortly
returned again.

This year being leap year, chaunsed four Eclipses, Four Eclipsis in one year
one of the Son the.xxiiii. day of January, and three of the moon: a
strange thing, and such as had not happened since the time of Charles the
great.

In the beginning of lent, lord Edward Seymer earl of Hertforde, was made
lieftena^t of the north parts, and sent thither with an army, for ye defense
of that country.

Execution at Tyborne.
The beginning of March, Germine Gardyner, Lark parson of Chelsey beside
London, and Syngleton, were executed at Tyborne, for denying the king to be
supreme head of the church: and shortly one Ashbee was likewise executed for
the same.

The.xxii. day of March, the lord Admiral with a great navy, departed from
the port of London toward Scotland.

Houses blown up with gunpowder.
The fourth day of Apryll, a gonne poulder house called the black swanne,
standing upon east smythfielde, was blown up with other houses nighe
adioynyng: and therein were burned five men, a boy, and a woman.

Upon May even, in the.36. year of Henry the eight, died the lord Thomas
Audeley high Chancellor of England: After whom succeeded lord Thomas
Writhesley.

Upon May day the nauye sent by the Lord admiral, which until this time had
no good wind, took their voyage into Scotland from Tynmouth: with whom was
the lord Edward Seymor Earl of Hertford, the kings lieutena^t and general
captain of the army, which the fourth day of May arrived at Lyth, Lyth and
Edenborough taken.
the haven of Edenborough, and took the town of Lyth, and spoiled it: after
which they made toward Edenboroughe, where at a certain bridge the Scotts had
laid their ordynance: but by the policy and manhood of our captains and
soldiers, the Scotts ordynance was won, and discharged against them selves,
and thereby were put to flight: after this, the town of Edenborough sent unto
the army, pretendynge to deliver the town upon certain condytions, to the
behofe of our King: But when the army entered, they were invaded by them: for
which cause the Town was destroyed, and clean wasted.

King Henry and the Emperor agreed ioyntely to invade the realm of France
with two great powers.

About this time king Henry made great provision for a voyage into France.

The coins inhanced.
A proclamation made, enhaunsynge the value of gold to the rate of.xlviii.s. and
silver to.iiii. shyllynges the ounce. It is to be noted, that at this time the
king caused to be coined the base moneys, The base money coined.
which was called down the fyfth year of Edward the.vi. and called in the
second year of Queen Elizabeth.

After the whytson holy days, the Duke of Norffolke, and the Lord pryuie
seal, with a great army took their voyage into France, and besieged
Mutterell, where they lay until the King had won Boloygne: Not long
after, the Duke of Suffolk with many other noble men passed the seas, and
encamped before Boloigne on the East side.

King Henry went to Boloigne.
The xiiii. day of July king Henry him self with a goodly company passed from
Dover to Calaice, and the.26. day encamped on the north side of Boloygne: after
whose coming the town was so sore battered with gonneshott, and certain of
their Towers being undermined so shaken with force of gunne powder, that
after a months siege the captain sent word to the king, that he would
yield the town to his behofe, upon condition that all which were within might
depart with bag and baggage: Boloigne won.
which conditions King Henry mercyfully granted, and the Bulleynors departed
one and other to the number of.4454.

The.xxv. day of Septembre the king entered into high Boloigne, with the
nobility of his realm, and the trompettes blowyng, that it rejoiced all the
whole host to hear.

The first day of October king Henry departed from Boloigne toward Dover:
and at his going, he dubbed.iiii. knights at the water side.

Ambassadors were sent both from the Emperor and the french King for peace
to King Henry: but for so much as he would not give up Boloigne, nothing was
concluded.

The.ix. day of October in the night the french me^ came unawares vpo^th english
me^ in base Boloigne, and slew of them a great number. How beit they were
shortly chased from thense, and the base town holden after in good quiet.

Anno. 36.
1544
William Laxton grocer May. John Wilford S. Andrew Iudde S.
This year was taken by the Kings shyps of the weste country, and of the
Englysh coast, the number of.300. french ships, and more.

The.xxvi. day of January, there camped on the weste side of Boloigne, beyond
the haven, an army of Frenchemen, to the number of.xviii. thousand, and lay
there ten days, and the.vi. day of February, they were all put to flight, by the
Earl of Hertforde, and the lord admiral then being Lord deputy of Boloigne.

The.vii. day of June in the.37. year of king Henry the.viii. a great army of
Frenchmen came nere to the haven of Bulleyne, and skirmished with the
Englyshmen: and this army began to build a fort, which before they
departed, they did accomplish.

The French king prepared.ii. great armies against the Englishmen, one by sea,
an other by land, that upon the sea was above.200. ships beside galeys: This
nauye made show diverse times to have landed in the Isle of wight, at
Portesmouth, and other where: but ever they perceived such prouysyon made by
king Henry, that nothing was done worthy memory, but that their sort by
Boloine was in the mean time fynyshed.

Word was brought that the french men intended to land in the Isle of
Wight. Wherefore the king went to Portesmouthe. The king went to Portsmouth,
where was drowned ye Mary Rose
At which time of the kings abode there, a goodly ship of England called
the Mary Rose, with sir George Carewe the captain, and many other gentylmen,
were drowned in the myddest of the haven, by great negligence and folly.

Certain french men landed in the Isle of Wight, Frenchemen landed at the I Will
of Wight
but they were driven away with loss of their captain, and many soldiers.

In August the lord Edward Seymor earl of Hertforde was sent by the King
into Scotland, with an army of xii. thousand men, where he destroyed diverse
towns, and the middle marches and greatly endomaged the Scotts.

This year in Auguste dyed Charles duke of Suffolk, a very noble gentylman,
and full of actiuitie.

This year the.xii. day of September the Church of saint Gyles without
Creplegate was brent. Saint Gyles church brent.


Anno. 37.
1545
sir Martin Bows goldsmith M. George barnes S Rafe Alleyn S
The.xxiiii. day of November a parliament begone at Westminster, where was
granted to the King a Subsydie of.ii.s.viii.d. of the pound of mouable
gooddes, and.iiii. shyllynges the pound in lands to be paid in two year,
and all Colleges, Chauntryes, Chantries given to King Henry.
and hospitalles were committed to the kings order during his life, to alter
and transpose, which he promised to do to the glory of God, and the common
profit of the realm.

About this time the Lord admiral landed in Normandye, and burnt the
suburbs of Traiport, and diverse villages along the sea coast, and destroyed
and took almost all the ships in the haven, which was a rich and a goodly
pray, and so returned without any damage.

Mounsyre de Bees invaded the English pale beside Grauelyn.

King Henry sent the lord Edward Seymour Earl of Hertforde, and the Lord
Lysle high Admiral with a company of.vii. thousand men to prevent the
Frenchmen, which intended to build an other fort at S. John's Rode, at which
time they entered into the haven two days before the Frenchemen had appointed
to be there, and so defeated them of their purpose.

Often skirmishes were between the English garrisons in Bulleyne, and the
French forte, greatly to the loss of both parts, and at one time especially
were slain sixtene English gentlemen and.80. other, and sewe or none of the
Frenchemen.

The stews and other like borthell houses were by the kings commandment put
down in all parts of the realm. The stews put down.


The.24. day of December the kings majesty came into the parliament house, to
give his royal assent to such acts as there had passed: where was made unto
him by the speaker, an eloquent oration, which the king him self did very
eloquently and wittyly answer.

In February should a woman have been burned in Smithfield, for clyppyng of
gold, but the Kings pardon came, she being at the stake ready to be burned.

In Aprille were diverse assemblyes made to entreat a peace between England
and France, but as yet took none effect.

This.38. year of Henry the.viii. the citisens of London, leuyed in the City
two fiftenes for the conueyance of more water to the City: and then was the
Cunduites at Algate, The cundyte at Algate and Lothberye builded.
and at Lothbery begun to be builded. And the cunduites at Bishops gate,
was taken down, and set lower as it now stands.

A general prosession in Loudon.
This year the.xiii. day of June, being Whytsonday, a continual peace was
proclaimed in the City of London between the king of England and the French
King, with a solemn Procession, at the time of proclamation, gyuynge laud
and praise to God: and at night thoroughout the City, great bonfyers were
made.

The.xxvii. day of June doctor Crome recanted at Paul's Cross.

The.xvi. day of July were burned in Smithfielde these four persons, Anne
Askewe gentylwomanne, Execution in Smythfield.
John Lasselles gentylmanne. Nicholas Otterden Priest, and John Handlande
Taylour: And Doctor Shaxton sometime bishop of Salisbury, preached at the
same fire, and recanted his opinion, persuading them to do the like but they
would not.

The.xxi. day of Auguste, The aduryra^t of France landed at the tower wharfe.
came into England to do his duty from the French King, Mounsyre Deneball
high Admyrall of France, with great Tryumphe, and also brought with him the
Sacre of Diepe, and xii. galeys well besene in diverse points, and landed at
London at the tower wharfe, where he was honorably received with many nobles
and pieres of this Royalme, with greatte shootynge of gunnes, and so brought
to the Bishop of Londons palaice, and laid there two nights. On Mondaie the
xxiii. day of August, he rode to Hampton Court, where the King lay: and
before he came there, Prince Edward received him with a company of five
hundred coats of velvet: and the princes lyuerie were with sleues of cloathe
of gold, and half the coat embroudered with gold. And there were to the
number of eighte hundred horses royally apparailed, which brought him to the
manor of Hampton court to the prudent Prince his father, and queen Katherin.

Anno. 38.
1546.
Henry Noble-thorne merchant tailer M. Rich. Iarbis S. Th. Curtise S.
Execution at tower hill.
In January Thomas Duke of Norfolk was sent to the tower of London; and
condemned to perpetual prison. And shortly after his son the Earl of
Surrey was condemned, and beheaded the.xix. day of January.

These things being done about the end of January, King Henry departed
out of this life: appointings his first heir to be his young son prince
Edward, and the second lady Mary his daughter by his first wife Queen
Katherine, and the third, Lady Elisabeth by his second wife Queen Anne
Boloigne.

Edward the sixte. Anno Regni.1.
THe gracious prince Edward the sixte, 1546
began his reign the xxviii. day of January, in the year.1546. when he was
but.ix. years old. He deceased in the year.1553. the.vi. day of July, so he
reigned.vi. years.v. months and viii. days, by his fathers will were
appointed.xvi. governors and overseers of this young prince, the chief
whereof, was his uncle Earl of Hertforde, who by the consent of the residue,
shortly after was made Duke of Sommersette, and proclaimed Protectoure of the
King and realm.

The.xix. day of February, he road solempnely with his uncle, sir Edward
Seymour Lord Governor and protector, Duke of Somersette, with the nobility
of the realm, from the tower to Westmynster, thorough the City, which was
richely hunged with couer-lettes and Carpettes of Tapistrie and arras, Cheap
being rychely hanged with cloth of gold and silver, every cundite runnyng with
wine: with pageantes, being richely apparailed to receive him at every place,
with Orations of his praise: And on the Southesyde of Paul's Churcheyard, S.
Paul's church lay at anchor.
an Argosie came from the Battilment of Poules church, upon a Cable, being
made fast to an anchor, at the Deanes gate, lieng upon his breast, aidinge him
self neither with hand nor foot, and after ascended to the middeste of the
same Cable, and tombled and played many pretty toys, whereat the King with
the nobles of the Realm lawghed right hartilye.

The five and twentye day of Februarye, he was crowned King at Westmynster
with great solempnitie.

In the Monethe of March sir Andrewe Dudley Uyce admyrall, with the Paunce and
the Heart, being but syngle manned, had a great conflicte with three
Scottysshe ships, being double manned, and obtained the victory, and took
many prisoners, and brought the ships into Orwelle Haven, where they did
remain.

The Lord Protectoure with the rest of the Counsel, Images commanded to be
taken down.
sent Commissioners into all parts of the Realm, willing them to take all
Images out of their Churches for the aduoydynge of Idolatry, with them were
sent diverse preachers, to persuade the people from their beads, and such like.

At the same time, Procession was commanded to be no more used: Processio^
forbidden to be used
And shortly after was a Parlyament, wherein beside other things, Chauntryes
were given into the Kings hands, The cha^tries given to the king
to be used at his pleasure. And also an order taken for the use of the Lords
supper, that it should be in both kynds of bread and wine.

This year in Auguste, the Duke Somersette and the Earl of Warwike with a
noble army were sent into Scotland: and nere to Edenborough at a place
called Muskelboroughe, Muskleborough field.
the Englyshmen and Scotts met, where between them was foughten a cruel
battle: The victory (by the only prouydence of God) fell to the Englysh
men, and the Scotts were slain (as writes master Patten in his book)
above.xiiii. thousand, Paten.
and taken prisoners of lords, knights, and gentylmen.xv.C.

Anno. 1.
1547
Sir John Gresham mercer M. Thomas white S. Robert Chersey S.
This second year of king Edward the.vi. the watch which in London had been
used at Mydsomer, Anno.2.
and of long time before had been laid down, was now again used, both on the
even of saint John at Mydsommer, and on the even of saint Peter next
following, in as beautyfull manner, and in as good order, as it had been
accustomed before time.

The last day of July, Stephen Gardyner bishop of Winchester, was for a sermon
made before king Edward, and the Counsel, with the nobility sent to the tower
of London, where he remained all this kings reign.

This year in London was great mortality by the pestilence. A great
pestilence.
Wherefore a commauundemente was given to all Curates, and other, having to do
therwyth, that no corpse should be buried before.vi. of the clock in the
morning, nor after.vi. of the clock at night, and that there should at the
buryeng of enery corpse be ronge one belle at the least, the space of three
quarters of an hour.

Anno. 2.
sir Henry Amcottes fishmo^ger M. William Lock S. 1548
John Oliffe S.
Sir Thomas Seimour high Admiral of England, brother to the Lord Protector,
and the Kings uncle, had married Queen Katherine late wife to King Henry, she
conceyuynge a stomach against the Lord Protectors wife. And there upon also
in the behalf of their wives, dyspleasure and grudge began between the two
brothers, which at the length brake out to the trouble of the whole realm,
and the confusion of them both: For the twenty day of March, in the third
year of Edward the syrt, Anno.3.
was the lord admyrall beheaded at Tower hyl. Execution at tower hill
And it was then said of many, the fall of the one brother, would be the
ruin of the other, as afterward it happened.

This year about Whitsontide, and so forth until September, the commons in
most part of this realm, Co^motion in Cornwall and Deuonshyre
mads sundry insurrections and commotions. Amongst whom, diverse of the
commons of Cornwall and Deuonshyre, rose against the nobles and gentilmen: and
in sundry Camps besyeged the town of Excester, which was valyantly defended.

Also they of Norffolke and Suffolk encamped them selves in a wood, Commocion
at Norwiche
called saint Nycholas wood, nere unto Norwiche, declaryng them selves to be
grieved with parkes, pastures, and enclosures made by the gentilme^: who
required the same to be disparked and set among the commons. They of Deuonshyre
did not only require that, but also their old relygion, and the art of sire
articles to be restored. Into Deuonshyre against Humfrey Arundell and his
rebels, was sent the lord Russell, lord preuye seal, with a number of
soldiers. The lord Graie was also sent with a number of strangers, which
were horsemen, where in diverse conflictes they slew many people, and spoiled
that country.

Into Norfolk against captain Kite a Tanner, and his company, sir John Dudley
earl of Warwycke, went with an army: where both he him self and a great
number of gentlemen that were with him, metynge with the rebels, were in
such danger, as they had thought all to have dyed in the place: but God that
confounds the purpose of rebels, brought it so to pass, that as well there
as in all other places, they were partly by power constrained, partly by
promis of their pardon persuaded to submit them selves to their prince, and
delivered their chief capitaynes to punishment, but yet after the loss of
many thousa^des of Englismen.

The king of France perceyuinge such sedicion and trouble in England, as is
before mentioned: and taking grievously the loss of Bulleyne, did not omit
the occasion, but in ye mean time, assaulted certain holds about ye town,
builded of the Englyshemen for the defense of the same, and namely took the
forte called new haven, and thereby much indamaged the English garryson that
lay at Bulleyne. The loss of this was laid to the lord Protector, because
he having the chief government of the Realm, did not see those parts better
furnyshed: in conclusion the Earl of Warwycke as chief, with the consent of
other nobles of the Realm, by open proclamation accused him of misgouernement,
as well in this as in diverse other matters. The Duke of Somerset sent to the
tower of London
Wherefore when he fled with the young king to Wyndsour castle, they caused
him to be set from thence, and brought as a traitor to the tower of London,
the.xiiii. day of October.

Anno. 3.
Sir Rouland Hill Mercer M. John York S. 1549
Rych. Turk S.
This sir Rouland hill, to the great praise of his vocation, and to the
synguler comfort of the weal publyque of his country, erected many notable
monumentes and good deeds, which here are not to be unremembered, so many at
the least as be come to my knowledge, to the intent that like as such (without
doubt) be immortalized in the everlasting world, they may not also be
forgotten in this transitory passage, where they be used and practysed, as well
to the relief of the poor, as to the great commodity of trauelers, and
maintenance of learning, which among other be these. At his costs and
charges he caused to be made a causye, commonly called ouerlane pauement, in
the high way from Stone to Nantwiche, in length.iiii. miles, for horse and
man safely to pass with also diverse lanes on both sides the same causye: he
caused likewise a causye to be made from Dunchurche to Bransen in
Warwickshyre, more then two miles of length, and gave.xx. pound in money
toward making of a bridge, called Roytten bridge, three miles from Couentree.
He made the high way to Kylborne, nere unto London: he made four brydges,
two of them of stone, containing xviii. arches in them both: the one of them
over the river of Seuerne, called Acham bridge, the other Terne bridge, for
that the water of Terne renneth under it, ye other two of timbar at Stoke, and
built new a good part of Stoke church. Moreover he builded one notable free
schole in Drayton in Shropshyre, of co^tinua^nce for ever, with master and
Ushar, and sufficient stypendes for them both, besides convenient lodgings
for the the same: and one yearly rent to maintain and repair the same schole
house and other the roumes for ever. For the maintenance whereof he has
assured lands to the parysh of Drayton, of.22. pound by the year: he also
purchased a free fair to the said town, with a free marked wekely, and a free
market for cattle every.xiiii. days. He gave to the Hospital of Christ's
church in London, in his life time five hundred pound in ready money, and one
hundred pounds at his decease, to the poor of the same city of London, beside
the finding of certain scholars at the universities of Oxenforde and
Cambrydge, and students in the Innes of court. etc.

Upon a sunday being the.xix. day of January, A murder committed by Charles
Gauaro.
were murdered in London between Newgate and Smythfielde, two capitaines that
had served the king in his wars at Bulleyne, and other where: the one was
called Gambo, the other Filicirga, both Spaniardes: this murder was committed
by Charles Gauaro a Fle^myng, who came in post from Barwyke to London to do
that act. And being hanged for the same with his three men in Smythfielde,
Execution in Smithfielde.
said at his death, he would never repe^te it: they were al four hanged on
the friday next after, which was the.xxv. day of January.

The.xxvii. day of January, Execution at Tyborne.
Humfrey Arundell captain of the rebels in Deuonshyre, was hanged, drawn,
and quartered at tyborne, with diverse other, as Wynslade, Holmes, and Bery,
etc. About the same time, Robert Kyte captain of them that rose in Norfolk
together with his brother Wyllyam, was condemned and sent to Norwiche, where
the said Robert was hanged in chains upon the top of Norwyche castle. The
two capitaynes, Arundell and Kite, were brought to London about one time: and
so was the prophecy fulfilled, that they and their company had great affiance
and trust in: that is, that they should mete at London, which they interpreted
to prosperity as co^querours and not to punishment as traitors.

Anno. reg. 4
About the beginning of February, in the fourth year of Edward the syxte, the
Ambassadors of England and France, consulted of a peace to be had between
both Realms, which after was concluded.

The Duke of Somerset delivered.
The.vi. day of February, the Duke of Somerset king Edwards uncle, was delivered
out of ye tower, and ye same night be supped with the earl of Warwick at the
sherifes house called master York.

The.x. day of February, One Bell a Suffolk man, was drawn from the tower to
tyborne, Execution at tyborne.
and there hanged and quartered for mouyng a new rebellion in Suffolk and
Esser.

On mondaye, being the last day of March, a general peace was proclaimed
between the kings of England and France, and in the same peace were included
the Emperor and the Scotts.

The.25. day of April, Bulleine yielded to the french king.
the town of Bulleyn was yielded up unto the French king, and his capitaines
took the possession, which was so great comfort to the Frencheme^, that at
their entryng of the town, many of them kneled down and kissed the stones of
the streates.

The ii. day of May, Ioane Butcher burnt in Smythfield.
one Ioane Knel, otherwise called Ioane Butcher, or Ione of Ke^t, was burned in
Smithfield for heresy, that Christ took no flesh of the virgin Mary, but
passed through her body as through a conduicte.

Not long after, certain leude persons attempted a new rebellion in some part
of Kent, but they were sone repressed, and certain of the chief, as Rychard
Lion, Goddard Gorran, and Rychard Ireland, Execution.
were apprehended and put to death for the same, the.xiiii. day of May.

Anno. 4.
sir Andrewe Iud Skin. M. August. Hind S 1550
John Lion S
This sir Andrewe Iudde (before named) erected one notable schole at Tunbrydge
in Kent, wherein be brought up and noryshed in good learning, great store of
youth, as well bred in that shyre as brought from other countries adioynyng. A
noble act, and correspondent to those that have been done by like worshipful
men and other in old time, within the same city of London.

This year upon a thursdaye, being the.xvii. day of December, the Thames
beneth the bridge did ebb and flow three times within.ix. hours: and the
same day and time, the bishop of Wynchester (who had lain in the tower from
the morrow after saint Peter's day, the first year of Edward ye sixth, was
brought unto Lambyth by water, before the bishop of Canterbury, and other the
kings commisioners, where were objected unto him certain articles on the
kings behalf, and day assigned him to answer.

Tho. Coper.
The.xxiiii. day of January, was a parliament holde^ at Westmynster, and was
continued until the.xv. of April. At this time besides diverse other things,
it was enacted that priests children should be legytimate.

Anno reg. v.
This year on saint Valentins day, being the fifth year of Edward the sixth, at
Feuersham in Kent, A murder at Feuersham.
one Arden a gentleman, was killed by the consent of his own wife. For this
act, just punyshement was afterward taken upon those that were the doers and
consenters to the same. The wife her self was burned at Canterbury the.xiiii.
day of March, the same day two other were hanged in chains at Feuersham,
and a woman brent: Mosby and his sister, Execution.
were hanged in Smithfielde at London. And Black will the Ruffyan that was
hiered to do the act, after his first escape, Execution at Flyshyng.
was apprehended and burnt on a scaffolde at Flyshyng in Sealande.

The.xiiii. day of February, being saturday, D. Stephen Gardener bishop of
Wynchester, was deprived of his byshoprike, and so committed to the tower
again. Into his place was translated doctor poynet, who before was bishop of
Rochester.

The.24. day of Apryll, being Frydaie, An Aryan burnt in Smythfield.
a duche man was burned in Smithfielde for heresy, who held the detestable
opinion of the Arrians.

The.viii. day of May, a proclamation was made, that from and after the last
day of August then next ensuyng, our shyllyng of the value of.xii. d. should be
current but for.ix. d. and a groate for three pence: by reason of which
proclamation ensued great dearth of al things, for the people couetyng to
reyse the loss of their money, upon such kind of wares or victual as they
occupied, did daily enhaunce the price, most myserablye appressyng the poor.

An earthquake.
The.25. day May, being Monday, between the hours of eleven and one of the
clock at after noone, was an erthquake of half a quarter of an hour long at
Blechynglye, at Godstone, at Croydon, at Albery, and at diverse other places in
Southery and Myddlesexe.

The.ix. day of July, being thursday, the foresaid proclamation, which was
appointed to take effect the last day of August next coming (by reason of the
infaciable covetousness of the people, oppressyng the poor) was shortened unto
this present day, and took effect immediately upon the publyshynge of the
same, which was done between.ix. and ten of the clock before noone, The
first fall of the money.
so that immediately, a shilling went for.ix. pe^ce, and a grote for.iii. d. and
no word spoken of ye small money, as pe^ce and half grotes, by reason whereof,
there was no small money to be gotten to give ye poor people.

The sweating sickness began in London the.viii. day of July, A sweatyng sycknes.
and the.x day of July it was most vehement: which was so terrible, that
people being in best health were suddenly taken, and dead in.xxiiii. hours,
or.xii. or less, for lack of skyll in guydyng them in their sweat. And it is
to be noted, that this mortality fell chiefly or rather only on men, and those
also of the best age, as between.xxx. and xi. years of age: also it followed
Englysh men, as well within the Realm as in strange countries: wherefore this
nation was much afearde of it, and for the time began to repent, and remember
God, from whom the plague might well seem to be sent among us. But as the
disease in time rele^ted, so our deuocio^ also in short space decayed: the
first weke died in London.800 persons and the^ it ceased.

The.xvii. day of August, being mo^day, was proclamacion made, The second fall
of the money.
that the shilling, which of late was called down to.ix. d. should be current
for.vi. d. the groat ii. d. ye half grote.i. d. a penny, a eb.

The.xi. day of October, being sunday, the Lord Marquis Dorset, was created
Duke of Suffolk, the lord earl of Warwycke, was created Duke of
Northumberlande, and the earl of Wilshere, was created Marquis of Wynchester,
and sir William Herbert, the master of the horse, was created earl of
Penbroke, and diverse me^ made knights.

The Duke of Somerset committed again to the tower.
The.xvi. day of October, being friday, the duke of Somerset was brought again
to the tower of London, and in the next morning the duchess his wife, was
brought thither also: and there went also with the Duke the lord Graye of
Wylton, sir Rafe Uane, and sir Thomas Palmer, and diverse other gentlemen of his
famyliers.

Anno. 5.
1551
Rychard Dobbes Skynner M. John Lambert S John Cowper S
The.xxx. day of October being frydaye, was proclaimed a new coin of money,
A new coin
both silver and gold: soueraynes of syne gold at.xxx. s. Angels of fine
gold at.x. s. and diverse other pieces of gold of lesser value: a piece of
silver of v. s. and a piece of two.s. vi. d. the sterlyng shylling.xii. d. and
sundry other smaller pieces of money.

The.vi. day of November, being friday, the old Queen of Scotts, The queen
of Scotts road through London.
road through London and Cheap, with a great company of Englyshmen waiting on
her, after she had layne four days in the bishops place beside Paul's church.

The first day of December, The Duke of Somerset araigned.
being tuesday, the Duke of Somerset was arraygned at Westmynster haull, and
was there acquitted of treason, but condemned of felony, by virtue of an act of
parliament, made against conuenticles and unlawful assemblies.

The.vii. day of December, being monday, was a general muster of the
horsemen, A muster of horsemen.
which were in the wages of the nobles of the Realm: and for the which the
kings majesty allowed yearly for every man.20. pound, the which muster was
made upon the caussey over against the kings palayce at saint James. the
number of horse was extemed to be a thousand.

The.xxii. day of January, being friday, Edward Duke of Somerset, Execution at
tower hill.
king Edwards uncle before mentioned, was beheaded at the tower hill: the people
being there to behold the execution, were suddenly in a great fear, few or
none knowing the cause, but this I saw: the Duke being on the scaffolde
by.viii. of the clock in the morning, enclosed with the guard, the warders of
the tower, and other, the people of a certain hamlet, which were warned to be
there by.vii. of the clock, to give their attendance on the Lieftenant: now
came through the posterne, and perceiving the prisoner to be already on the
scaffolde, the formoste began to run with their bills on their shoulders, and
cried to their fellows to follow fast after: which sodennes of these men so
weaponed, thus running caused the people being next, and which best saw the^,
to think that some power had come to have delivered the Duke from execution,
which caused them to cry, away, away, whereupon the people ran, one end way,
not knowing whether, and they which tarried to know some cause of this hurly
burly, had thought some pardon had be brought, some said it thundered, some
said the ground shoke, but the occasion was as I have said.

Anno. reg.6.
This syxt year of Edward the syxt, on the.xx. day of February, the
merchants of the Stylyarde at London, were put from their pryuyledge of
occupiyng, which they of long time before had used.

The.xxvi. day of February, Execution at the tower hyl
being Friday, Sir Raufe a Uane, and six Miles Partryge, were hanged upon the
gallows at tower hill: and sir Mychell Stanhope, with sir Thomas Arru^dell,
were beheaded upon the scaffold, which four were condemned as accessory in that
which the Duke was condemned for.

This year the sea brake in at Sandwiche, in so much that it did ouerflowe all
the Marshes there about, it ouerflowed the marshes beside Wolwich and beyond
saint Katherynes.

The last day of April, through negligence of the gonne powder makers, A house
blown up with gunpowder.
a certain house with three last of powder, was blown up and burnt, the said
gunpowder makers, being.xv. in number, were all slain at the tower hill, a
little from the Minoris beside London, on the back side of new abbey.

The.iii. day of August, was borne a marvelous strange monster, A monster.
at a place called Myddelto^.xi. miles from Oxe^ford, a woman brought forth a
child, which had ii perfect bodies from ye navel upward, and were so joined
together at the navel, that when they were laid in length, the one head and
body was eastwarde, and the other west, the legs for both the bodies grew
out at ye mids where the bodies joined: and had but one issue for the
excreme^t of both the bodies, they lived.xviii. days, and when they were
opened, it appeared they were women children.

The.viii. day of August, Great fyshes taken.
there were taken about Nuynborough three great fyshes called Dolphins, or by
some called Kygges: and the weke following, at Blackwall, were six more taken
and brought to London, and there sold: the least of the^ was greater then any
horse.

The same month the commons of the city of London, chose three sherifes,
either after other, and every one of the^ refused the office, and fined for it
as it was thought, two hundred pound a piece, and then the commons chose one
John Mainarde, who took it upon him, which about.ix. or.x. years before, had
given out wares and Iewelles, as it was thought, to ye su^me of.2000. marks to
be paid him when he were sheriff of London.

The same month of August, began the great provision for the poor in London,
toward the which every man was contributorie, and gave certain money in
hand, and promised to give a certain wekely. The gray friars in London
converted to an hospital.
The first house which was begone was at the Graye friars in Newgate market,
which went forward with all speed.

The.vii. day of October were two great fyshes taken at Grauesend, Great
fyshes taken.
which were called whirlepooles, they were afterward drawn up above the
bridge.

The.xiiii. day of October the bishop of Durha^ called Cuthbert Tunstall was
brought before the Commissioners, at the place of sir Arthur Darcy knight upon
tower hill, where he was deprived from his said byshoprike.

Anno. 6.
George Barnes haberdasher M. will. Garret S Io. Mainarde S 1552

This sir George Barnes gave ye wind myll which stands toward the east in
Finsbery field to the company of the haberdashers of London, to that entente
that the profits risyng thereof, should be distributed to the poor almose
people of the same company. And also he gave to the parson and church
wardeyns of saint Bartholomew the little, certain tenements, for the which
they be bound to distribute to the poor people of the same paryshe.xviii. d.
in bread every sunday for ever.

The first children taken in to Christ's hospital at London.
The.xxi. day of Noue^ber, being mondaye, the children were taken into the
Hospital at the gray friars called Christ's Hospital to the number of four
hundred.

In the summer past the other year, king Edward went in progress into the
west country, where he had so much exercise of haukynge and hunting, as was
thought by some at that time to be dangerous unto his health. Toward winter
he returned to London, and from thense to Grenewitche, where all the Christmas
season was passed with much pleasauntnes and myrthe, until at length in
January he fell sick of a cough, Anno. 7.
which ended in a consumption of the lyghtes.

The sunday before Candelmas which was the.xxix. day of January, in the vii.
year of Edward the.vi. came a commission to the Church wardens of all paryshes
in London, that all their lynnen, as albes, chesebels, and surplices, which
were not occupied (reserving necessary linen for the church, should be
given unto the Hospital above named.

The.xx. day of May by the encourageme^t of one Sebastian Gabota.iii. great
ships well furnished were set forth for the adventure of the unknown
voyage to Moscouia, A voyage to Moscouie.
and other east parts by the north seas. And about the same time.ii. other
shyps were sent forth to seek adventures southwardes.

In May whiles king Edward lay daungerously sick, Lord Gylford the duke of
Northumberlandes fourth son, married lady Jane the Duke of Suffolkes daughter,
whose mother being then alive was daughter to Mary king Henry's sister, which
first was married to the french king, and after to Charles duke of Suffolk.

In this time many were punyshed in England for talking rasshely, that the
King should be dead, and diverse also for saying that he was poisoned: for
that rumor was spread throughoute the Realm.

The.22. day of June, a great thunder began about a.xi. of the clock, A great
thunder.
and dured almost the space of two hours, and about.xii. of the clock was a
wonderful terrible clap, at which clappe the little door of saint Denyse
church in London was driven open, and the lock thereof with a great part of
the lynyng of the same door was torn away.

King Edward deceased.
King Edward being about the age of.xvi. years, as is said before was long sick
of a consumption of the lights, and the.vi. day of July ended his life. he was
in this his youth, a prince of such towardnes in virtue, learning, and all
goodly gifts, as Europe seldom times or never has seen the like: and therefore
no marvel, considering the state of the realm, if all true english hearts
dye much lament so untimely death in so tender youth, and so toward a prince.

The.x. day of July being monday, the death of King Edward was publyshed:
Lady Jane proclaimed Queen.
The same day in the after noone about four of the clock, the Lady Jane
daughter of the lady Frances, the Duchess of Suffolk, which Lady Jane was
married unto the Lord Gyiford Dudley the fourth son unto the Duke of
Northumberland was conveyed by water to the tower of London and between.vii.
and.viii. of the clock in the evening, proclamation was made throughout the
city, whereby was declared by sundry circumstances, that king Edward being
deceased, by his will had assigned the said lady Jane to be queen, and
therevppon so proclaimed Queen of England. This matter was very greuouslye
taken of the commom people, and a great number of gentilmen, for the love they
bare to Lady Mary, and the right of her title. At this time the state of this
realm might well seem most miserable, wherein the nobility and counsel on the
one part, and the gentlemen and commons of the other, appeared to be fully bent
to maintain two contrary titles. For when it was heard that the lady Mary was
fled to Framingham castle in Suffolk, the people of the country almost
wholly resorted unto her, and in Oxenforde sir John Williams, in
Buckinghamshire, sir Edmunde Peckham, and in diverse other places many men of
worship, offryng them selves as guides to the common people, gathered great
powers, and with all speed made toward Suffolk, where lady Mary was. In this
mean time the.xiii. day of July, by appointment of the counsel the Duke of
Northumberland, the Earl of Huntingdon, the lord Gray of Wilton and diverse
other, with a great number of men of arms, went to fetch her by force, and
was on their way as far as Bury but not long after, the counsel, partly
moved with the right of her cause, partly considering that the most of the
realm was wholly bent on her side, changed their minds, and assembled them
selves at Baynardes castle, and there commoned with the earl of Pembroke, and
immediately came into Cheapeside, with the king of heraldes, where they
proclaimed the lady Mary daughter to king Henry the.viii. and queen Katherine,
Lady Marye proclaimed queen of England.
queen of England, France, and Irelande defendor of the faith. etc. the xix.
day of July: keeping as prisoners in the tower lady Jane lately proclaimed, and
Lord Gylford her husband. When this was heard in the dukes camp, many of his
soldiers forsook him, and be returning to Cambridge, proclaimed the Lady
Marye Queen, and on the twenty day at night, being apprehended of the guard, he
with other, was brought to the Tower of London, the five and twentye day of
July. Thus was the matter ended without bloudshedde, which men seared would
have brought the death of many thousands.

Queen Mary.
Anno Regni. 1.
MArye, the eldest daughter of king Henry the.viii. began her reign over this
realm of England the vi. day of July, 1553
in the year of our Lord.1553. and deceased in the year of our Lord.1558.
the.17. day of November, so she reigned.v. years.v. months and.xi. days: she
was proclaimed Queen at London, the.xix. day of July, and the.xx. day at the
castle of Framingham: Queen Mary having to the number of 30000. men, ye earl
of Sussex being lieutenaunt of the army, when she dissolved her camp at
Framingham victuals was of such plentithe, that a barell of biere was fold
for vi. d with the caske and iiii. great loaves of bread for a penny.
and afterward being accompanied with a goodly band of noble men, gentylmen,
and commoners gathered out of all parts of the realm, came to London, and
entered the tower the.iii. day of August. In her fathers time and brothers time,
diverse noble men, bishops, and other were cast into the tower: sum for
treason laid to their charge, as the Duke of Norffolke, and the Lord Courtney,
son to the Marquis of Excester: some for mainteinyng the Popes supremacy, as
D. Lonstall, bishop of Durham, and other: which continued there prisoners at
the Queen's coming to the tower, to all these and many other, she granted
pardon, and restored them to their former dignities. Likewise did she unto
doctor Gardener bishop of Winchester, whom she did not only set at liberty,
but also made him high chancellor of England. For the great favor that she
showed to the lord Courtney, whom she made Earl of Deuonshyre, many men were in
opinion, that she purposed to have married him, but in the end it proved
otherwise.

As all sorts of men almost did rejoice, that Queen Mary had recovered the
crown: so many notwithstanding much feared alteration of religion by her. For
manifest signification thereof, was given daily, as well by the Queen her self,
who oftentimes had mass and Latin service before her in the tower: as also
by diverse sermons made of them that at that time were appointed to preach
about London.

The.xi. day of August certain gentilmen myndyng to pass through London
bridge in a wherrie, A wherrye ouerturned.
were there ouerturned by violence of the water, and seven of them drowned.

The.xiii. day of August, master Bourn canon of Paul's, preaching at Paul's
cross said as follows: This same day v. years the reverend father in God,
Edmunde bishop of London our diocesan, preaching in this place, and this same
gospel which I now preach, for the same was cast in prison, and has there
remained till this time, that the queen's most excellent majesty has delivered
and set him at liberty: which saying of the precher so offended the audience,
that they breakyng silence, said, the bishop had preached abomination: other
some cried (meaning of the preacher) pull him out, pulle him out: and some
being next the pulpyt, began to clymbe toward the preacher to have pulled him
out, wherewith the preacher stepped back, and one master Bradforde, a preacher
of King Edwardes time, stepped forth into the preachers place, most myldely
and gently persuadyng the audience to quietness and obedience, whose presence
lyked the people well: A dagger thrown at Paul's cross
but nevertheless Bourne standing by Bradford one threw a dagger at him which
hytte one of the side poastes of the pulpet, and rebounded back again a great
way: whereupon master Bradforde was feign to break of his speech, and forced
him self with the help of John Rogers, an other preacher, to conueye Master
Bourne out of the audience, which with great labor they brought into Poules
schole.

Doctor Boner that was deprived in king Edwards time, was now again (as ye
have heard) restored to his bishoprike and diverse other bishops for Religion
were displaced: as Cranmer of Canterbury: The archbishop of York Poynet of
winchester, Barlow of Bath, Farrar of S. Dauis: Harley of Herford: Houper of
Gloucester: Couerdale of Excester: Scory of Chichester. etc. And al other
benefieed men, that either were married or would not forsake their opinions, were
put out of their liuinges, and other known to be of the contrary part were
set in the same, especially if any were alive, that in the time of king Henry
or Edward were put out of the same bishoprikes or benefices: as bishop day of
Chichester: Heth of worc. Turberuile of Excest. etc. The.22. day of August yt
duke of Northu^berla^d was beheded and with him were put to death sir John Gates,
Execution at Tower hill.
and sir Thomas Palmer called Buskin palmer knights.

Peter martyr, who in king Edwards time was reader of divinity in Oxford
obtained license and safe conduite of the queen, and departed out of England
to Argentine whens he came.

In this time ye people showed themselves so ready to receive their old
religion, yt in many places of the realm, understanding the queen's pleasure,
before any law was made for the same, they erected again their aultars, and
used the Mass and latin service, in such sort as was wont to be in king
Henry's time.

The great Hary burnt.
The.xxvi. day of Auguste in the euenyng, the notablest ship in the world was
burnt at wolwich, called the great Hary, by the negligence of maryners, she was
of burden a M. tun.

The last day of September the queen's hyghnes rode thorough the city to
Westminster in most goodly manner, A man stood on the wether cock of Paul's.
the pageantes in all places accustomed being most gorgiously trimmed: And as
her grace passed by Poules, a certain dutche man stood upon the wethercock with
an enseigne in his hand, flouryshyng with the same, and under him upon the
cross, a scaffold garnished with enseignes banners and streamers, and under
that upon the holle an other scaffolde with enseignes and streamers, very
strange to ye beholders. And the morrow which was the first day of October her
grace was crowned at westminster by doctor Gardener bishop of Winchester.

The.v. day of October began the parliament at Westminster, and mass of the
holy ghost was song.

The.xxv. day of October the barge of Grauesend by great misfortune of a
ratche running upon her, Grauesende barge ouerturned.
was overthrown and.xiiii. persons drowned, and xvi. saved by swimming.

The.xxiii. the.xxv. the.xxvii. days of October were certain disputations in
the long chapel at the north door of Paul's concerning Transubstantiation
but nothing thoroughly determined.

Anno. 1.
Tho. white merchant tailour M. Tho. Offley S. Will. Hewet S. 1553

The same sir Thomas White, a worthy patron and protector of poor scholars and
learning, renewed or rather erected a college in Oxford, S. John's college in
Oxenford erected
that was in great ruin and decay, now called S. John's college, and before
Bernard college, indowyng the same with lands and revenues, to the great
prefermente of learning and comfort of poor men's children. Renewing by that
ensample, the worthy monuments and deeds done by the like godly disposed of
ancient time in both the universities, which may well be called, ye two Eyes
of the realm, whose sight begin to grow dymme, thorough the coldness of
charity and want of devotion late crept into the hearts of men. God grant
they may be restored to the clerenes of their wonted syghte, that learning may
flouryshe, through abundaunce of scholars, with maintenance for the same.
And that the able and rich may liberally imitate therample of this virtuous
gentleman, who both there and in many other places, as by erection of Schools
at Bristoll and Reading, has planted the roots of learning: the fruits
whereof no doubt in time to come shall flouryshe, to the great commodity and
singular ornament of the realm.

Trinity coledge erected.
The like College also now called trinity college, the right worshypfull sir
Thomas Pope knight deceased to his great praise and singular comme^dation
erected, which some time was called Durham college, also ruinous and in great
decay he reedified: appoyntynge for the maintenance of the fellows and
scholars like possession. By which fact he declared, that like as God had
endued him with great richesse and revenues by policy and the princis service
acquired and gotten, even so he thereby meant to dedicate some portion thereof to
the honor of lerning, and gifts of the mind, that his natural country might
attein that honor, which is or ought to belong to every christen realm.
For he remembryng what benefits learning does conduce and bring to a well
governed common wealth, thought not to beslack in distributyng his portion, to
thaugmentation of the same.

Cardinal Poole, who fled out of England in the time of King Henry, and
was in great estimation in the court of Rome, was sent for by Queen Mary to
return into his country.

About this time the parliament did conclude, that the Service of the church
should from and after the.xx. day of December next ensuyng, be used in all
places, in such manner and form as it was used in the last year of king
Henry the.viii.

The.xiii. day of Noue^ber D. Cranmer Archbishop of Canturburye, lady Jane that
was before proclaimed Queen, and the lord Gylford her husband were openly
arreigned and condemned for treson.

This year the.xxv. of November being saint Katherins day, after euensong
began the quier of Poules to go about the steple, synging anthemes with cresset
lyghtes, after the old custom at vi. of the clock at night.

The last day of November being saint Andrews day, began the procession in
latin, the bishop, curates, persons, and the whole quiere of Poules, with the
Mayor and aldermen, and the prebendes in their gray amyses, etc.

The.v. day of December the parliament was dissolved, in the which parliament
all statutes that were made either of Praemunire in time of king Henry the.viii.
or concerning religion and administration of the sacraments under king
Edward the syxt, were repealed, and communication was had of the queen's
marriage with king Philyp the Emperors son.

The beginning of January the emperor sent a noble man called Ecmondane and
certain other ambassadors into England to make a perfect conclusion of the
marriage between King Philyp and Queen Mary.

The.xx. day of January the lord Chancellor with other of the counsel,
declared openly unto the Queen's majesty's household, that there was a marriage
concluded, between her grace and the king of Spain, which should be a great
strength, honor, and enrichyng to the realm of England.

The purpose of this marriage was so grievously taken of diverse noble men, and a
great number of gentylmen and commoners, that for this, and religion, they in
such sort conspired against the queen, that if the matter had not broken out
before the time appointed, men thought it would have brought much more
trouble and danger. For sir Thomas Wyat in Kente, being one of the chief, A
commotion in Kent.
fearing that the matter was by certain persons bewrayed, suddenly about
the.xx. day of January gathered a certain company, and much incensed the
people of those parts against the queen, saying: That she and the counsel
intended not only by alteration of religion to bring in the pope, but also by
marriage of a stranger to bring the realm into miserable servitude and
bondage. When report of this was brought to London, the Queen, with so much
speed as might be, sent the duke of Norfolk with a company of soldiers into
Kent against Wiat, where the duke meting with Wyat, not far from Rochester
bridge, was forsaken of his soldiers, and returned to London.

The duke of Suffolks, again proclaimed his daughter queen.
In this mean time Henry duke of Suffolk father to lady Jane lately proclaimed
Queen fleing into Leycestershyre, and Warwikeshire with a small company in
diverse places as he went again proclaimed his daughter: but the people did not
greatly inclyne unto him Wherefore when the earl of Huntyngton, that was sent to
pursue him, came to Couentrie, and was received into the city: the duke,
having no great power or strength of men about him, was brought thereby into a
straight, and hydyng himself in a park of his own by Couentrie, was bewrayed
by one of his servants, and so taken, and by the earl of Huntington brought
prisoner to London: The Duke of Suffolk taken.
while this stir and trouble was, the Emperors ambassadors for fear of
danger departed out of the realm, and the same day being the first of
February, the Queen came from Westminster to the Guyld hall in London: The
Queen came to the Guylde hall in London.
and there after vehement words against Wyate, declared that she meant not
otherwise to marry, then the Council should think both honorable and
commodious to the realm. And if they thought good, that she could continue
unmarried, as she had done ye greatest part of her age: and therefore wylled
them truly to assist her in repressynge such as contrary to their duties
rebelled.

When she had done, understanding that many in London did favor Wyats part,
she appointed lord William Haward lieutenant of the city, and the Earl of
Pembroke general of the field which both prepared all things necessary for
their purposes, with great provision of men and artillery.

While this prouysion was making, Wyate came nere unto the city, and was
entered into Southewarke, the third day of February, and the morrow after
Candlemas day. wherefore the draw bridge was broken down, ordinance bent to
that part, general pardon proclaimed to all them that would give over and
forsake the rebels, and a great reward appointed to him that took Wyate
prisoner. After Wyat had layne.ii. days in Southwarke, he turned his journey to
Kyngston on Shroue: tuisday in the morning, being the sixte of February. where
he passed over the Thames, and purposed to have come to London in the night:
but by means that the carriage of his chief ordinance brake he was so let
that he could not come before it was far day. At that time the earl of
Pembroke, and diverse other were in saint James field with a great power, and
their ordinance so bent that Wiate was feign to leave the common way, and with
a small company came under saint James wall from the danger of the
ordinance: and so went by Charing cross unto Ludgate without resistance, and
there thought to have be let in. But perceiuyng that he was defeated of his
purpose, he returned, and about temple bar was resysted, and yeldyng
himself was taken prisoner. Wyat taken.


Proclamation was made in London, that no man under pain of death should keep
in his house any of Wiats faction. Wherefore they were all brought forth, and
shortly after, about the number of fifty were hanged on.xx. pair of gallouses
made for that purpose in diverse places in and about the city.

The.xii. day of February lady Jane the duke of Suffolkes daughter and her
husband lord Gylford, which hitherto had been kept in the tower, Execution.
were now be headed, for fear least any other should make like trouble for her
title, as her father had attempted to do.

The.17. of February was proclamation made that all strangers should void the
realm within.xxiiii. days next ensuing, Execution at the tower of London.
upon pain of confiscation of their goods (all free denisens, marchantes,
embassadoures and their servants except.)

The.xvii. day of February Henry Duke of Suffolk was condemned of reason,
and the fourth day after beheaded at the tower hill, Execution at tower hill.
and his body buried in the tower.

The.23. of February, about.240. prisoners of Wiats faction went with halters
about their necks toward Westminster, who had their pardon in chepe.

The.xv. day of March the Earl of Devonshire, whom the Queen at her first
entering delivered out of the tower and lady Elisabeth also the Queen's sister
were both in suspicion to have consented to Wyats conspyracie: and for the same
were apprehended and committed to the Tower.

The.x. of April Cranmer archbishop of Canturbury, Ridley of London, and Hugh
Latymer ones bishop of worcester, were conveyed as prisoners from the tower of
London to Wyndsor, and after from thence to the university of Oxforde, there
to dispute with the divines and learned men of the contrary opinion.

Execution at tower hill.
The.xi. day of April sir Thomas Wiat chief capitayn and ryngleader of the
rebels was beheaded at tower hill, and after quartered, his quarters were set
up in diverse places, and his head on the gallows at Hay hill, where it was
soon after stolen away, and his fyngers and toes cut of from his quarters and
conveyed.

The.27. of April the lord Thomas Gray, Execution at Tyborne.
brother to the late duke of Suffolk, was beheaded.

William Thomas a gentylman, and certain other persons were apprehended for
conspiring Queen Mary's death the same William Thomas for that offense
the.xviii. day of May was drawn hanged and quartered at Tyborne.

The.xix. day of May the lady Elizabeth was brought out of the Tower by water,
and so conueyde to Richemount, from thense to Wyndsore, and so by my lord
Williams to Rycote in Oxfordeshyre, and from thens to Woodstocke, where she
remained.

The.xxiiii. day of May, being the feast of Corpus Christi, a ioyner that
dwelte in Colman street, called John Street would have taken the Sacrament out
of the priests hands in Smithfield, in the time of procession, but he was
resisted, taken and put in Newgate, and then he feigned him self mad.

The fowerth day of June was taken down all the gallows that were about
London. The same day began the cross of Cheap to be new gylded.

Anno. reg. 2. A spirit in a wall at London.
The.xxii. day of June was a proclamation made concerning shootynge in
handgunnes and bearyng of weapons.

The.xv. day of July in the seconds year of Queen Mary, Elisabeth a young
wenche of the age of.xvi. or.xviii. years, did open penance at Paul's cross,
standing upon a skaffold all the sermon time where she confessed openly, that
she being enticed by lewd council, had upon the.xiiii. day of March last
passed counterfeit certain speches in an house, nere unto Aldersgate in London,
about the which, the people of the whole city were wonderfully molested. Some
saying it was an angel, some the holy ghost, speaking in a walls: On this
manner she behaved her self, she lay and whystled in a strange whistell made
for the nones, then were.iii. or.iiii. companions confederate with her, which
took upon them to interpret what the spirit said, expressyng certain sedicious
and opprobrious words against the queen's highness.

The.xix. day of July king Philyp the emperors son, King Philip came to
Winchester.
passing out of Spain came into England, and arrived at South hampton.
the.iiii. day after he came to Winchester in the evening, and there going to
the church, was honorably received of the bishop, and a great number of
nobles, for that purpose appointed: the next day he met with the quens with
whom after he had long and familiar talk. The second day being saint James
day, the marriage was in honorable manner solemnised between him and queen Mary.
At this time the emperors ambassador being present, openly pronounced yt in
consideration of that marriage, the emperor had granted and given unto his
son, the kingdom of Naples. Shortly after, king Philip and queen Mary,
departed from Winchester, and with a goodly company were brought to London,
and there with great provision were received of the Citizens the.xviii. day of
August. At that time a man came as it were flying upon a rope from Paul's steple
to the deanes wall.

In October the emperor sent ambassadors into England to yield unto his son
king Philip the Dukedom of Millayne.

Anno. M.2. P.1.
1554
John Lion grocer M. David Wodroffe S. William Chester S.
Cardinal Poole came into England.
The.xxiii. of November Cardinal Poole came out of Brabant into England, and
was received with much honor in all places as he passed. At the same time he
was by parlyamente restored to his old estate and dignity that he was put
from by king Henry the queen's father: and shortly after came into the
parlyamente house where the king, queen, and other states were all present.
Then he declaryng the cause of his legacy, first exhorted the^ to return to
the communion of the church, and restore to the most holy father and pope, his
due authority: secondly he advertised them to give thanks to God that had
sent them so blessed a king and queen: finally he signified, for so much as
they had with great gentylnes restored him to his honor and dignity, that he
most earnestly desired to se them restored to the heavenly court and unity
of the church. The next day the whole court of parliament drue out ye form of
a supplication, the sum whereof was, that they greatly repented them of
that schism that they had lived in: And therefore desired the queen and the
Cardinal that by their means they might be restored to the bosom of the holy
church and obedience of the sea of Rome. The next day, the King, queen, and
Cardinal being present, the lord Chancellor declared what the parliamente
had determined concerning the Cardinals request, and offered unto the king, and
Queen the supplication before mentioned, which being read: the Cardinal in a
large oration, declared how acceptable repentance was in the syghte of God.
etc.

Immediately he, making prayer unto God, by authority to him committed,
absolved them, and restored them to the church of Rome. When all this was
done, they went all unto the chapel: and there singing Te Deum, with great
solempnytie declared the joy and gladness, that for this reconciliation was
pretended.

The.ii. day of December being sunday, the kings majesty, the Lord cardinal,
and diverse other of the nobility, repaired to saint Paul's church in London,
and so unto a wyndow of the same, directly against the cross, where the bishop
of winchester being lord Cha^cellor of England made a sermon, declaryng how
this realm was again restored and united unto the church of Rome.

The.27. of Dece^ber the prince of Piamont duke of Sauoy, with other lords were
received at Grauesend by the lord privy seal, and other, and so conueyde
along the river of Thames through London bridge to Westmin. to ye kings palaice.

In the beginning of January the parliament was dissolved: Wherein among other
things it was enacted, that the statutes before time made for the punishment
of heretics, and the confirmation of the popes power should be revived, and in
so good force as ever they had been before king Henry's reign: and that such
acts as were made against the supremacy of the Pope should be clean
abrogated and abolished.

The.ix. day of January the prince of Orange being received at Grauesende, The
prince of Orange came to London.
was conveyed along the river of Thamis through London bridge, and landed at
the duke of Suffolkes place.

The.iiii. of February being monday, John Rogers vicar of S. Sepulchers, was
burned in Smithfield. Execution in Smithfielde.
The.vii. of February, the lord Strange being married at the court, the same
day at night was a goodly pastime of Iuga cana by cresset light, there
were.lxx. cresset lights.

The.xviii. of February the bishop of Ely, with the lord Mountacute and diverse
other, well apparelled rode forth of the city of London toward Rome
ambassadors from the king, queen and council.

The.xvi. day of March a weaner, Execution in Smithfielde.
which dwelled in Shorditche, was burned in Smithfield.

The xiiii. day of April in Anno.1555. being Ester day, a certain desperate
person named William Flower, with a wod knyfe, wounded a priest, as he was
ministrynge the sacrament to the people in S. Margarets church at Westminster:
for the which offense, Execution in Westminster
the said William Flower was burned at westmynster in saint Margarets church
yard the.xxiiii. day of Apryll.

In May the Lord Cardynall Poole the lord Chauncelloure of England, the
Earl of Arundell, high steward of England, and the lord Paget, went over
sea to Calyce, and nere unto Mark treated with the emperors and French kings
Commyssioners, for a peace to be had between the said princes, Cardinal Poole
being president there, who returned again into England, about the myddest of
June, without any agreement making.

On the tenthe day of May, a ladde called Wyllyam Fetherstone, about the age
of eyghtene years, who named him self to be king Edward the vi. was taken
about Eltham in Kente, and conveyed to Hampton court, and there brought before
the counsel, who examined him why he named himself to be king Edward, he
requirynge to be pardoned, said he wist not what he did, but as he was
counseled, apperyng manyfestly to be a desperate fool, and so was committed
to the marshalsey.

The.xxviii. day of May the aforesaid ladde was had out of the Marshalsey in a
carte, and so carried through London to Westminster, with a paper on his head:
wherein was written, that he named him self king Edward. And after that he had
been thus carried round about Westmynster hall before all the Judges and
others, he was then whipped about the said Hall, and after set at liberty.

The later end of June, was a certain muttering traitorously attempted about
Wadehurst in Suffex, but it was spedily perceived and wyttyly repressed.

About the first of July John Bradforde was burned in Smithfield. Execution in
Smythfielde.
This Bradforde was a man of very sober and honest life, and therefore the
bishops would have been very glad to have had him recant and abjure his
opinion.

The.xii. day of August the.3. year of queen Mary was a terrible fight on the
sea, Anno.3.
between the Duchemen and frenchmen nere unto Romney marshe, where as.xi. shyps
were brent and sonke, that is.vi. french ships, and five great hulkes, and
certain hulkes taken by the French men.

In the beginning of September the king went over sea to Calice, The.iiii. of
September king Philip arrived at Calaice.
and so forth to Brusselles in Brabant to visit the emperor his father.

The beginning of October fell such rain, that for the space of vi. days men
might row with boats in saint Georges field, the water came into westminster
hall, and there stood half a yard deep. Also into the palaice of
westmynster, and into Lambeth Church, that men might row about the church
with a whirrie.

The.xvi. day of October doctor Ridley, and doctor Latymer were burned at
Oxenforde.

Anno. M.3. P.2.
1555
will. Garret haberdasher M Thomas Lee S. John Macha^ S.
In October and November a parliament was holden, in the which the queen being
persuaded (of the clergy) that she could not prosper so long as she kept in
her hands the revenues of the church, yielded up unto the spiritual men,
the first fruits and tenthes of all byshoprikes benefices, and
ecclesiastical liuinges, which in king He^ries time were by parliament annexed
to the crown: before the end of this parliamente, dyed Stephen Gardener
Chancellor of England on the.ix. day of November, and was buried at
Wynchester, and in his place was appointed doctor Heath archbishop of York.

Philpot was burned the.xviii. day of Nouembre. Execution.


King Philyp, beginning to govern the low countries, committed unto him by his
father about the.xviii. day of January entered into Andwerpe, and was received
with great solemnity.

The.iiii. day of March appeared a blasyng sterre, A blasyng sterre.
and continued the space of xii. days.

William Fetherston who before had named him self to be king Edward (as you
have herd in the year last past) now said, he had of late seen and spoken with
king Edward: for the which he was drawn to tyborne, and there hanged and
quartered the.xiii. day of March.

The.xxi. day of March D. Cranmer archbishop of Canterbery was burned at
Oxford: and the same day the lord Cardinal Poole song his first mass at
Grenewich in the friars church: on sunday next following, he was consecrated
archebyshop of of Caunterbury, at the same friars church with great
solemnity: and on the.xxv. day of March, being the feast of the annunciation
of our Lady in the year.1556. he was stalled at Bowechurche in Cheap.

On Palmsonday eue^ being ye.28. of March, part of the prison house of Newgate
at London was burnt by casualtie of fire.

This year a certain conspiracy was made by certain mean persons in
England: whose purpose was to have robbed the queen's Escheker, to this intent
that they might be able to mainteyne war against the queen. This matter
was uttered by one of the conspiracye: whereby Udall, Throgmorton, Peckham,
Daniel, and Stanton were apprehended for the same, and diverse other fled into
France.

The.xxviii. day of Apryll, Throgmorton, and Richard Udall were drawn to
Tyborne, and there hanged and quartered. The.xix. of May Stanton was likewise
executed at Tyborne.

The.viii. day of June one Rossy, Dedyke, and Bedle, were also drawn to
Tyborn, and hanged and quartered.

The.xxvii. day of June were.xiii. persons brent at Stratforde the bow, for
matters of religion.

The.viii. day of July Henry Peckham and John Daniel were hanged and headed at
the tower hill, and their bodies buried at Barkyng church.

Anno. M.4. P.3.
sir Tho. Offley marcha^t taylour M. Will. Harper S. John white S. 1556

About this time began the hofe burning fevers and other strange diseases,
whereof died many old persons, Seven aldermen deceased in London.
so that in London there dyed from the last of Noue^ber; unto the last of
Dece^ber.vii. Aldermen, whose names were Henry Herdson, sir Richard Dobbes late
mayor sir William Larton late mayor, sir Henry Nublethorn late mayor, sir John
Chapneis blind late mayor, sir John Oliffe late sheriff, and sir John Gresha^
late mayor

The.16. of December a smyth being a stranger borne was arraigned at Newgate
for making counterfeated keys, wherewith to have opened Newgate in the night,
and so to have slain the keeper, and let forth the prisoners, at which time
of his arraignement, having a knyfe about him, he thrust him in, who gave
witness against him, so that he dyed thereof: for the which act after
that.xii. men had given their verdict against him, and judgment passed, he was
immediately taken from the bar and in the street before the Justice hall, his
hand being stricken of, his body was hanged on a new gybbet set up for that
purpose: the same time, the keeper of newgate was indicted for that the said
prisoner had weapon about him.

The.iiii. of January a ship passing before Grenewiche (the court being
there) shot of her ordinance, and one piece being charged with a pellette
of stone, was shot into the court: but thanks be unto God it did no hurt: but
passed through the walls.

An ambassador from Moscouie.
The.xxvii. day of Februarye an ambassador came to London from the emperor of
Cattay, Moscouie, and Russe land: who was honorably met and received at
Tot^ham by the merchantes venturers of London, rydyng in velvet coats and
chayues of gold, and by them conducted to the bars at Smithfield, and there
received by the lord mayor of London, with the aldermen and sheriffs: and so
by the lord Mayor, aldermen and merchant venturers, conveyed thorough the
City, unto master Dimokes place in Fanchurch street, where he lodged until
the.12. of May next following in the year.1557. at the which time he took his
journey to Grauesend, and there took shyppyng with the prymrose, and iii. other
ships to sail to Moscouie.

The lord Sturton with much iniu^ye and cruelty murdered two men: A
murderer.
and for the same was araigned and condemned at Westminster: the.ii. day of
March: he was conveyed through London to Salisburye, Execution at Salisbury.
and there hanged with.iiii. of his servants, the.vi. day of March.

King Philip, who had been a good season in Flaunders to take the possession and
government of the low countries, ^^ March returned into England, and
the.xxii. day he passed through London, being accompanied with the Queen, and
the nobles of the realm, but because great trouble was toward between him
and the king of France: he tarried not long here, but about the third of July
next following, passing the seas again into Flanders made great provision for
war against the French king. The queen thynking her husbands quarrel to be
hers also, Englyshmen sent to saint Quintins.
proclaimed open war against France: and not long after sent over an army of
one thousand horsemen.iiii. thousand footmen, ii. M. pioners, to aid king
Philip, whereof the earl of Pembroke was general.

The.24. day of April in the year.1557. Thomas Stafford and other englismen
to the number of.xxxii. persons coming out of France took the castle of
Scarborough, Scarbrough castle taken by.xxxii. persons.
which they enjoyed.ii. days, and then were taken and brought to London:
where on the.xxviii. day of May the said Thomas Stafford was beheaded at the
Tower hill: Execution at tower hill.
and upon the morrow were three of his company drawn to Tyhorne, and there
hanged and quartered.

The tenthe day of Auguste in the fyfthe year of Queen Marye were taken of
France the chiefest Capitayns that the French king had, as follows. The
duke of Mo^tmorency Constable of France, and his son called, Monsieur de
Meru, the duke of Monpencier, the duke of Longueuille, the Mareshal of S.
Andrew, the Ringraue Coronal of the Almains, Roche du Main, the Conte of Roche
foucaul^, The Vicont of Touraine, the Baron of Curton, the Prince of Man^us,
beside many gentylmen and Capitains.

This year on the.xv. day of July dyed the lady Anne of Cleue at Chelsey,
The lady Anne of Cleue deceased
and was buried at Westmynster, the.viii. day of August.

The.xviii. day of Auguste was taken the town of saint Quintine by king
Philyppe, with the healpe of English men, at the siege whereof, the Lord
Henry Dudley, youngest son to the Duke of Northumberland, was slain with a
gunne.

This year before Harueste, Both deart^^ and plenty or corn in one year.
wheat was sold for.iiii. mark the quarter, Malt at four and fortye
shyllynges the quarter: Beans at forty shyllyngs the quarter. Rye at forty
shillyngs the quarter, and pease at.xlvi. shillinges.viii. d. But after
harueste, wheat was sold for.v. s. the quarter: malt at.vi. s.viii. d ^ye
at.iii. s.iiii. d. and in the countreye, wheat was sold for.iiii. s. the
quarter, malt for.iiii. s. viii. d. and in some place a bushel of rye for a
pound of candels, which was.iiii. d.

Anno M.5. P.4.
1557
Thomas Curteys fishmo^ger S. Rich. Malarie S. James Altam S.
Calaice lost.
The first of January the frenchmen came to Calaice with a great army, and laid
siege thereunto: and within.iiii. or v. days were masters thereof: and shortly
after wan all the pieces on that side the sea: To many it seemed strange, how
that town, which so many years had been fortified with all munitions that
could be devised, should now in so short space be taken of our ennemies. It is
to be noted, that the counsel of England raised great power to have gone to
the defense of that town: but such tempest rose, as the like in many years
had not ben seen, whereby no ship could broke the sea, and such of the
ships, as adventured, were wonderfully shaken, and forced by the said
tempest to return again with great danger.

The French king also invaded Flanders, and spoiled and brent Dunkirke, before
king Philyp could come to the rescue: but before the french men returned out
of Flanders, the Fleminges and the english ships metyng with them upon the
sands between Dunkirke and Grauelyne slew of them a great number.

Against summer great preparation was made both on king Philyp and the French
kings parties, and they retained still mighty armies, of purpose to invade each
other: but nothing being done, toward winter they brake up their camps.

This Winter the quarterne aques continued in like manner, or more behementely
then they had done the last year.

At this time also dyed so many priests that a great number of paryshes in
diverse places of this realm were unserved, and no curates could be gotten for
money.

This year in June were.vii. burned at one stake in Smythfield, Execution.
and in July were six bnrned at Brainforde at one stake, and diverse other in
other places.

Anno M. 6. P. 5.
1558
Sir Thomas Lee mercer M. Tho. Hawes S. Rich. Cha^pion S.
King Philippe being absent out of this realm, Queen Mary being dangerously
sick, ended her life, the.xvii. day of November, when ^he had reigned.vi.
years.iiii. months, and.xi. days. The same day dyed Cardynall Poole, and a
little before two of her phifitions, and diverse bishops and noble men, whom
the Queen had esteemed greatly.

Queen Elisabeth.
Anno regni.1.
1558
AFter the decease of Queen Mary, our gracious and sovereign lady Elisabeth,
to the great comfort of England, was with full consent proclaimed queen
the.xvii. day of November, in the year 1558. Not long after she came from
Hatfielde in Hartefordshyre, where she then abode, unto the Charterhouse in
London: and went from thens to the tower, there she remained until the
xiiii. day of January following: at which time (the Lo^doners having made
sumptuous provision) she passed through the city to her palaice at
westminster, showing very comfortable and gentil countenance unto the people:
the next day following, her grace was crowned in saint Peter's church at
Westminster by doctor Oglethorpe bishop of Carlisle.

The report of this was very joyful to such as in Queen Mary's time for
religions sake fled into Germany, and other countries, whereupon they now
shortly returned home again.

The twentye day of January next following, began a parlyamente at
Westmynster: A parliament at Westmynster.
And in this Parlyament, the First fruits and Tenthes were restored to the
Crown, and alsoo the Supreme gouernemente over the state Ecclesiastycall, the
which Queen Marye had taken away, and given to the Pope: likewise the book
of common prayer and administration of the sacraments in our vulgar tongue
was restored.

In this parliament time, shortly after Easter the queen's majesty appointed a
conference or disputation to be had at Westminster church, concernynnge
matters of religion, but the matter came to none effect.

The.vii. of April was a joyful peace proclaimed betwixt our sovereign lady
Elisabeth queen of England, and prince Henry the french king. And the like
peace between her majesty, and the king and queen Dolphiners of Scotland.

The.viii. day of May the Queen's highness rode to the parliamente, and gave
her royal assent to all such acts as there were made, with high thanks to
all the estates for their great travel and diligence therein.

The.xxiiii. day of June being the feast of saynct John Baptiste, the service
in the mother tongue was fully establyshed throughout this realm, and the Mass
with other latin service was clean abolyshed from that day forward.

In August about Bartholomew tide the Church wardens of churches in London with
their persons and ministers, brought forth the Roodes and other images of
their Churches, and burnt them before their church doors, throwyng in their
coapes and vestimentes, alter clothes, baners, crosses, books, and all other
such things as had been accounted ornaments of churches, and some burned
roode loftes also.

Anno regni.1.
sir will. Hewet clothworker M. Tho. Lodge S. 1559
Roger Martin S.
The second year of Queen Elisabeth many men of war were conueyde out of
France into Scotland, Anno. reg. 1. It is to be noted, that the Mayor of London
begins his year the 28. day of October, which is in the first year of the
queen's majesty's reign. And the queen's second year begins on the 17 day
of Noue^ber next following.
and there placed in towns and fortresses: whereby it was to be suspected,
that they would sodeinly invade this realm, whereupon the Queens majesty
sent the Duke of Norfolk toward Scotland, as general with an army, who
remained at Berwyke, and the lord Gray of Wilton being lieutenant, entered
Scotland with a sufficient power to join with the Scotts and French men.
And in the end her grace sent sir William C^^cill knight, her majesty's
principal Secretary together with master doctor Wotton to treat with the
french men, who by their wysedomes so well ordered them selves, that they
enforced the frenchemen to depart, to the great quietness and safety both of
England and Scotland: and there upon her majesty revoked her army after the
fortes there were rased, withont any seysure or holdyng of any piece within the
ground of Scotland.

The.v. day of July through shotyng of a gonne which brake in the house of one
Adrian Arten a ducheman, Houses blown in crooked lane.
in crooked lane, and setting fire on a fyrkyn and a barrel of gunpouder.iiii.
houses were clean blown down, and diverse other sore scattered, there were
slain.ix. persons men and women, and diverse other sore hurt and bruised.

This year on Michelmas even before noone, The base moneys called in
it was published by proclamation that the teston of the best sort being
marked with the porteuleys should then forthwith be taken for.iiii. d. ob. and
the second sort being marked with the greyhound for.ii. d. q. the third and
worst sort not being marked with one of those marks before named, not to be
taken for any value, the three penny piece which was coined for.iiii. d. should
be but.i. d. ob. the.ii. d. piece, for.i. d. etc. New coins
And shortly after, her grace restored unto all her subjects fine and pure
sterlynge money, both of gold and silver for their corrupt and base coin,
calling in the same to her majesty's myntes, according to the rates before
mentioned.

This year also the Queen's majesty by the advice of her honorable council
made great preparation of armor, munition and powder to be in a readynes to
defend her majesty's Realm from the enemy, if need should happen.

Anno. 2.
Sir Will. Chester Draper M. Thomas Roe S. 1560
Christo. Draper S.
This majors year began in the.xi. month of the second year of the queen's
majesty's reign, that is to say the.28. day of October, and the.17. day of
Noue^ber next following, begins the third year of her majesty's reign.

Anno. reg. 3.
This third year the.xxi. day of March A notable gra^mar school was founded by
the master, wardens, and assistentes of the right worshypfull company of the
merchant taylours of the city of London in the paryshe of S. Laurence
Pounteney of London, the right worshypfull Emanuell Lucar, Robert Rose Wyllyam
Merike, John Spark, and Robert Duckyngton then being master and wardens of
the same company.

The.x. day of April was one William Geffrey whypped from the Marshalsey in
Southwarke, to Bethleem, without bishops gate of London, for that he professed
one John More, to be Christ our Savior: he was very sore whipped, and on his
head, and about the cart were set papers, wherein was written as follows:
Wylliam Geffrey, a most blasphemous heretic, denying Christ our Savior in
heaven. The said Geffrey being stayde at Bethleem gate, the Marshalles officers
caused John Moore to be brought forth: and then where as the said Geffrey
had till this time for all his sore whippyng still professed John Moore to
be Christ, now he forsook him, and confessed Christ to be in heaven. Then
the said John More, being examyned and answering them very ouerthwartely was
commanded to strippe him self, One saynyng him self to be Christ was whipte.
which he seemed to do very wyllyngly, who was after tied to the cart, and
whipped an arrows shote from Bedlem, where at the last he confessed Christ to
be in heaven, and himself to be a synful man. Then was More sent again into
Bedlem, and william Geffrey to the Marshalsey, where they had layne prisoners
nygh a year and a half before that time the one for professynge himself to
be Christ, the other an apostle or disciple of the same Christ.

The.iiii. day of June being wednesday between.iiii. and.v. of the clock in
the after noone, Poules steple a fire.
the steple of Paul's in London, being fyered by lyghtnynge, brast forth as it
did seem to the beholders.ii. or.iii. yardes beneth the cross, and so brent
round about in the same place, that the top with the cross fell of, and
lighted on the south side of Paul's church, and so the spyre brent downward
like a cresset or a bekon to ye stone work, and the belles (which was from the
top.ii. hundred foot) and so brent downwarde so terribly and vehemently,
that within less space then.iiii. hours, the same steple, and all the roofes
of the same church were consumed to ashes: which was a lamentable sight, and
pitiful remembrance to the beholders thereof.

Anno. 3.
1361
sir Will. Harper mar. tat. M. Hu^f. Baskeruile S. Alexander Aueno^ S.
In the beginning of this Majors year and the later end of the third year of
the Queen's majesty's reign, the. xv. day of November, the Queen's majesty
published a proclamation, wherein her grace restored to the realm diverse small
pieces of silver money, ^ new coin.
as the piece of.vi. d. iiii. d.iii. d.ii. d. and.i. d. three halfepenie, and
three farthyngs. And also forbad all manner of foreign coins to be current with
in the same realm: as well gold as silver, except two sorts of crowns of
gold, whereof the one was the freuche. crown, and the other a flemishe crown.

This fourth year in England were many monstrous byrthes, Anno reg. 4.
as in March a mare brought forth a foale with one body being in good
proportion, Many monstrous births this year in England.
and two heads, having as it were a long tail growing out right like a horn
between the same two heads. Also a sow farrowed a pygge with.iiii. legs
like unto the arms of a man child with hands and fyngers, moute and ears
dysfygured. etc.

About April a sow farrowed a pigge which had.ii. bodies.viii. feet, and but
one head, many calves and lambs were monstrous, and one calfe had a colier of
skin growyng about the neck, like to a double ruff, which to the beholders
seemed strange and wonderful.

The.xxiiii. day of May a monstrous child was borne at Chichester in Suffer, A
monstrous child.
which may not so plainly be declared with the pen, as in picture. The head
arms and legs like unto an Anatomy, the breast and bealy very monstrous
bygge, from the nauille, as it were a long string hangyng: about the neck a
great collar of flesh and skyn growyng like the ruff of a shyrt or
neckerchief, coming up above the ears pleytyng or foldyng. etc.

This year the Queens majesty in September addressed a band of her subjects
to the town of Newhauen in Normandye: The going to Newhauen.
who were embarked at Portesmouthe, because that haven is most apt for
transportatio^ to that place. Upon whose arrival the towns men and
inhabitauntes ioyefully surrendered them selves and their town into the
possession of the Queens Majesty. which was kept by Englyshmen from
September.1562. to the.29. day of July then next following, which was in the
year.1563. the governor of which band was the right honorable, the Earl
of Warwyke, who with the capitaynes seruyng there (which were of great
experience) and soldiers trained by them to knowledge of service, together
with part of the old approved garrison of Barwike, did at that time both
manfully defend the piece, and valiantly encountered by sundry skirmishes and
co^flicts with the cou^tie Ringraue and his band, the most part whereof were
happyly achieved to the great overthrow of the adversaries part, and singular
co^mendations of ours.

Anno. 4.
sir Tho. Lodge grocer M. William Alleyn S. 1562
Rich. Cha^berlain S.
This Majors year began the.xxviii. day of October in the year.1562. which
was in the latter part of the fourth year of our sovereign lady Elizabeth.
And the fyfthe year of her majesty's reign began the.17. day of Nouembre next
following.

Now this fifth year when the french men with huge armies assembled out of
all parts of France to recover the place of passage: Anno reg. 5.
the stoppyng whereof, by our power, was the double woe of their common wealth,
there bredde thorough the heat of time and putrefaction of the air, a
miserable and unfortunate plague among our men, which meruailously increased
with the death of diverse of the best capitains and soldiers, wherewithal
there followed a cruel and quick siege, whereat was present the yang king
himself, the queen his mother, the Constable, and the best tried number of
warlike soldiers with in the whole country, besides an other sort of young and
old that cared not for life or land, so their own adventure might wyn again
the cause of their distress: with this general aid, the marshes were made
passable and firm ground, which by men of great experience was thought
impossible. And with common help the Canons were placed, the castle and walls
were battered, and sundry breaches made beyond expectation. Howbe it they were
rewarded by our gonners, and made to taste the bitter fruit of their desperate
approach, to their great terror and annoyance. The earl of Warwyke with the
remnant of our captains and soldiers in courageous order, standing at the
several breaches ready to defend their assaults: which perceived by the
ennemy, they caused their trumpettes to sound the blaste of emparle, that
composition of either part might be made to avoid the imminent slaughter and
effusion of blood. New haven delivered to the french.
This offer seemed not unmeet, both parts concluded, the town was delivered
the.xxix. day of July.

When the town in this sort was surrendered to the frenchemen and the greatest
part of our garrison shypped many sick persons were left behind impotent
and unable to help them selves. The myserie whereof Edward Randolffe
esquire, high marshall of the town, who was appointed to tarry and see the
vttermoste of our composition accomplished perceyuyng, moved with natural
pity of his country men, relinquyshed without comfort, caused the said sick
persons to be carried aboard, not sparyng his own shoulders at that time full
feeble and full of the plage, him self and his men still bearyng and helping
the poor creatures on shypboord. A rare fact worthy of worldly reward, and no
doubt in remembrance with God him self, the true recorder of merciful
deserts.

This year as ye have heard, the plague of pestilence being in the town of
Newhauen, and many souldioures afected with the same, returnyng into England,
the infection thereof spredde in diverse parts of this realm, Great pestilence
at Lon
but especially the city of London was so infected therewith, that in the same
whole year; that is to say, An hundred and eight parishes in London.
from the first of January.1562. until the last of December.1563. there dyed
in the City and liberties thereof (containing.108. parishes) of all
diseases.xx. M.iii. C.lxxii. so that there dyed of the plague (being part of
the nombre before named) xvii. M.iiii. C. and.iiii. persons. A seven parish
churches called the out paryshes.
And in the out parishes adjoining to the same City, being xi. paryshes dyed
of all diseases in the whole year aforesaid.iii. M.ii. C.lxxx. and viii.
persons, and of them of the plague being a part of the said number last before
named.ii. M.vii. C.xxxii. so that the hole total sum of all those that dyed
of all diseases in the whole year, as well within the city of London, and
liberties of the same as in the out parishes nyghe adioynynge unto the same
City was.xxiii. M.vi. C.lx. and of them of the plague, being part of the
total sum before named) dyed in all.xx. M.i. C.xxxvi.

This year for so much as the plague of the pestilence was so hot in the
city of London there was no term kept at Michelmas: to be short, ye poor
citisens of London were this year plaged with a treble plague, as with ye
pestilence, scarsitie of money, and dearth of victuals: A treble or a three
fold plague.
the myserie whereof; were to long here to write: no doubt the poor remember
it. God be merciful unto us, and defend us from the like, if it be his will.

Anno. 5.
sir John White grocer M. Edward Banks S 1563
Roula^d Haiward S
This Mayor beginning his year the xxviii. day of October kept no Majors feast
at the Guyld hall, No majors feast kept at the Guild hal
as it had been accustomed before time: Also he took his oath at the uttermost
gate of the tower of London.

The.vi. year of the queen's majesty's reign, Anno reg. 6.
beginning the.17. of November (thanks be given to God) was a peaceable
year, and the plague of pestilence well ceased in London, yet nevertheless
for fear thereof, Hillarie term was kept at Hertforde castle, beside Ware.

This year.1564. the.23. day of Apryll was a ioyefull peace proclaimed with
the sound of trompets between England and France. Peace proclaimed between
England and France.


And now the plague being (thanks be to God) clean cessed in London, both
Easter and Mydsomer terms were kept at Westminster.

This year through the earnest suit of the armorers, The watch on S. Peter's
even at London.
there was on the Uigile of Saint Peter a certain kind of watch in the
City of London, which did only stand in the highest streets of Cheap,
Cornhyll, and so forth toward Algate, which was to the commons of the same
city (for the most part) as chargeable as whenne in times paste, it was most
commendably done, where as this being to very small purpose, was of as small a
number of people well lyked.

The second day of October in the after noone was a solemn Obsequie kept
at Saint Paul's Church in London, for Ferdinando the Emperor, late being
departed out of this mortal life, and likewise the morrow next after, in the
forenoone where was a goodly hearce erected in the vppermoste quyre of the same
Church, garnyshed with scutchins and baners of his arms very costely and
sumptuous. The whole doing thereof with the sermon, are at large set forth
in a Book of that matter in print.

Anno. 6.
Rich. Malary mercer M. Edward Iackman S Lyonell Ducket S 1564

The.xx. day of November, Anno reg. 7.
being monday in the morning about.vi. of ye clock through negligence of a
maiden with a candell, Houses shatered with gunpowder.
the snuff falling in an hundred pound weight of gunpouder, three houses in
Bucklers bury, were sore shaken, and the backer parts of the same houses, were
blown and shattered in pieces: the maiden was so burnt, that she dyed thereof
within.ii. days after. It is to be noted, that if this powder had layne in a
sellar or lower part of the house, as it lay in a garrette, it had done
much more harm: Wherefore I advise men to look warely to such ware.

The Thames ouerfrosen.
The.21. day of December being S. Thomas day began a frost, which continued
till the.iii. day of January: on new years even, people went over the Thames on
the ice, and alonge the Thames from London bridge to Westminster, and
agaynward, great number of people playde at the foot ball as boldly and
(thanks to God as safely as on the dry land: on New years day, being
monday, on tuisday and wednesday, diverse gentylmen, and others, set up pricks
on the Thames, and shot at the same, and great numbers of people standing at
either prick, beholdynge the same. And the people both men and women went on
the Thames in greater numbers then in any street in London: The costardmongers
stood in diverse places and playde at the dyce for apples on the ice: on the
wednesday at night it began to thaw: but men went over and along the Thames on
thursday all day: but on friday being the.v. day of Ianuarye at night, was no
Ice on the Thames to be seen, but that all men might row over and alonge the
same, it was so suddenly consumed: which sodeyn thaw caused such great floods
and hye waters, that it bare down many bridges and houses and drowned many
people.

The.26. day of January being friday at night time were.ii. tides in the space
of.ii. hours at London, Eighte tides in.ii. nyghtes and a day.
on the morrow being saturday was likewise.ii. in the morning, and.ii. at
night: on sunday being the.28. day of January were likewise.ii. tides in the
morning, and at night but one, as orderly it had been accustomed.

This year in the city of Chester was a wonderful cure wroughte by the power
of god in his minister master Lane upon a maiden named Anne Milner, The work of
god upon a maid in Chester.
of the age of.xviii. years, who had been possessed with an horrible kind of
torment and sycknes, about the space of.18. or.19. wekes: All which time of
her sickness her torments being terrible, and her sustinance very small, or
almost nothing now sodeinly the.16. day of February, she was restored to her
perfect health, (thanks be given to god) as ye may read more at large in a
letter imprinted of the same, subscribed by the hands of diverse worshypfull
knights and gentilmen of that city.

An escape out of the tower.
The.xxix. day of April the archbishop of Almacarne (a byshoprike in Ireland)
made an escape out of the toure of London, who had layn there prisoner about
iii. quarters of a year: There was great search made for him, but he could
not be found within the realm.

The.xx. day of June the Lady Lineur was sent prisoner to the toure of London

This year on S. Peter's even at night was the like standing watch in London as
was the same night.xii. months or very little better.

Great tempest.
The.xvi. day of July about.ix. of the clock at night, began a terrible tempest
of lightning and thunder, with shoures of hayle, which lightnyng and thunder
continued until.iii. of the clock on the next morning. In the which tempest
much harm was done in and about Chelmsford in Essex, as by destroying^ of.v.
C. acres of corn, the heatynge down of all the glass wyndowes on the east
side of the said town, and of the west and south sides of the church, the
beatyng of the tyles of their houses, throwyng down diverse barnes and chimneys
with the battilments of their church. etc. The hayle stones being measured,
were found to be vi. inches about: as ye may read more at large in a book of
the same matter imprinted. At the same time was much harm done in many other
places of this realm, as at Ledes, at Cra^broke, at Dover ink e^t etc

This year Christopher prince and margraue of Baudon, with Cicelie his wife
sister to ye king of Swethla^d, after a long and dangerous journey, wherein
they had trauayled almost.xi. months, saylyng from Stokholme in Swethland, to
Finland then crossing the seas over to Lyffla^d, from whens they came by land all the voyage about by Pole land, Fryseland, Russye, Mahelbrig, thoroughs Saxon
land, so to Antwarpe in Brabant, then to Calaice: at the last in September
they landed at Dover, and the.xi. day of the same, they came to London, and were
lodged at the earl of Bedfords place, nere unto Iuie bridge, where within.iiii.
days after, that is to say, the.xv. day of September, she travailed in
childbedde, and was delivered of a man child: which child the last of
September, was baptized in the Queens majesty's chapel of the White Halle of
Westmynster, the Queen's majesty in her own person being godmother, the
archbishop of Canburye, and the duke of Norffolke godfathers, the Queen gave
the name Edwardus Fortunatus, for that God had so graciousely assisted his
mother, in so long and dangerous a journey, and brought her so fate to land in
that place, which she most desired, and that in so short time before her
deliverance.

Rech. Champion draper M John Rivers S. Iam. Hawes S.
Thus (good reader) I have broughts as thou see, this small abridgement or
Summarie of our english Chronicle, to these our present days: meaning as time
shall increase, so to increase the same, if I be not discouraged of thee in
these my simple beginnyngs. Wherefore I beseech thee to judge favorably, and to
correct friendly, so as thy correction may rather be an Instruction then a
condemnyng of me.

The ages of the world, after the account of the Bible, the Hebrews, and after
the most ueritable writers, are in number.7. as follows.
THe first age of the world took his beginning 1656. The second age took his
beginning at such time 292. The third age continued from the birth of Abraham,
503. The fourth age continued from the departing of Israel out of Egypt, till
the building of the 481. The.5. age continued from the building of the temple
til the captivity of Babilo^, which was years 414. The sixte age continued from
the captivity of Babylon till the birthe of our Lord and savior 614. The.7.
age of the world took his beginning at the birth of our savior Jesus Christ,
and has continued 1565. The age of the world at the birthe of Christ
was.3962. The age of the world this present year of our Lord. 1565. is.5527.
FINIS.
Here is showed how a man may journey from any notable town in England, to
the City of London: or from London to any notable town in the same realm.
Here follows the way from Walsingham to London.
FRom Walsingham to Pyknam. xii. miles. From Pyknam to Brandonfery. x. miles.
From Brandonfery to newmarket. x. mile. From new market to Babrain. x. mile
From Babram to Bark way. xx. mile. From Barkeway to Puchryche. vii. mile. From
Puchryche to Ware, v. mile. From ware to Waltham, viij. mile. From Waltham to
London, xij. mile.
Here follows the way from Barwyke to York, and so to London.
FRom Barwyke to Belforth, xij. miles From Belforth to Anwyke, xij. mile. From
Anwyke to Morpit, xij. mile. From Morpit to Newcastell, xij. mile. From
Newcastell to Durham. xij. mile. From Durham to Daryngton, xiiij. mile From
Darington to Northalerton. xiiij. mile From Northalerton to Topclyfe, vij mile
From Topclyfe to York. xvj mile From York to Tadcaster, viij. mile From
Tadcaster to Wentbrydge, x mile From Wenthrydge to Dancaster, viij mile From
Dancaster to Tutford, xviij mile From Tutford to Newarke, x mile From Newarke
to Grantham, x mile From Grantham to Stanford, xvj mile From Stanforde to
Stylton, xij mile From Stylton to Huniyngton, ix mile From Huniyngton to
Boyston, xv mile From Royston to Ware, xij mile From Ware to Waltham, viij mile
From Waltham to London, xij mile
Here follows the way from Carnaruan to Chester, and so to London.
FRom Carnaruan to Conway, xxiiij mile From Conway to Dynbygh, xij mile From
Dynbygh to Flynt, xij mile From Flynt to Chester, x mile From Chester to Wyche,
xiiij mile From Wyche to Stone, xv mile From Stone to Lychfelde, xvj mile From
Lychfield to Colfill, xij mile From Colfyll to Couentre, viij mile
And so from Couentre to London, as hereafter follows.

Here follows the way from Cokermouth to Lancaster and so to London.
FRom Cokermouth to Kyswyke, vj mile From Kyswyke to Grocener, viij mile From
Grocener to Kendale, xiiij mile From Kendale to Burton, vij mile From Burton to
Lancaster, viij mile From Lancaster to Preston, xx mile From Preston to Wygam,
xiiij mile From Wygam to Waryngton, xij mile From Waryngton to New castle, xx
mile From New castle to Lychfield, xx mile From Lychfield to Couentre, xx
mile From Couentre to Danetre, xiiij mile From Danetre to Tocester, x mile From
Tocester to Stony Stratforde, vj mile From Stony Stratford to Brychyl, vij mile
From Brychyl to Dunstable, vij mile From Dunstable to S. Albons, x mile From S.
Albons to Barnet, x mile From Barnet to London. x mile
Here fololoweth the way from Yermouth to Colchester and so to London.
FRom Yermouth unto Becclis, viij mile From Becclis to Blybour, vj mile From
Blybour to Snapbrydge, viij mile From Snapbrydge to Wodbridge, viij mile From
Wodbrydge to Ipswyche, v mile From Ipswyche to Colchester, xij mile From
Colchester to Eastford, viij mile From Eastford to Chelinesford x mile From
Chelinesford to Brentwod, x mile From Brentwood to London. xij mile
Here follows the way from Dover to London.
FRom Dover to Canterbury, xij mile From Canterbury to Sittingborn, xij mile
From Sittyngborn to Rochester, viij mile From Rochester to Grauesende, v mile
From Grauesende to Datford, vj mile From Datford to London, xij mile
Here follows the way from S. Burten in Cornwall to London.
FRom S. Burten to the mount, xx mile From the mount to Thury, xij mile From S.
Thury to Bodnam, xx mile From Bondain to Launston, xx mile From Launston to
Ocomton, xv mile From Ocomton to Crokehornewell, x mile From Crokehornewell to
Exceter, x mile From Exceter to Honiton, xij mile From Honiton to Charde, x
mile From Charde to Crokehorne, vij mile From Crokehorne to Shyrborne, x mile
From Shyrborne to Shaftisbury, x mile From Shaftisbury to Salysbury, xviij mile
From Salysbury to Andeuor, xv mile From Andeuor to Basyngstock, xviij mile from
Basingstocke to Harford, viij mile from Harford to Bagshot, viij mile from
Bagshot to Stanes, viij mile from Stanes to London, xv mile
Here follows the way from Brystowe to London.
FRom Brystowe to Maxfelde, x mile from Maxfelde to Chypnam, x mile from
Chypnam to Marleborow, xv mile from Marleborow to Hu^gerford, viij mile from
Hungerford to Newbery, vij mile from Newbery to Redyng, xv mile from Redyng to
Maydenhead, x mile from Maydenhead to Colbroke, vij mile from Colbroke to
London, xv mile
Here fololoweth the way from S. David's to London.
FRom S. David's to Axforde, xx mile from axford to Carmarden, x mile from
Carmarden to Newton, x mile from Newton to Lanbury, x mile from Lanbury to
Brecknocke, xvj mile from Brecknocke to Hay, x mile from Hay to Harford, xiiij
mile from Harforde to Roso, ix mile from Roso to gloucester, xij mile from
gloucester to Cicester, xv mile from Cicester to Faryngton xvj mile from
faryngton to Habyngton, vij mile from Habyngton to Dorcester, vij mile from
Dorcester to Henley, xij mile from Henly to Maydenhead, vij mile from
Maydenhead to Colbroke, vij mile from Colbroke to London, xv mile
Hereafter follows the names of all the kings and chiefest governors of this
realm of England, in what leaf ye shall find them.
BRute the first king of this realm, folio. 9. Locrine fo. eo. Gue^doline
queen.10. Madan eodem Mempricius fo. code^ Ebranke fo. code^ Brute Grinshiled
11. Leill. fo. eodem. Lududribas fo. eodem Bladud fol. ibidem Leire. fol.
ibidem Cordyla queen fo. 12. Morgan fo. ibidem Conedagus fo. ibi. Riuallo fo.
ibide^. Gurgustus ibide^ Scicilius ibidem Iago or Lago fo. 13. Kynymacus fo.
ibid. Gorbodug fo. ibide^ Forrex and Portex ibi. Mulmutius Dunwalls fol. ibide^
Belinus and Brennus. fol. 14. Gurgostus fol. 15. Guinthelinus fo. ibi. Cecilius
ibi. Kymarus ibidem. Elanius ibidem Morindus ibidem Gorbumannus ibid.
Archigalio folio. 16, Elidurus fol. ibi. Uigenius and Peredurus fo. ibidem
Gorbonian fo. ibid. Morgan fo. ibid. Emerianus ibide^ Iuall folio.17. Rymo
ibidem Geruntius ibide^ Catilius ibi. Coilus fo. ibidem Porex fo. ibi.
Chirunnus fo. ibide^ Fulgen ibidem Eldred ibidem Androgius ibidem Uarianus
ibidem Eliud ibide^ Dedantius fo. ibidem Detonus ibidem Gurgincus ibidem
Merianus ibidem Bladunus ibidem Duinus ibid. Silius ibid. Bledgabredus ibid.
Archemalus ibid. Eldeius fol. eodem Rodianus fol. 18 Redargius eodem Samulius
eod. Peniselus eod. Pirthus eod. Caporus eod. Dinellus eod. Helius eod. Lud
eod. Cassiuelane eod.
Under Julius Caesar.

THeomancius 20 Cymbalinus eod. Gwiderius eod. Aruitagu^ 21 Marius eod. Coilus
eod. Lucie eod. Basianus 21 Carassus 23 Alectus eod. Asclepiodatus eod. Coill
eod. Constantius eod. Constantine 24. Octauius 24, 25 Maximus 25 Constantine 27
Constantius 27 Uortyger 28 Uortymers 29 Aurelius Ambrose 30 Uther Pendrago^
eod. Arthure eod. Constantine 32 Aurelius Conanus 32 Uortiporus eod. Malgo 32
Caretieus 33 Cadwane 34 Ladwaiyne 35 Ladwaladar eod. Jew 36 Ethelard eod.
Cutherede eod. Sygeberte 37 Kenulphus eod. Brithericus eod. Egbarte 38
Ethelwolphus 38 Ethelwaldus 39 Ethelbert eod. Etheldrede eod. Alured 40 Edward
ye seniour 41 Adelstane 42 Edmond eod. Eldrede eod. Edwyne eod. Edgare 43
Edward. eod. Egelred fol. 44. Edmond Ironside 47 Canucus fo. 48. Harold. fol.
48. Hardikenitus fo. 48. Edward fo. 49. Harolde fol. 50. VUilliam bastard Duke
of Normandy fol. 51. William Rufus fo. 55. Henry Beauclerk 59. Steven fol. 62.
Henry.ii. fo. 65. Richard first fo. 68. John fol. 7^. Henry third fol. 81.
Edward.i. fo. 99. Edward.ii. fo. 105. Edward.iii. fo. 111. Richard.ii. fo. 124.
Henry.iiii. fol. 132. Henry.v. fol. 137. Henry.vi. fo. 140. Edward.iiii. fo.
154. Edward.v. fo. 161. Richard.iii. fol. 162. Henry.vii. fol 163. Henry.viii.
fol. 171. Edward.vi. fol. 208. Mary queen. fo. 222. Elizabeth queen. 239.
The Table of all the principal matters contained in this book.
AUxolme an pla^d fo. 3. Albion. foli. 9. Archflamyn. fo. 9. Adrians wall fo.
22. Albon martyred fo. 24. Ambreshuey builded fo. 29. Abyngton builded fo. 35.
Abbey at Saint Albons builded fol. 37. Ambery builded fo. 44. A barkers son
claymed the crown. fo. 107. Arms of England and France joined fol. 115.
Iusten friars church in London builded fo. 119. Alsoules college builded 147.
Anne barton, called holy maid of Kent fo. 186.187. Abbeys visited fol. 189.
Abbeys suppressed fol. 194. Andrew Iudde his charitable deeds fol. 214. A
mylners son feigned him to be King Edward the sixte. fo. 233. fo. 235. Ages
of the world. fo. 248.
BIsshoprickes in England folio. 1. Britayne fol. 9. Bambrough builded 10
Bathe builded fo. 11. Bladud in flyenge brake his neck fol. 11. Bangor in
wales builded 12. Blonde reigned fo. 12. fo. 38. Blackwell hall builded fo. 13.
Belyns gate builded fo. 14. Britones chased into Wales fol. 33. Bishops see of
Wynchester builded fol. 35. Berkyng in Essex builded 35 Brithricus poisoned by
his wife. fol. 38. Blasyng sterres. fol. 36.44. 58.60.61.121.144.235. Battle
abbey builded. 55. Barmo^dsey abbey builded 55 Brystow Castle builded 60
Bassynge work abbey builded fol. 66. Bewley abbey builded fo. 81 Beston
castle builded fo. 83. Battle at Jews fo. 92. Battle at Euisham fo. 92.
Bow steeple in Cheap blown down fol. 97. Black Friars by Ludgat: builded
fol. 100. Barwyke won. fo. 103.113. Battayl at Estreuelyn. 107. Battle on the
sea. fo. 115.173 Barwicke taken by.xl. persons. fo. 12^6 Battle at Otterborn.
128. Battle at Shrewsbury 134 Battle at Agencourt fo. 139 Barnard college
in Oxforde builded fol. 147. Bishop of Salisburye murdered fo. 149. Battle at
S. Albons 150 Battle at Bloreheth fo. 152 Battle at Northampto^. 153 Battle
at wakefield. fol. 153 Battle the second at saynct Albons fol. ibide^.
Battle at Shirborn. ibide^. Battle at Exam fo. 154 Bataile at Banbery fo.
156. Barnet field fo. 157 Battayl at Teukesbury 157 Battle at Bosworth. 163.
Battle at Stoke 164 Black heath field fo. 166. Baynardes castle builded 168
Brasenose in Oxforde builded folio. 171. Bow steple in cheap builded fol.
173. Bishop of Romes authority abrogated fol. 188. Boloygne won fol. 204.
C
COunties of England fo. 1. Cornwall described fo. 5 Compass of England 7.8.
Carleile builded 11. Canterbury builded ibidem Carlion builded 14. Cambridge
builded 16. Cesars first voyage into this land fo. 18. Cesars second voyage.
fo. 19. Caesar a bakers son ibidem Caesar slain with book insibi. Castle at
Canterbury builded. ibidem. Castle at Rochest. built. ibi. Chichester builded
ibidem. Christ his birth fo. 20. Chester builded fol. 21. Colchester builded
ibidem. Close crowns wherefore kings of England wear the^ 24. Consta^tin slain
by a Pict 27 Co^sta^tius slain by picts. ibi. Constantius a monk made king.
ibidem Chertsey builded fol. 35. College of wells builded 36 Crowland abbey
builded 37 Chastytye of womenne defended 39 Couentrye abbey builded 49 Castles
at York builded 53 Castle at Notyngham builded ibidem. Castle at Lincoln
builded ibi. Chester abbey builded 57 Cicester builded 62. Co^bremore abbey
builded 6^ Coggeshall abbey builded 65 Castle of Rutla^d builded 66 Canturbery
a fire ibid. Charter made to ye barons 79 Charteley castle builded 83 Coin
altered. fo. 88.96.115. 116. 118. 136. 155. 169. 180.203.216.241 Castle of
Flynt builded 99. Castle Barnard builded 100 Cheap corn 101. Crouched friars
106. Cardinals robbed 107. Cheap of victual 114. Caleys won 117. Chest in
Guyld hall of London fo. 112. Combat fo. 127. 129. Cheap wynes fo. 128.
Conspiracy fo. 132 Cundyie in Cornehyll builded 134. College of Eato^ builded
141 Custom first paid 142 Co^motion at Abyngton 143 Calaice besieged 144
Cundite in Fletestrete builded 145. Commotion in Kent 148. Cruelty of Edward
the fowerth 157. Commotion by the bastard Fauconbridge 157. Cundyte in
Cornhyll enlarged. 158 Cu^dyt in Chepe called ye great Cundite new builded 164.
Cross in chepe new bylded. ibi Ceyple gate builded 165 Conduyte in graciouse
streate builded ibidem Cheap wheat and salt 166 Cundit at bishops gate
builded. fol. 170. Charles the.v. emperor came into England 177 Conspiracy at
Coue^try 179 Cardinal first suppressed abbeys fol. 180. Cardinal discharged of
chancellorshyp 283 Cardinal deceased 184. Clergy co^dened in premu. ibi Clergy
sworn to K. H. 8. 185 Co^motio^ in Lincolnshire 191 Co^motion in Yorkshire.
191. 193.199. Chantries given to the king 205. 209. Cundytes at Algate and
Lothbury builded 206. Co^motion in Cornwall and Deuonshyre 210 Commotion at
Norwich 211 Charles Gauaro commytied murder 213 Co^motion in Kent by Thomas
Wyat 227 Cou^terfait spech i^ a wall 240 Cardinal Poole came into England 231
Co^spirators minded to have robbed the eschequer 235 Calaice lost 238
Description of England 1. Dune a river 3. Dunbrytayne builded 10 Dover Castle
builded 10 Danes first entered this la^d 38 Danes second entering. ibid. Danes
third entryng 39 Danes besieged London 45 46 Danes suddenly murdered 45. Danes
driven out of this land 49 Derth of wheat i^ England 75 Death of King John 80
Delacresse abbey builded 83 Dover spoiled 102. Dry summer 118 Dukes of Herford
and of Norfolk banyshed 131 Dearth of corn 134 Duke of Norffolke like to have been drowned 143 Duke of Suff. murdered 148 Duke of York began a commotion 150 D.
of york claimed ye Cr. 153 D. of Clarence murdered 158 Dyches sylde and hedges
cast down about London 174 Duke of Buckyngham beheaded 176 Dagger thrown at
Paul's cross 223 Dearthe and plenty of corn in one year fo. 238.
E
ENgland described fol. 1. Edinburgh builded. 10 Ely how it took that name
fol. 18 England first tributarye to Caesar fo. 19 Excester builded fo. ibidem
England first baptized 22 England first so named 36 Etheldred slain by the
Danes 40 Ethelyngsey builded 41 Eight kings rowed Edgar up and down the river
of Dee 43 England trybutarye to the Danes 44 Edmond Iro^side murdered 47
Earthquake in England 57 61 88 127 215. Euisham abbey builded 61 England
interdicled 76 Enterdiction released 78 Edward the second murdered 111
England let to ferme 131 Elianor Cobham 146 Edward the fourth fled the
land 156 Elisabeth wife to Ed. the.4. took saintuarye at Westmynster 156
Earl of Northumberland slain 164 Excester besieged 167 English marchantes
received with procession 167 Evil May day 175 Execution in Paul's church yard
196 Ambassador of Moscouy 236 Eight tides at London in.ii. nyghtes and one day
247
F
First King that ware crown of gold 13 Form of the ylande 7 First christian
emperor 24 Fortiger sent for ye Saxons 28 First saxons entered this la^d 28
Fortiger divorced ibidem. Fortiger married Rowane, daughter of Hengist ibi.
Fortiger was deprived 29 Fortiger burned 30 Fourth kingdom of the Saxons 31
Fifthe kingdom of the Saxons 32 First war between the saxons 33 First schole
in Cambridge 35 First Tithes given in England 38 First grammar schole in
Oxforde 41 Fountains abbey builded 62 Fourntis abbey builded 65 Feuersham abbey
builded 65 First bailiffs in London 69 Five moons seen in the fyrmament 75
First mayre of London 77 Frewarren granted to London 84 Fre toll granted to
London 84 First alderma^ of London 86 Folkmote at Paul's cross 91 Famyn 108.
145 Fray in Fletestrete 129. 145 Fray in S. Dunstons church in London 139 Fall
of a stayre slew.18. persons 145 Fray in London by saintuarye men 151 First
yeomen of the guard 164 Fraye in London against the Stylyard 165 First
merchant tailours of London 169 Fire on London bridge ibi. Friar houses
suppressed folio 187 folio 195 First fruits given to K. Henry the.viii. 188
Fire in Roode lane 194 First pencioners 198 Fall of money 215 216 241
GLamorganshyre, how it took that name 12 Game of Chesse devised 13 Grantham
builded 16 Gloucester builded 21 Gurmondchester builded 33 Great church at
Lyncoln builded 34 Glasynge first brought into England 35 Glastenbury new
builded 36 Great fire at London fo. 46. fol. 84. 79. Great flouodes in
England fol. 58.89. Graye friars came into England 62 Great wynd 88. 120
Great cundyte in cheap first builded 100 Great hayle 101 Grauesende spoiled
125 Gunnes first invented 126 Guyld halle in London builded 136 Grenewyche
builded 168 Golden Rose sent to K. Henry the.8. 180 Gold enhanced 181 General
procession 189 206 George Barnes his charitable deeds 19 Great Hary a ship
brent 224 Gone shot into Grenwich 236 Gramer schole builded by the merchant
taylers 242 Great frost. fo. 91 57 64 97 120 135. 144. 175. 192. 246.
H
HUmber a river fol. 3. Humber how it took that name 9. Hot bathes builded
11. Holy Gyldas 32 Hospital at Rome for english men 38 Herford Castle builded
41 Haroldes body cafte in Thames 48 Hospital of S. Bartholomew builded 59
Hyde abbey builded 61 Hayles abbey builded 88 Half pens and farrhinges
coy^^ued 100 Hot summer 101 Henry Duke of Hertford landed in Holdernes 131
Henry the syxte crowned at Paris 44 Humfrey duke of Gloucester arested at Bury
147. Henry the.vi. fled. ye land 153 Henry the.6. murdered 157 Herring.3. s.4.
d. ye barel 166 Houses of office builded to ye Guyld hal of Lon. 168 169 Henry
the.7. builded ye new chapel at Westminster 171 Hospital of the Sauoy builded
^bidem H^ngman hanged 194 Houses blown up with gunpouder. 202. 218. 241. 246.
I
Irlande situate 7 Island divided 9 Iro^ cups fastened by wels 35 Jews crucified
children 64 67. 68. Jews slain in Engl. 69. 9^ Jews robbed and spoiled 70
Jews executed 89. 99. Jews banyshed 102 Iustes in Smythfielde 119. 128. 135.
155. John Philpot his charitable deeds 125 John ^ycklefe 130 John Oldcastell
158. Images taken down in churches. 194.209. Ioane Butcher 214 Images brent 241
John Raynewell his charitable deeds 14^ John Moore faynynge himself to be
Christ, was whypt 242 King devoured by a mo^ster 15 King deprived. 16. 17. 41.
King Edmond slain 39. King counterfeated to be a mynstrell 40 King Edward
murdered by his stepmother 44 Kings hose cost.iij. ^. 56 Kings children
drowned 63 K. S^uen taken prisoner 64 King Richard taken prisoner 70 King
Richard wounded to death 73 King John deuorsed 74 King John sworn to the sea
of Rome 78 Keni^worth castle beseged 95 King Henry the.iij. besieges London 96
King Ed. the.ii. prisoner in Kenilworth castle 110 King Rychard the second
taken prisoner 131 King Edward deposed 110 Knights of the gartar 116 K. Ri.
the.ij. murdered 132 Kings College at Cambrydge builded 141 K. of Scotts
married at S. Mary Audryes 141 King Henry the.vj. taken prisoner 154 King
Rychard the.iij. slain in the field 163 K. of Scotts married Margaret,
daughter to Henry the.vij. 169 King of Castle la^ded in Enlande 170 King of
Scotts slain at Scotts field 174 King H. the.viij. first defendour of the
faith 177 King and queen of Denmark came into England 178 King H. the.viij.
first named supreme head 184. Kings palayce at S. James builded 184. Kings
stable called the mewe^, brent 188 King Henry the.viij. first named king of
Ireland 200 K. Henry. the. viij. went ta Boleyne 203 King Phylyp of Spayn
aryued at Southampton 231 K^yes counterfeyte to have spoiled Newgate 236
L
LOndon described 2 London bridge described 3 Lugge a River 4 Length of this
Island 7 London builded 9 Leicester builded 11 London enlarged 18 Ludgate
builded eod. London named Ludstone eod. London, York, and Carlio^,
archebyshops 22 Little Brytayne conquered 25 Laws against quaffyng 43 Little
John an outlawe 69 London bridge builded 77 London like to have been spoiled 92
London given to prince Edward 97 Laurence Ducket hanged in Bowechurche 100
Liberties of London seysed 129 Lyberties of London restored 130 Leaden hall in
London builded 147 Lord Say beheaded at the cross in cheap 148 Lord
Aud^ley beheaded 107 Lady Anne of Cleue received 198 Lyth and Edenborow taken
203
M
Mulmutius laws 13 Malmesbury builded 14 Marcian laws 15 Mordred slain 31
Mahomets first beginning 34 Money of abbeys brought to the kings treasory. 54
Monstrous fyshe fo. 76. 151. 185 185 186 218 219. Mad parlyament 90 Mayre of
London prisoner at Wyndsore 93 Mayre of London and four alderme^ given to ye
prince 93 Men put in sackes thrown in Thames 96 Martyn college in Oxforde
builded 100 Market house called the stocks builded 136 Murder in Whitchapel
143 Mary Magdalein college in Oxforde builded 148 Margaret queen of Scotts K.
Henry the.8. sister fled into England 175 Muster at London called the great
muster 195 Mary Rose drowned 205 Muskleborough field 209 Murder at Feuersham
215 Murder by ye lord Sturto^ 237 Monstrous byrthes 242 Maid of Chester 247
N
New Troy fo. 9. Notable ways made fo. 14. New abbey in Wynchester builded
41 New forest made 54 New Castle upon Cyne builded fo. 57. Noble men that came
in with William conqueror 52 Normandye lost 67 New work of Westmynster 82.
101 Norwiche spoiled 95 Newgate builded 141 New Testament printed in English
183 Nicholas gybson his charytable deeds 195 Newgate on fire 235 New haven
242. 243.
O
Oppressers of the pore hanged 17. Oxforde builded 38. Outlawes in England 6^
One crucified. 83 Oath to the King 91 Order of the Rhodes put down 198 One
hundred and.lx. persons hanged 166
P
Porrex slew his brother Forrce 13 Porrex slain by his mother ibidem. Picts
first inhabyte Scotland. 15 Pickeryng builded 16 Prodigious signs fol. 17.
97. 66. 109. Peter and Paul crucified 21 Plenty of corn 28 Pelagius heresye
in England fo. 29. Porismouthe how it took that name 30 Peter pence first
paid 30 Priorye at Excester builded 40 Peter's bury builded 43 Parlyamente at
Oxenforde 48. People of England numbered 55 Plagues in england 5^ Powles
church a fire 55. 146. 141. Pestilence in England 28. 58. 117. 118. 120. 122.
125. 158. 168. 177. 202. 210. 241. Priorye of saint Bartholomewes builded 59
Priorie of saint James at Bristowe builded 60 Priorye of Norton builded 62
Pierce of Poumfret 79 Parliamente at Wynchester 92 Parliament at Northampton
95. 112. Parlyament at Shrewesbury 100 Parlyament at Gloucester. fol. 101.
Parliament at Canforbury 104 Parlyament at Oxenforde. fol. 107. Peter pence
forbidden to be paid 128 Plymmouth spoiled 134 Person of ^rotham 13^
Parlyament at Leycester. fol. 142. Part of London bridge fal^ down. 145
Posterne by the tower sank by night 146 Procession 151 Printing first invented
152 Part of London wall new builded 158 Perkyn Watbecke. 166. 167. 168. Prince
Arthure married. fol. 169. Prisoners delivered 170 Paul's schole builded 172
Parlyament at Black friars 183 Priorie of Christechurche in London put down 185
Polled heads 188 Paul's Church lay at an anchor 208 Procession forbidden 209
Prince of Orange came into England 233 Parysh churches in London 244
Q
Queen's college in Oxenforde builded 122 Queen's College in Cambridge builded
171
R
Rome builded 12 Romans refuse to defend England 27 Ramsey builded 43 Rofe of
Bow church blown down 57 Rofe of Salisbury church consumed 57 Rufus slain
with an arrowe 58 Readyng abbey builded 61 Robert Hoode an outlaw^ fol. 69.
Ransom paid for king Rychard 71 Rochester castle beseged 79 Robert
Grossehead 81 Ryotte in London 96. 151 Riot in Norwyche 97. Rhodes won from
the Turks 106 Rebellyon in Kent 116 Rochester bridge builded. fol. 135. Robert
Acton 138 Robert Chesley his charitable deeds 145 Rychmont builded 168 Rhodes
taken by the Turkess. 178 Roulande Hylle his charitable deeds 218
S
Shyres in England fo. 1. Seuerne a river 4 Seuerne, how it took that name 20
Shaffesbury builded 11 Stamford builded ibide. Saint John's town in Scotland
builded 12 Spanyardes first inhabyt Irelande 15 Salysbury builded 19
Southampton how it took that name 21 Saint Helene an English woman 24 S.
Ursula of: England 26 Scotts and Pyets invade England eod. Scotts and Pyets
spoil this land 28 Saxons stewe.iiij. C. ix. barons and earls 29 Second
kingdom of the Saxons 30 Saxons had the whole possession of this realm 34
Saint Augustine came into England eod. S. Augustine at Canterbury builded eod.
Saint Paul's at London builded eod. S. Andrews at Rochester builded eod. S.
Peter's at Westminster builded eod. Seventh kingdom of the Saxons eod. Saint
Beda an English man 36 Segebart depryued and slain by a swyne heart 37
Shaftsbury builded 41 Saint Peter's at Gloucester builded eod. S. Edmo^ds bury
built 46 S. Edwardes laws 50 Shrewesbury abbey builded 55 Sir hundred houses
blown down 57 Strange syghtes in the air 58 Smythfielde a leystaw 59
Stratford abbey builded 64 Saint Mary Auberys in Southwarke builded 77
Strangers banyshed 82 Salysbury mynster builded 83 Saint John's without Oxford
builded 85 S. Catherins nigh London builded 85 Symond Mountford earl of
Leicester 92 Southampton robbed 114 S. Steue^s chapel at Westmynster builded
221 Sauoy brent by rebels 126 Saint John's by smythfield brent eod. Shine and
Syon builded, folio 140 Strangers to be lodged in an english host 124
Standard in cheap builded 144 Simon air his charitable bedes 147.152
Sandwyche spoiled 151 Suburbs without Algate and byshope gate bre^t 157
Sweatyng sycknes 164. 175. 182. Saint Anthonies in London builded 167 Scarsitie
of bread 181 Ship chassed to the tours wharfe 182 Small houses of Religion
given to king Henry the eight 190 S. Gyles church at Crepis gate brent 205
Stews put down 206 S. John's college in Oxford builded 225 Saint Quintins
237. 238 Scarborowe castle taken 237
T
THamys described 2 Twede a river 3 Trent a river 3 Troyan laws 9 Tower of
London first builded 14. 19. Temple nygh to temple bar builded 14 Third
kingdom of Saxons fol. 30 Thorney builded 41 Tribute to the Danes discharged 44
Tempest in England 57.67.75.82.247.85.110 Tewkesbury abbey builded 61 Twenty
governors of London 75 Twelve years in England 91 Term kept at Shrewesbury
99 Tun in Cornhyll 101 Treasure conveyed out of England 101 Thieves in
apparayle of friars 101 Three hundred men slain by misfortune 141 Two Majors
and six Aldermen of London dy^ within.viij. days 164 Thomas Kneysworth his
charitable deeds 171 Turney and Turwyne won 171 Tower of Grenewyche builded
180 Thomas More Chaunceler 181 Thomas Cromwell, 185. 188. 193. 198. Tower of
London repaired 185 Thomas ^unflow his charitable deeds 167 Thomas White his
charitable deeds fo. 225 Trinite college erected 225 Three fold plague of
London 245
U
Ueye a river 4. University at Stamforde fo. 11. Uies builded 14. Uortymer
poisoned by his stepmother. 29 Uillages and towns drouned 89 Uisytation of the
abbeyes fol. 189. Uoyage to Moscouie 220
W
Wales described 4. Welshemen fo. 4. Wolves devoured kings fol. 10. Wynchester
builded 11 Walbrooke how it took that name 23 Wall of stone between England
and scotland 26 Wyndsore castle first builded 31. Wynchecombe abbey builded 37
Wolves destroyed in Englaude 43. Warwell builded 44 Waltha^ abbey builded. 50
Wenloke abbey builded 55 Westmynster Halle builded 58 Wyndsore builded 62
Wodstocke builded ibid. Wyllyam with the long bearde 72.73. Wynchester abbeye
builded 81 Wards granted to the king 83. Weyghts and measures 95 Woll staple
kept at sandewyche 102 White battle 108 Woll staple kept at Westmynster 119
Wolstaple kept at Chychester ibide Wolstaple kept at Lincolm Brystowe; and
Canterbury ibidem Wylliam Walworth slew Jack straw 127 Whityngton college
builded 135 William Taylour his charitable deeds 155 Wyat taken 229
Y
York builded 10
FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fletestreete, nygh unto S. Dunstones church, by Thomas
Marshe. Anno Salutis. 1565.


