A LEARNED TREATISE: In three parts, 1 The Definition of Divinity. 2 The
Distribution of Divinity. 3 The Happiness of Man:


As it was Scholastically handled by JOHN STOUGHTON D.D. in Immanuell College
Chapel in Cambridge, while he was fellow there:

And now published according to the Copy left under his own hand.

LONDON, Printed by Ric. Hodgkinson for John Bellamy, Daniel Friar and Ralph
Smith. 1640.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader:
THis ensuing discourse concerning the Definition and Distribution of Divinity,
and the Happiness of Man, was left perfected by the Author, under his own
hand, as you have it here presented to you.: The Author in the former Sermon
laying down an exact Systeme of Divinity and entering upon the explication of
it, it might have been expected according to the method of Art, that he should
have begun with the Definition of it. But he did purposly omit it there,
because it was an Argument too Scholasticall, for a popular Auditory, but he
having finished this in the University in an exercise appointed for the
trayning up of the sons of the Prophets, I thought it fit not to conceal it,
but to insert it in this place, that so the treatise might be the more comple
at: If it do in some things exceed the capacity of the ordinary Reader, he
must remember that the Argument it self is more Scholasticall then popular, yet
much of it may be useful to most, and all of it delightful and profitable to
the ingenious Scholar, to whom it will be the more profitable if he do peruse
the rest of the Treatises: Divinity is a practical Art, not only speculative,
and so the end of it is operation: He is the best Scholar, and best
understands what Divinity is, that has learned to know and worship God so,
that he may live well here and happily hereafter: If in this Treatise or those
other Sermons, to which this is annexed, things do not fall out to thy mind,
divide the blame betwixt the Printer and Transcriber, and rather lay it upon
the publisher then the Author: So I rest,

Thine in the Lord, A. B.

THE DEFINITION OF DIVINITY.
CHAP. I.
Praeface to the Auditors concerning the scope.
IF Plutarchs discourse be reasonable, that a Philosopher should be so far from
being shy and shunning the converse with great Men, that are in place and
magistracy, that they should take most pleasure in taking pains to instruct
them because their lives being exemplary, their labor with them might redound
to the benefit of the whole common weal: as a Physician that has any spark of
ingenuous honesty will delight more in the cure of that eye which sees for
many: and if that be recorded of that of the Jews in the Ecclesiastical
history as an act of Barbarous inhumanity, that they poisoned the fountains in
hatred of the Christians, or mankind rather: then will I labor to forget the
difficulty of this imploiment, and rather think upon the public utility of
such an exercise appointed for the training up of the Sons of the Prophets, the
curing of the eyes (as they call the Universities) that see for many, the
healing of the waters (by casting salt into them as the Prophet Elisha did)
whose streams make glad the city of God, the Churches throughout the whole
kingdom. Cast thy bread upon the waters, says the Preacher, thy seed in
fruitful ground in locis irriguis and propterea benedictionis feracibus, as
Junius expounds it. Cast it as I observe, with a secure cheerfulnes in hope of
a rich and copious benediction.

He that makes an harp would go more willingly about it, if he were assured,
it were for one that would build the walls of Thebes with it as Amphion did: he
that makes an helm if he knew it were to guide Themistocles his ship, in which
he fought for the liberty of Greece, or Pompeyes in which he overcame the
Pirates, or the famous Argo, in which the ancient Heroes fetched the golden
fleece, and I think says Plutarch, the Artificer had rather hew and square
that wood in which Solons laws were to be written, then of which a plough or
some such rusticall instrument should be made: The accommodation is as easy
for me, to encourage to this work in hand, in this seminary of Religion and
learning: as it was for him to provoke Philosophers, to apply themselves to
great persons: for students in Divinity are like tables in which not the Laws
of Solon, but of God are to be written, and those that polish them with
precepts, hew and square them, fit for that imploiment: like Pompeyes ship in
which God overcomes the enemy of mankind the Devil, the most dangerous Pirat,
who is therefore styled in Scripture (...): like Themistocles, that fights for
the liberty not of Greece, but of the Gospel: like Argo that brings the golden
fleece, the grace of God in Jesus Christ, who is the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the World, as John calls him: and they that furnish them with
instructions, do as it were make an helm to guide them: they are like Amphion
that build not the walls of Thebes but of the new Jerusalem, and he that
explains the Principles of Religion, the Analogy of Faith, tunes an harp for
them, by whose sweet harmony the living stones come together into the building:
And these places of learning if any, are those waters of the preacher which are
feraces benedictionis, like that good ground in the parable that yields
increase a hundred fold, or like the land in Babylon, that with good husbandry
as you have it in Pliny gives a hundred fifty increase.

fundamental points of Divinity, which though they may seem as they are few in
number, yet are many in virtue, in sight small, but great in weight, like gold
which being soild is contracted into a narrow room, but may be drawn into so
large an extent, that one Angel may cover an whole acre of ground as you know
the naturalists have observed: And because it was the counsel of Polybius for
history (...), to frame a body of it, which is applied by a learned Divine by
better right to Divinity. I purpose to follow that advise and contrive a body
of Divinity: wherein if you find me vary for the form, yet you shall not for
the substance: if weakness make me err, yet stubbornes shall not make me an
heritick: I cannot hold it any shame after Austin to write Retractations
professing my name among those, qui proficiendo scribu^t, and scribendo
proficiunt, as he speaks.

I know it will be objected against this course that I shall not be able to
make any great progress in it, muchlesse finish it, and therefore might more
profitably propound some shorter project.

But I answer first, though I should but make an entrance, yet I should meet
with many matters of great importance and use (as you shall perceive) which
have not been explained within the memory of the greatest part of this Auditory.

Second, I hope to ride some way because I intend to point at only all petty
passages and to prosecute them alone, which I shall judge fundamental and
necessary.

Third, that which shall remain I mean God willing to fill up at other
opportunities.

One thing more I desire you to remember, that as he said by way of Apology for
himself, of the harsh and barbarous names of towns that are in the Catalogue of
those things that will not be written in a florid style (...), as the Greek;
elegantly: so may I say of some things in Divinity; that you may not look for
ornament in my discourse, but emolument: Verba nostra non lenocinia esse
volumus sed media, to speak with Salvian: The foundations of houses are laid
under ground, and madness it were you know, to carve or paint them: and so it
were to deck and trim the fundamental points of Divinity: they would be so
fine (as we say of some effoeminate gallants) that they would be the worse for
it.

the Definition of Divinity: which I will propound two ways.

The first definition of Divinity according the rules of Art.
First according to the Method of Art; which as a strait garment to the body
keeps close to the nature of the thing expressing it exactly, and cutting off
all other things counting them but superfluities.

Second, according to the Method of prudence, which gives a little more scope;
which inclines and bows truths, without injurious violence, to the condition
and satisfaction of the Auditors, in regard of some circumstances. The first I
conceive thus.

Divinity is a Doctrine of man's Happiness. Or in equivalent terms, of living
well and happily: wherein you have according to the law of definitions, two
portions.

First, the general, containing the community, by which it agrees with other
Arts and Sciences; it is as they are, a Doctrine.

Second, the special, containing the Propriety, by which it is divided and
differenced from all other and constituted that which it is in its own peculiar
essence, which two if they be rightly taken the definition must needs be
accurate; and therefore that this may better appear, I will endeavor to open
them both severally and distinctly.

general, that it is a Doctrine, by a Doctrine I understand a comprehension
orderly of certain catholicall precepts that are homogeneall one to another,
and tend to one common scope as you know, for I do but borrow these from the
ordinary notions without much scanning, because that suits not with this
exercise and argument, in which a Divine must presuppose not prove those
general principles: and the matter is not great whether you call it a
Doctrine, or a Discipline, or a Science, or Art, or Prudence, or Sapience: all
which words may be put upon, in the same signification, though in diverse
respects, as I might easily show, if I were not afraid I should be prevented by
the time in more material things: but in this indifferency and choice of words
I rather call it a Doctrine then otherwise.

First, Because it is in more common use among the best Divines then any other
(which is the best rule to follow in this case) and sounds most gravely and
fitly in my ear.

Second, Because it prevents an ambiguity, which lies hid in the other, for
whereas an Art is properly, those Catholicall precepts, and truths, which as I
said it comprehends, whether a man be habituated in the knowledge of them or
not, whether they be written in books, and delivered or not, as the Logitians
you know teach you to distinguish those terms of Science, Art and Prudence and
the like, signifying primarily habits of the understanding, have misled many
(and all the Schoolmen) and made them misconceive the nature of them as though
they were nothing else, but intellectual habits, which indeed they are
considered as attained by us, but this respect is but accidental to them and
seperable, and no ways essential.

Third, I might add that as those Arts which they call Mathematical, have
their name from learning, because by reason of their difficulty they are not
often attained without learning from others, or because it was one of the first
and common things, which the Ancient were wont to learn: so this name of
Doctrine attributed to Divinity may intimate (as some have observed) the
impossibility of attayning to this skill without a teacher (How can I
understand without a teacher, said the Eunuch in the Acts to Philip) and
withal the excellency of the Doctor because all that come to it must be (...),
taught of God as the Scripture speaks, we have one Doctor, says our Savior,
Cathedram habet in coelo qui corda docet, according to the Father: and so there
will be a great Emphasis in this word Doctrine: And for these reasons, though
the matter be of small consequence, and though in the original of it, it
import but an extrinsecall and adventitious relation of teaching, I rather
prefer this, and call it a Doctrine: and this is the gneral part of the
definition, though not a Genus in exact language and rigor of speech, because
as I apprehend it, the distribution of Art is not generis in species, but
adjuncti in subjecta, all the distinction of them being taken from the Objects
as all agree, which in an Analogicall sense are said to make a specificall
difference between habits: and as in Method we call the precepts general or
special, though the distribution be not of that kind, but integri in membra as
in Logic, and the same may be said of others.

Genus (for so we will call it) because it expresses only that agreement which
every Art has with another, whereas without doubt some have nearer affinity to
some then to other, for example, Divinity to Ethics then to Geometry, and so
are tied together in nearer references: In answer to this I say,

First, the division of Arts is taken (as I noted even now) from the subjects
by which the same thing in essence comes to be multiplied and diversified, so
that the Generality of that word Doctrine seems to be sufficiently restrained
and limited by the mention of the proper object without any further curiosity.

Second, It being not agreed what is the best and most accurate distributions
of Arts, I judge it more convenient to rest in that which is commonly received,
and had rather that Generality too much should be taxed as insufficiency, then
too much particularity should breed obscurity, especially considering that this
is a place not to examine, but to set a work those grounds which Divinity must
needs borrow from higher Arts.

Third, to give some satisfaction I will enquire of these three things.

First of the kind of this Doctrine (the thing now in question) out of the
lawful subordination of Arts.

Second, of the condition, whether it be Scientia or no.

Third, of the end whether it be Practical or speculative; of all very
briefly.

For the kind I will mention but a double Series of Arts out of which you may
fetch the primum genus of Divinity, the first is known to the most or many of
you, where Arts are first divided into General and particular, then particular
into Mathematical and Philosophical; Philosophical again into Natural and
Moral; Moral into the root Theology, and the branches Ethics; Oeconomicks
and Politics and the rest; so that if you would frame the next Genus of
divinity you must call it a Particular Art the root of Moral doctrine etc. I
might produce many other of ancient and modern authors if it were needful or
profitable, but I will only suggest a second, and that in a word: as many
precepts about a certain subject collected make one Art, so many Arts make one
(...), between every of which there is as lawful sequence and subordination as
there is between the several parts of the same Art: so that all are truly one,
though we divide them (and not amiss neither) for our commodity, as Suarez
relates the opinion of Aegidius and Antonius Mirandula concerning Metaphisicks:
now the hint of this division must be taken from the Objects as I noted before:
Therefore if the object of Art in general, be ens, in general as is commonly
said (and for ought that I know truly) the species of Art will accompany the
Species of ens, and go hand in hand with them: Now ens is first divided into
Increatum and Creatum (supposing this to be an Analogicall division according
to the most received opinion, though there can be no genericall community
between God and the Creature as the Schoolmen show) and so ars is either de
ente increato, or de ente creato: Art de ente creato, is either of it in
general or in particular: that in general shall treat of the nature and
affections of it and the species, and so cut out that which the particulars
shall make up, which borrow their subjects from it: for all being comprised
there where any affection or species swells to too great a bulk, it will send
forth a colony as it were, and erect a particular Art: For example, Reason is a
general affection of ens creatum, which is so large that it deserves
particular considerations, so speech, so quantity, whence Logic, Grammar,
Mathematics are risen: so there is scarce any species of created nature,
whence some particular Art is not budded: the last of which, man, more
fruitful then the rest is branched into many: all which guide him in his
operations toward his happiness and perfection, as the general Art (wherein
he is handled as well as the rest) regulate him in his essence and
constitution: and they consider man either single or in society, concerning man
single, either in ordine ad Deum, which is Divinity, or in ordine ad hominem,
which is Ethics: and out of this you may collect more strictly the proper
genus of this Doctrine from the special habitude to the nearest object, which
is the operations of man single, or every man as dirigible toward happiness: and
this may something give light and limits to the generality of the word Doctrine
which I used; But I will not insist upon these Metaphysicall and general
notions, which are little sought into by reason of the difficult abstraction
from particulars, but for the same reason, are very scientificall; and he that
should travail in them with diligence and dexterity, should do very good
service to all studies: and so leaving the first inquiry concerning the kind of
this Doctrine, I come to the second, concerning the quality, whether it be
Scientia.

Scientia is taken two ways.

First, for an Intellectual habit apprehending an infallible truth, and this
is according to the notion of the word most proper, and then the question will
be whether our knowledge of Theological truths be Scientia.

Second, by a Metonymie of the Adjunct for the Subject, for the truths
themselves apprehended, and this is most pertinent to our purpose, for you may
remember I said that was the best meaning, when we speak of an Art or Science,
and then the question is whether the precepts in Theology be such as are the
Subject of such an habit, as we call a Science. viz. of infallible truth,
Catholicall and Scientificall.

According to this latter sense I answer affirmatively to the question, that
they are, and therefore it may justly challenge the name of a Science: the
precepts in this being as in other, desinitions, distributions and consectaries
that explain proprieties, all which make reciprocal and Catholicall axioms:
and if it be objected that many things in Divinity dependupon contingent fact,
as the fall of our first parents, and the Incarnation of our Savior, with the
rest of his performances, for the Redemption of man kind, of which there
cannot be a perpetual and unvariable rule: I say,

First, these instances are but few (not many more I think then I have named)
and therefore can bring no prejudice to an whole Art.

Second, Divinity makes not a bare historical narration of the contingent
fact; but supposing that explaines a constant affection with which it is proper
Subject, man, in order to his happiness, is invested upon those occasions.

Third, I distinguish the existence and essence, or rather the condition of the
things, and the connection in the Rule, the former is contingent and mutable,
yet the latter may be notwithstanding immutable and constant: But these things
shall appear more plainly afterward. If the question be put in the former
sense, whether our knowledge of Theological truths be properly Science: I say,

First, it is not much material what it be.

First, because the consideration of an Art is extrinsecall to the nature of
it, as I concluded before of an Art in general.

Second, if that were regarded according to the diverse habitudes, to diverse
apprehensions the form would be diverse habits, yea contrary in one Scientia
(as without question the knowledge that God has of Divinity is Scientia, in
another opinion which apprehends them not without doubting cum formidine
oppositi, as the School speaks, in another Faith that assents to them only,
because commended to him by divine authority; and so the same habit of
Theology, would be all of these, and by consequence none of them, which were
absurd to say: but to come up closer to the point I say,

Second, that it may be more fully answered by this distinction of Scientia:
Scientia may be taken three ways.

First, for the knowledge of a Catholicall axiom, or an immediate proposition
as other Logicians call it, whatsover the condition of that knowledge be: and
according to this acception the resolution of this question, follows from the
former affirmative, because there I determined that the precepts in this
Doctrine are such.

Second, for the certain knowledge of any axiom, whatsoever the condition of
it be: which is the most common signification of scire in common phrase of
speech: and thus also the resolution of the question is affirmative, because
the certainty of faith by which we assent to divine truths upon a divine
testimony is as great as of any demonstrative syllogysme: and for this reason,
says Gregory de Valentia the nobility of this Doctrine deserves the name of a
Science, amd cannot well be styled by any other.

Third, for the evident knowledge of a conclusion by a convincing reason, or
demonstration, and in this sense it seems to be used by Aristotle; and after
him the Schoolmen, and according to this strict acception the question is more
doubtful: for this including that which was most restreined in both the
former, that the object must be a Catholicall axiom as the first required, and
that the assent must be certain, as the second exacted, superads three
qualifications.

First, that the Object must be a Conclusion.

Second, that the assent must be evident.

Third, that the motive must be a eonvincing Reason or demonstration, as it
were necessitating the understanding to assent: The first and last addition I
pass over, as impertinent, because few precepts of any Art are such
Conclusions, for neither definitions nor distributions (which make the greater
part) are so demonstrated being most prime, and immediate, and therefore cannot
be proved by any that are priora or magis immediata and perse, then they are.
Only it is said that passions may be so demonstrated of their proper subjects
which may well be called in question by the same reason that I alleged for
the other.

Second, few Arts have such precepts except only the Mathematics as is
observed, when it is that (...), are grown almost into a Proverb.

Third, if they were necessary, Divinity is in the like condition with the rest
for the precepts of the Art, though not for other accessory: We will therefore
enquire of the second condition, and propound the question a new; whether our
knowledge of Theological truths be evident or not.

To answer it then with as much circumspection of judgment, and yet with as
little circumstance of words as may be.

First, I lay this foundation, that Evidence is a metaphorical speech, from
the eye to the understanding, and a relative thing importing a fair proportion
of the object, to the faculty in both; so that there is a concurrence of three
things to it.

First, the aptitude of the object to be discerned.

Second, the ability of the faculty to discern.

Third, the disposition of the medium fit for conveyance, which is distinct in
the vision, but included in the two former, in the action of the understanding.

Second, I distinguish the three principal terms of the question.

First, the knowledge of which must be considered according to his different
condition either in natura integra or corrupta, for many things he did know
then scientifically, which now he does so much as opinio natively: and again
as corrupted, he is either immersed in it, or elevated by the infusion of grace.

Second, the precepts of Divinity are in a double difference, some are
aeternijuris, some are liberae voluntatis, that I may speak so for distinction
sake: for instance, in the state of innocence the promise of another life, to
which Adam should have been exalted upon observance of the covenant, was
liberae voluntatis, as the most agree, and the precept of that I call so,
though it also be indeed aeternae veritatis, as all rules of an Art should.

Third, Evidence is either in regard of the simple terms, the things
themselves, which by reason of more or less abstraction or such like
circumstances, may be evident or obscure, more or less.

Or second, in regard of the connection and cohaesion of them one with another:

And now thirdly, I resolve the question in these Assertions.

First, all Theological precepts areevident in themselves though not to us, as
Thomas Distinguishes of propositions that are per se nota secu^dum se though
not quoad nos, of which this he gives as one Deus est: the reason is because
the terms are essential one to another as they must be in all Catholic
axioms.

Second, Man in his integrity had proper Science of all those precepts, which I
called juris aeterni: though of the other, as a better state in another life,
he had not without a double help.

First, ex part objecti, which was Divine Revelation to convey it.

Second, ex part facultatis, which was an oration of grace strengthening, and
comforting it; the reason of the first part of this assertion, that man had
Science of those which were juris aeterni is, because they were evident of
themselves, and there was no impediment of his part, his faculty being
proportionable to them: of the second, that the other he could not scire of
himself, because they depended on the free liberal grace of God, which he
could not penetrate, till it pleased him to signify his good pleasure by
Revelation, and withal were supernatural to him, and above his Sphere: the
reason of the third part that those helps supposed, he could, is because then
nothing was deficient, either in object or faculty, as I said of the first
three Assertions: Man fallen, can know neither the one kind nor other,
scientifically and savingly, without Revelation of the object and elevation of
the faculty, and then he may evidently: so that his knowledge may in truth and
propriety be called Science, for the reasons hitherto intimated: I confess I
seem in this to strive against the stream of the Schoolmen, who seem to make
evidence of the nature of Faith, out of the Apostle, who says faith is of
things that are not seen, and make faith and science opposite habits; but they
also may admit a good interpretation: for I think they mean of the condition
of some things, not the connection of the terms in the precepts, or of man
considered with natural reason only, to which I grant they are not evident:
But if there be any doubt of this last (to which I have without any necessity
condiscended) I think the former answers may suffice: And so I will pass from
this, adding but this one observation, that when an Art or Doctrine is called
Scientia, there is a Synecdoche in the word, for properly the knowledge of one
scientifical axiom is a science, and in that sense, neither Divinity (as Durand
and Ariminensis well dispute) are one Science, but so many conclusions (so they
call them) as there are so many sciences, yet by this Synechdoche as I said the
collection of many are called one, and are so unitate ordinis, which suffices
says Gregory of Valentia to the unity of a Science.

of the end, whether this doctrine be Speculative or Practical: where I
premise a few necessary observations for the better understanding of it, and
then resolve it in a word.

First observe Speculative and Practical are not specificall differences of
Arts and essential, but accidental only, as Valentia rightly judges more
probable, though I like not his reason, because says he, they are taken from
the objects as things, for Arts as I said are specifically distinguished by
their objects in that large sense of specificall before mentioned, but because
they are taken from the habitudes, which Art, have to us, who use to aim at
Speculation, or operation in the purchase of them and end in those.

Second, every Praxis does not constitute and denominate a Practical Art, but
you must note a threefold latitude in the use of this word.

First, in the largest extent of the signification, it comprehends these three
things under it (...) and (...) for all these are operation, the first of the
understanding, the second of the will, the third of all the faculties.

Second, in the narrowest it is opposed on one side to (...) on the other to
(...), and then imports nothing but the second, the elicitus actus voluntatis,
as Scotus speaks, or an immanent act perfected within it self.

Third, in the middle way it is opposed to (...), but includes the two latter:
now in both these latter acceptions, it is taken when we speak of a practical
discipline, but more principally and more particularly in this question, in the
first of them the middle of the three:

Third, the (...), and character of a practical Science is not the end that
any particular man makes to himself, for that is fallible, for in both kinds
of practical, (...) and (...), they may propound to themselves Speculation as
a Gentleman may study Architecture for delight in the contemplation, and do
study both Divinity and Morality whose purpose if it be not bare Speculation I
know not, but the issue we see is not practice; therefore the judgment of this
must be from the nature of the object, and the end of the art it self: These
observations being thus dispatched, I answer in a word affirmatively that
Divinity is a Practical Doctrine, and conclude this truth in this one Reason:
That Art is practical whose Subject is res operabilis a nobis, in the language
of the School, and whose proper end is operation, for these make it
practical, and it is says Durand very well, practical, radicaliter a
subjecto formaliter a fine, but Divinity is such as shall appear in the
explication of the latter part of the Definition immediately succeeding;
therefore Divinity is Practical.

Second, things may be objected against the Assumption of this Syllogism.

First, that God is the object of Divinity, who is not res operabilis a nobis,
and therefore the first condition of a Practical Art is not found in this: I
defer the full answer of this till I come to a particular decision of that
question which shall be the next time, for the present I say God is not the
subject of Divinity nor principally considered in it according to his nature
for he that does so says Durand, sumit formam Philosophi, but in Relation to
our works as they are terminated in him objective, and in some sense that is
true, which the same Author affirms, not qua Deus, as the Thomists would have
it, but qua salvator, not qua cognoscendus, say I, but qua colendus.

Second, it is objected that the last end of Divinity is the vision of God,
which is speculative and therefore the second condition of a Practical Art
agrees not to Divinity, to which I answer.

First, the last end of Divinity is eternal happiness, but not the whole end,
and in eternal happiness that vision is something, but not all, for without
doubt there shall be many other operations, as praising of God etc. To which that
is rather subordinate then otherwise.

Second, the next end makes an Art Practical not the remote, but that vision
is as Durand disputes: yet that is produced by an habit of glory, which is of
another kind, then our habit of Divinity; but these things shall appear
better in that which follows: Therefore I still hold that conclusion that it is
Practical: and that Scripture gives good testimony to this truth, Evidenter
apparet consideranti omni Scripturam a principio usque ad finem, quia semper
pro una scripturae columna in qua agitur de his quae sunt pure speculabilia a
nobis sunt plusquam quingenta folia in quibus agitur de pure practicis, as
Durand writes: I will allege some few places to make this good in part. 1.
Tim. 15. The end of the Commandment is charity. Out of which and such like
places Alexander Hales made it a third, neither Speculative nor Practical; but
Affective, which opinion is true though not in opposition to practick, for that
affection is in order to action, that that is the last: more plainly. 2. Tim.
3.16.17. All the scripture is profitable for doctrine for instruction in
righteousness that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished (...),
to every good work: John 13.17. If you know these things, blessed are ye if ye
do them, says our Savior. James 1.22. But be ye doers of the word and not
hearers only deceiving your selves. I shall not need to heap up more: for
Scotus and many of the best Schoolmen concur in this opinion, and all our
modern and orthodoxe Divines with one consent agree in it: and therefore I will
conclude this in the words of Bernard, Is recte legit Scripturas divinas, and
so Theologiam, qui verba vertit in opera: Blessed are they that hear the word
of God and keep it.

definition of Theology containing so much, as I conceived necessary for the
accuratenesse thereof: which was this that Theology is a Doctrine of man's
happiness: and then I dispatched the former and general part of it, that it
was a Doctrine, explayning four things for the clearing of it.

First, how it was a doctrine and wherefore I called it so, rather then by any
other name.

Second, what kind of doctrine in particular that seeming large and general.

Third, what manner of doctrine for the condition and quality whether scientia
or not.

Fourth, what was the end of it whether Speculation or Praxis.

It remains now that I proceed to the second and particular part of that
definition that this doctrine is of Man's happiness, that this same thing may
be expressed in other equipollent terms I touched before, and mean not to
trouble my self, or you with unnecessary scruples in that kind: whether you
list to speak as I have done, or like beter to call it, a doctrine of living
well; with Ramus, or a Doctrine guiding man to his happynes; or such like, the
sense being the same, the terms are indifferent: but thus much I wish to be
observed in the words.

First, that I call it happiness rather then Salvation, because this latter word
in the common acception there of implies and presupposes a state of evil and
misery from which man is to be saved, which is not general enough for our
purpose, being but one parcel of that divinity doctrine as it is usually and
rightly handled of all, and as you shall perceive by that short declination of
the parts, which I shall make the next time.

Second, I rather mention happynes in general then eternal happiness, as the
most either express, or understand it; for the same reason: because though
that be the highest and last and principal, to which all other things in
Divinity are in their kind subordinate, yet it is not all: for both Adam in
the state of integrity had actual felicity, and should still have had so long
as he continued in integrity and so have the children of God in the state of
Regeneration, though they be translated into the kingdom of heaven and
glorified, though this be of a lower rank and order then that other: so that
Eternal happiness is too narrow for the general end of this Art: except
perhaps it be widened two ways.

Either first, by extending the signification of the word eternal happiness
(which is ordinarily taken for that estate which abides with the children of
God in the kingdom of heaven; because that is to endure without alteration and
change to all eternity) so that it may take that happiness of this life along
with it, both together making but one context of Eternal happiness.

Or secondly by changing the whole phrase, delivering the sense in these or the
like terms that it is a Doctrine teaching to live well here, that we may live
happily hereafter and that to all perpetuity, which will come to the same
effect: thus much you may observe for the word

Second, under the word Happiness, I comprehend both the end it self, to which
that word is in a manner appropriated, and all those means that lead unto it
which are either, those gracious acts of God such as are Redemption, Vocation,
Justificatio^, Sanctification and the rest, or those pious acts of man, which are
necessary for the obteining thereof, especially those that directly and
immediately have God for their object, being his proper worship and service:
whether these actions have a Relation of efficiency to that happiness, under
which notion we conceive of means ordinarily, and perhaps not amiss in this
case, if we speak of happiness as it signifies that future estate of glory; or
whether rather those actions are parts of it, or happiness it self; which
respect seems to agree better to it, as it is taken generally for the whole end
of man, and makes the adaequate subject of this Art: because as you know the
Philosopher defines felicity to consist in the operation according to virtue:
And according to this explication of the word, you may easily discern that
those opinions would not stand in opposition one to the other, one of which
says that man's operations are the subject of this Doctrine: as Durand does,
expressing it in these words actus meritorius, (says he in their Popish
language) is the subject of Divinity, and better actus humanus ordinabilis in
beatitudinem: as Arminius also in his private disputations makes, actio hominis
quam Deo praestare tenetur, and in word Religio, which is the same with the
former, only it omits the reference that those actions have to the end,
happiness, which notwithstanding the same author adds expressly in his
definition of Theology: But the other makes Happiness the subject of this
doctrine: which has no repugnancy to the former as I said but includes it as
subordinate: And thus I judged it to suit better then the other: for these two
reasons,

First, because actus Religionis, is not large enough for the whole latitude of
Theological precepts for there be some, as I noted of the Acts of God which
are necessary to make man happy: it being as impossible in ordinary course,
that man should be reduced to his perfection, his happiness, without the
culture of Gods grace, as it is that other inferior creatures should be reduced
to their perfection, their last end; without intervention of man's care: there
being the like proportion in the dependence of other creatures upon man, to be
managed by him, that there is of man upon God, to be managed by him, and
something more:

Second, the acts of Religion, may be reduced to happiness by a more direct
attribution then happiness can be reduced to them: and therefore seeing both are
contained, and it is not needful to express both, I made choice as near as I
could of the fittest: And so much also of the signification of these words.

Third, therefore to dispatch the explication of this latter part of this
definition, and show how these words of man's happiness, contain the
specialities of divinity: they may sustain a threefold relation.

First, of the subject, because this doctrine is conversant about the nature
and affections and parts of happiness.

Second, of the form, because Arts being distinguished by their objects the
form is always included in them.

Third, of the end, which indeed is primarily either of the artificer, or
rather of the subject; and so secondarily may be considered as of the Art it
self: the first therefore of the subject is the most principal and essential
relation as you see, and requires a little further illustration.

That is the subject of a Science or Art says Gregory de Valentia, which is
the subject of those conclusions (as he calls them) or precepts that are
principally intended in that Science: and distinguishes nicely between this
subjectum and objectum, which he makes the precepts themselves where you may
note scientia, to be taken for the habit of our understanding: Durand also
distinguishes between subjectum in quo, which he makes the understanding to be
of all Arts, and subjectum de quo, of which the present question is, and that
says he must have these three conditions.

First, it must be aliquid incomplexum scilicet terminus and non propositio.

Second, it must be primo and principaliter consideratum in scientia, and all
things there must have attributionem ad ipsum.

Third, it must be such de quo aliqua praedicari possint denominative: that
third of these is obscure by reason of a Scholasticall term, but included in
the former, for any thing material: and the two former agree with that I
brought out of Valentia: so that not to hold you longer in this, I conclude
that in a word to be the subject of a Science, that is the subject of the
Scientificall precepts therein contained: now I assume, But man's happiness so
taken as I have explained it, including all the means unto it and the parts of
it, is the subject of the precepts of divinity which are principally intended
in it, as might appear by a particular enumeration now, and shall better
afterward: for except the definition it self of Theology, wherein it is a part
of the praedicate it or some part or affection of it is the subject in all the
rest: there being many precepts of this Art, because there be many particulars
of this subject, as I showed the last time that Arts are multiplied because
their subjects are multiplied: and the unity of a Science likewise depends upon
the unity of of the subject: I conclude therefore that man's happiness is the
Subject of Divinity: man is as it were the materiale and happiness the formalis
ratio subjecti: And thus much of this first definition of Theology that it is a
Doctrine of man's happiness.

There may be diverse things objected both against this latter part, which I
have passed over more lightly and less distinctly then I purposed for some
reasons, and against the whole: but I shall meet with them more conveniently in
another place, and that by and by, and therefore will not meddle with them
here, the rather also because I have detained you too long already in the
entrance.

Only give me leave to illustrate this definition out of the Scripture, for
though the word of God aim not at the laying down of artificial and notionall
truths; but beats almost altogether upon fundamental in a method of divine
wisdom and prudence: yet even those must have the ground and substantialls,
from thence, though Art may put a form and modification upon them: therefore it
will not be amiss to give some light to this definition out of it: The places
are infinite, which I might allege, but I will confine my self to afew, and
that of two sorts.

The first point at it, in general as for instance. John 6.68. Peter calls the
doctrine of our Savior, (...), for when our Savior upon occasion of the going
back of many of his disciples from him asked his Apostles, will ye also go
away, this is Peter's answer; whether shall we go? thou have the words of
eternal life: Luc. 1.77. It is styled (...), for in Zacharies song this is
said to be the scope, and imploiment of John the forerunner of Christ, to
prepare the ways of the Lord to give knowledge of Salvation to his people in
the forgivenes of their sins: Acts 13.26. Paul terms the preaching of the
Gospel by himself, and the rest of the Apostles (...): as that evil spirit in
the maid, Act. 16.17. to the same effect in a Scripture metaphor calls it (...).
the way of Salvation. I will content my self with these that I have already
mentioned though many more offer themselves and perhaps more pregnant.

The second sort of places seem more fully to comprehend the definition, of
which it shall suffice to have produced but three, 1. Tim. 6.3. the Apostle
Paul expresses it in these words, (...), a Doctrine of Religion or godliness,
or according to godliness, which by some of our Divines is used in so many words
to this purpose; and therefore I need not stand to explain it: only I observe
that this defines it by the means to happiness rather then the end happiness it
self, as you may remember I said some Divines did: the second place is more
plain and full. Tit. 1.1. (...), where you may have both expressly mentioned:
the third and last place, is rather more accurate for, 2. Tim. 3.15. the
Scriptures, and so the rule of Divinity contained in them are thus
circumscribed, (...): I should enlarge these with explication and accommodation
of them to my present scope, but they are perspicuous of themselves; and I have
been too tedious in this matter: I will therefore observe this only in all
together, that the Scripture instead of happiness uses rather to name eternal
life and Salvation, the latter because it is directed all to man fallen, who must
be raised from misery; so that his happiness is properly Salvation: the
former, because the most noble member of our happiness is eternal life, and
therefore by a familiar Synechdoche names that for all and insists in that: and
both in a dispensation of heavenly wisdom, because they carry most majesty and
divine authority with them, and are most powerful and efficacious to work upon
the heart of man: And so I leave this first definition, and pass to the second.

Divinity is a Doctrine revealed by God in his word which teaches man how to
know and worship God, so that he may live well here and happily hereafter: I
intend not to spend any time about those parcels in this definition, wherein it
agrees with the former: and for circumstantiall differences, I will pass them
over likewise; because I suppose there will not arise any difficulty, which may
not tolerably be satisfied out of that which has been said already.

There be two additions only of moment, which must be expended.

First, concerning the Scripture.

Second, concerning the knowledge of God.

The first, I shall clear in the opening of these three propositions.

First, that divine Revelation is not the formalis Ratio of the subject of
Theology.

Second, that mention of the Scripture is not to be inserted into the
definition of divinity, when we go about to lay down the nature of it
accurately.

Third, that for some circumstances of prudence it may be convenient to do it:
the truth of which three I shall show in a word.

For the first: Valentia distinguishing of formalis ratio quae and sub qua,
makes divine Revelation the formal respect of the subject of Theology
acccording to the latter, and the Thomists generally make ens divinum
Revelabile: and make good the unity of this Doctrine by that, though it treat
of many different things as God and the creatures etc. Yet it is one because
all are considered in one formal respect as they are revealed, which is
enough: and he goes so far that in answer to an argument of Aureolus, to the
contrary, that if that were true, if God should reveal Mathematics and
Metaphysics to one man they would be but one Science because there would be
the same ratio formalis sub qua, viz. divine Revelation he thinks it no
absurdity to grant so much.

But, I take it, this cannot be: for if Revelation were the formalis, by which
any thing were brought into the compass of Divinity; then,

First, nothing should be handled there, but quatenus Revelatum, and so
Divinity should have no proper subject of it own.

And second, every thing quatenus Revelatum, should be handled there, upon
which must needs follow this inconvenience that the truths of all Arts should
belong to Divinity, because many of them are revealed in the Scripture (as for
example, natural, moral, Political, Historical, Architectonicall,
Mathematical, and almost of all kinds) at least all of them may be revealed,
if God pleased, as well as Theological are.

And second it would follow, that Theology should not be distinguished from
other Arts by any essential difference; but only by this extrinsecall respect,
of being revealed which may as I said be a common affection of all truths: it is
true indeed that de facto, all truths necessary to Salvation are Revealed and
de jure they had need to be revealed, and if that opinion aimed at no more I
think it should offend not against the verity of the thing so much as the
propriety of the language but they seem to say more, and in that sense I
reject it.

For the second, that mention of the Scripture is not to be made in the
definition of Divinity, when we go about to lay down the nature of it
accurately I show it thus.

First, because it is but an extrinsecall relation as has been said, and
therefore as it were absurd to say of Logic, that it is an Art of Reason
delivered in Aristotle's Organon, or in Ramus, and it were inconvenient to
define any Art, that it was such an one attained to by natural reason and
humane industry, (which have the same habitude, to the Sciences of humanity
that Revelation has to the Doctrine of Divinty) so in a like (I say not an
equal) proportion, it would be at least unnecessary to interpose this in the
definition of Theology that it is revealed by God in his word:

Second, because it is not of so general consideration as to be placed in the
title and frontispiece of the Art, as may if you do but remember,

First, the finis cui, or the object of the Scripture, which is either only,
or especially man fallen, in which estate it is absolutely necessary that he
should have the word of God, to be his guide toward his true happiness.

And second, if you remember the efficient cause of the Scripture which beside
the principal, the holy Spirit, is isntrumental, holy men inspired by God the
penmen of the holy Ghost which were always extraordinary ministers of the
Church having such immediate assistance of the Spirit: now both these the fall
of man and extraordinary officers of the Church, without which the nature and
use of the Scriptures cannot well be unfolded, are of later consideration and
follow afterward in the body of this Art: and therefore the treating of the
Scripture cannot be exalted so high as the definition without an obscure
anticipation of exact order.

For the third, that this notwithstanding, it may be convenient to define it,
so for some circumstances of prudence, it will be no hard matter to demonstrate.

First, because it conteines all thing necessary to Salvation, and therefore is
coextended with the object of Divinity; and in this sense also the Scripture
may be called a Rule or Canon, because though it be not every way adaequate, as
that uses to be (containing many things in it which are not properly
Theological, as I noted before) yet it has all those things in it: but it is
more aptly resembled to a Rule or Canon, as it respects faith and things to be
believed, with which it is every way reciprocated, for every thing revealed in
the Scripture is to be believed, and every truth to be believed is revealed in
Scripture.

Second, because all men now are in the state of corruption of the fall, so
that it is absolutely necessary as the case stands for all men: and so it is
well commended to all in in the very entrance as a principle and ground of all
that follows, and is placed at the top as a candle upon a candlestick to give
light better to all the room: And thus much of the first addition in this
latter definition, that Divinity is a Doctrine revealed by God in his Word.

The second follows, which is, that this Doctrine teaches man to know God;
concerning which, I shall deliver my mind what I think in so many propositions
likewise.

First, that God is not the subject of divinity.

Second, that he is not (according to his nature) at all to be handled in
divinity.

Third, that there is just reason why he may and should according to the method
of prudence.

The first may appear by the same argument negatively concluded, by which I
proved that man, as he is to be guided to his end or (...) (which in a
reasonable nature is called happiness) is the true subject about which all the
precepts in this Art are conversant: but I pass over that.

Second, it may appear by this reason, because divinity as has been proved,
is a practical Art not a Speculative: now a Practical Art is that whose end is
operation and that immediate not mediate, as Valentia well observes, for the
remote and mediate end of any contemplative Science, may be operation; and a
Practical Art has always such an object, as is res operabilis a nobis: but if
God be the subject, neither of these can agree to it, as it is more then
manifest: therefore God is not the Subject.

The second, that God is not at all to be handle in Divinity, though perhaps it
be included in the former and might be proved by the same reasons; if he be
neither the subject nor part of the subject, yet because it will seem more
strange to some. I will rather prove it distinctly, and severally.

First, because Divinity, as we for the most part generally conceive of it, is
a particular Art one of the lowest and last: but God must be needs handled in
the first, or very near the first: for if ars be ranked according to ens, God
who is the first being, may justly challenge the first Art at least, next to
that of Art in general if there be any such in the whole (...),

Second, because if there were any reason why God should be handled in this
Art, it would be this, because he is the object of the operations of man which
are here regulated namely (in which regard I deny not, but he may be called a
remote object of it) but this is not sufficient, because by the same reason the
nature of man should be handled here also, he being the object of some acts, as
for example, of charity and the rest: which to say would be held absurd:

Third, because supposing that to be, true that it is an Art Regulating man's
actions and directing him to his happiness, which I think is out of question, I
cannot see how things of so different nature can be homogeneall to the same
scope, and beside the unity of a Science will not bear it, as Keckerman says
well, even in this respect, because it should be both practical and
Speculative, which are indeed incomputible though some Schoolmen have
attempted such a reconciliation: It may be objected,

First, that it can be handled in no other Art: But I have prevented this
objection when I reasoned that it must be in the first art, before we descend
to the treatise of ens creatum: and Bradwardine confirms me in this, saying
that Deus est that truth is the first of all, upon which all other verities
have dependence.

Second, the very name Theologia argues God the subject of it: I answer.

First, I granted before that he is the remote object namely of man's operations
performed to him, and that may salve the Etymology.

Second, the name supposed, the reason may be drawn otherwise then from the
subject, as from the author and efficient God, or from the end because it is to
bring us to God, etc.

Third, which Durands Arts (or habits as he speaks) are many times denominated
not a formaliratione subjecti, but a digniori, and so it might well come to
pass that Divinity, which is Scientia salutis humanae, might be denominated
from God: where I observe that he falls upon the same definition that I have
given.

Fourth, the imposition of the name usually follows the common opinion (which
was so, I confess) rather then the accurate truth of things, which perhaps
would rather call this art Anthropologia, or some like name then Theologia:
lastly the consent of all may be objected as a prejudice against this opinion:
But I answer.

First, it is no strange thing for many to err in such a matter of notion,
artificial rather then substantial truth, and yet many give good hints of
that which I have said.

Second, the error has been not so much pofitive in defending, as negative in
not attending or expending this truth, not so much of judgment maintaining, as
practice following this, which also they had good reason for, which I must show
in the last proposition,

Thirdly, therefore I say that the Doctrine of God is not unfitly handled in
Divinity.

First, because the nature of God and our actions tending to happiness are of
so near affinity, for the former affords a firm ground to build the latter
upon, so that the explication of that is necessary to this which indeed should
be supposed out of an higher Art as I have often intimated; but seeing God
communicates the knowledge of the one, to men of the common sort, it would not
be expedient to distract them between two arts; but it is much better to
comprise them in the same, by a dispensation of Prudence condescending to their
capacity.

Second, because they are conjoined in Scripture in which the knowledge of both
is conveyed unto us jointly, therefore Divines finding them there together
thought it not meet to separate them in their treatises.

Third, this is a singular privilege and prerogative of the School of Christ,
that in it all Christians besides the way to their own felicity, in which they
are properly directed, do withal learn the knowledge of God in all his
excellencyes, which must needs add much grace and majesty to the former: and
thus much of this third proposition, and of both the definitions of Divinity in
general, me thinks too much, and yet when I look to the particulars too
little, too jejunely and nakedly.

The uses may be,

First, for instruction to teach us that this Art concerns all, every one must
be of this trade, for it is of Man's felicity.

Second for exhortation.

First, to thankfulness, second to diligence, from the Certainty, Nobility and
Necessity of this Doctrine.

I will not trouble you with repetition of any thing that has been formerly
delivered, only because that which follows has the rise and ground out of that
which is gone before, Let me call to your mind the definitions of Theology,
which I have hitherto propounded and in some homely manner expounded, and that
in general only: the first was a Doctrine of man's Happiness, or of living
well and happily, which I thought sufficient for accuratenesse: the second was
this, that Divinity is a doctrine revealed by God in his word, which teaches
man to know and worship God so that he may live well here, and happily
hereafter. Which perhaps as I said may give more popular satisfaction though
according to the rules of Art, if it were examined, there may be some
superfluityes in it to be cut off as I showed: and thus having only presented
these a fresh to your consideration, that you may the more clearly understand
the succeeding discourse, I begin with that where I left, then to draw some
practical observations out of that which has been taught, before I proceed
any further: and they shall be but two.

First for Instruction, we may learn from hence that this Art or Doctrine
belongs not to some few, only, but concerns every man to know and practice.

Second for Exhortation, and that twofold.

First, to thankefulnes, that God has planted us like trees by the rivers of
waters, and taking such care to guide us in the way of happiness.

Second, to diligence, in the use of those means and golden oportunityes,
which God has afforded us, toward the gaining of our happiness in this seminary
of Religion and learning, which we cannot let slip unless we will shamefully
betray our own souls.

The first appears out of the definition because it is a doctrine of man's
happiness: where you see both the material subject man, and the formal
happiness intimate unto us, and commend the consideration of the generality of
this Art, that the use thereof extends it self indifferently unto all men:
indeed if there be any that have drunk so deep of Circes cup, that are so
bewitched with the Sirens songs so besotted with the charms of pleasure, that
they have put off the shape and name of men, and are turned into beasts, or if
any that bear the name and shape of men are so degenerated from their nature
that they are not ashamed to confess themselves altogether void of humanity;
they may perhaps consequently to that hypothesis though not reasonably, reject
this Art as nothing appertayning to them: but if they be men homo sum,
humanitas nihil a me alie number puto, as you know he said, if they be men, this
is the doctrine concerning man to guide and regulate him, of which therefore
they may not only claim the use, but also challenge propriety in it: for it is
a Doctrine of man's happiness: man may be conceived as the material object of
it, and so that implies the generality of it reaching to every man: Again if
there be any Art concerning man, which perhaps concerns not every man in
particular, and so the former illustration be thought insufficient; yet that
which is of man's Happiness, the general end of all, must needs belong to all:
except there be any that have so far defaced the image of God in their Souls,
that they have blotted out also even those common principles which nature has
left engraven and imprinted not only in men, that are endued with the highest
perfection of reason, but also in all creatures (at least in a kind of Analogy)
that have but the lowest degree of being; all which have a natural impetus or
appetitus to their perfection, which in the reasonable nature is called
properly Happiness: and though men be divided in their desires and inclinations
toward particular good, some affecting one thing someanother according to the
variety of their dispositions, yet all agree in this general, all hunt after
happiness: Though bonum be not defined according to the proper essence
accurately, quod omnia appetu^t, yet with the emphaticall article. I think it
may be not absurdly described as the Philosopher has done it, (...): that good
is that which every one desires, every one desires to be happy: and though all
they miss their mark when they think to find it here below, beatam vitam
quaerunt in regione mortis, as Austin speaks, yet in gross they aim at this:
and therefore this Art, as this end, is general and concerns every man: And
thus it appears that this observation is reduced out of the former definition,
which I therefore mention least any here should think the study of this alienum
opus, a matter that pertains little to him, and therefore behave himself as it
is said of Gallio in the Acts, as if he cared not for these things: whosoever
thou art if thou have but the nature of a man, if thou have but any propension
un^o happiness, hoc ad te pertinet, the study of Divinity belongs unto thee:
the wisdom of swaying scepters and managing Kingdoms and Common wealths,
which the Philosopher styles the Architectonicall art, may prescribe to every
man a particular employment and vocation, according to their natural abilities
in subordination to the public utility, but every one must take this along
with him, this is the general calling of all men, which they must walk in
directing all their actions to this end: this is one difference of this* from
other Arts: The great Turk himself they say, you know though born to bear
rule and inherit the Empire, yet beside is trained up to some trade of life,
which he exercises perhaps in his Royal palace and chair of estate: I am
sure the greatest Princes and Potentates must be skild in this trade or else
all their glory will be not only splendida servitus as he said, but also
splendida miseria: the Rabbis had such a constitution that all their Doctors
together with the profession of Divinity should join the practice of some
handicraft: what the convenience of that was I know not, but I see a necessity
of the contrary, that every craftsman with the profession of his craft, should
join the practice of Divinity; Some are employed in Magistracy, some in
Merchandise, some in Agriculture, or otherwise, but from the highest Statesman
to the lowest craftsman, all should be divines; all should be employed in this:
Not so that every one should be, or labor to be a teacher of others, as we
commonly take the name of a Divine, otherwise then that general obligation to
the private duties of charity, as admonition and the like, that is not my
meaning: but that he should be able at least to teach himself and guide his
own actions to the last end of all his happiness: And thus far I say it
stands every one in hand to be a Scholar in this School, least any should be
misled with that vulgar opinion which rejects all knowledge and study in this
kind, as proper to Divines: But wherefore then has God tempred the style of
his word, and bowed it to the capacity of all sorts of men; modus ipse dicendi
sacrae Sripturae quo contexit? says Austin, quamvis paucis penetrabils omnibus
tamen accessibilis: that I may a little alter his words, Nam quae aperta
continet ea quasi amicus familiaris sine fuco ad cor loquitur indoctorum ac
doctorum: eavero quae in mysteriis occultat, neceloquio ipso superbo erigit,
quo non audeat accedere men's tardiuscula and inerudita quasi pauper ad divitem
sed invitat omnes humili sermon quod non solum manifesta sed etiam secreta
exerceat veritate etc. And wherefore has God erected his oracles every where
in his Church, and his Schools and the chair of Moses in every Congregation,
to have them taught and expounded: whereas other Sciences are professed and
practiced in some places only of the Commonwealth: but that they belong to all,
and must be part of the care of every man? but I need not urge this, neither
did I purpose any more then to propound it when I first thought upon it:
especially in this place and among you, who both by the general appellation
that is given to Universityes, that are called the Schools of the Prophets,
and by particular situation of this, compassed with hills as Jerusalem the valley
of vision, and by proper dedication of this College, whose gates will scarce
admit of any, but such as are at the least welwillers to Divinity, but as
Plato's Auditory exacted Geometry (...), so this seems to examine as it were
and pose every one it receives in their purpose for Divinity Sacrae Theologiae
studiosis posuit: All which do put you in mind that howsoever others may stand
affected to this study, yet it behooves you to be in a singular measure addicted
thereunto, and desire to be in the number of those that not only in the
Apostles words, let the word of God dwell in them richly and plentifully, but
also labor for it, and therefore as it were dwell continually in the study of
it: and true it is of these places that Nazianzen speaks, I think of his mother
at least a godly mother, (...), or to that purpose for I do not well remember
his direct words: they are mothers in Israel to nurse and give suck; that same
(...) the sincere milk of the Word as Peter calls it to us that we may prove
Nathaneels true Israelites in whom there is no guile: so does she deserve that
title of Alma matter, which you see written in her Arms: and we may well bear
that devise which Domitian used where his word was this optimae matris: as you
have it in Tacitus: And thus much of the first observation that the use of this
Doctrine extends it self generally to all men, and to us in a more particular
manner: wherein because I have been longer then I purposed, I will pass over
the rest, though more material, the more briefly.

The second follows for Exhortation,

And first to thankfulness upon a double ground.

First, that God has set us in so honorable a station, a calling so worthy as
you see that of a Divine must needs be, whose employment is about that
knowledge, a small portion of which to have attained is the happiness of other
men: what though the tribe of Levi has no inheritance among their brethen,
shall not we think this a Royal recompense of that want, since the Lord is
their inheritance, the Lord is their portion, (...), as Lucian speaks of his
Priests, not their revenues are their, God as some profane person might invert
the words and pervert the meaning, like them whom the Apostle Paul reproves
that would have gain to be godliness, which he corrects affirming that
godliness is great gain, so here God is their revenues: let other
professsions please themselves in the gain or glory that they procure, Dat
Galenus opes, dat Justinianus honores, I envy them not: but let my Soul
delight in the law of the Lord and meditate therein day and night, and let me
always account that the chief part of my blessedness: Praise the Lord ye house
of Israel, for in Jury is the Lord known, he has given his statutes to Israel:
great is the privilege of the Jew, for them did the Lord betrust with his
Oracles: but especially praise the Lord ye house of Aaron, praise the Lord ye
house of Levi, whom he has entertained into nearer service: though your
condition be full of difficulties and your vocation obnoxious to the obloquies
of the world, say with the Psalmist, The lots have fallen to me in pleasant
places, yea I have a fair heritage: and this may be the first ground of
thankfulness, in a word plainly, that God has honored us with such a calling in
which we have liberty and means to study for that which all desire, the Art of
Happiness:

The second is from this, that God affords so many means unto us to furnish us
for the discharge of this calling, (...), that the name of God may be even and
square and perfect to all due performances, you all know and have heard often
how Plato thanked the Gods that he was borne a Grecian, an Athenian, and
especially in the time of Socrates: and you can all make the application
without my help, that you have greater cause to thank God that you are born
Christians in the womb of the true Church, that you are brought up Athenians
in the bosom of a most famous University, and that in this flourishing estate
of Religion, and time of the gospel, when God has powered forth of his Spirit
so plentifully among us especially in these places, that as Plutarch says of
the neighbor villages of Rome in Numa's time, that sucking in the air of that
City they breathed (...), righteousness; so from the overflow of this place,
all parts of the kingdom are full of knowledge, I wish I could say of Religion
and Piety: Behold a greater then Socrates is here: even God himself in his
ordinances; we are wet with the influence and dew of heaven, as Gedeons fleece,
though all the region about be dry in comparison; and again when all about us
are wet with the waters of affliction, we are dry and free: we are in the land
that flows with milk and honey: and though it were but a wilderness
otherwise, yet God raining Mannah from heaven the food of Angels, in that
respect it were a map of heaven: we sit under our vines every man, and under
our figtrees: and are planted in Paradise near the tree of life, plainly, we
enjoy all blessed means for the knowledge of the way to Salvation in the
practical study of Divinity: and of that knowledge which was so dainty
heretofore we have Gods plenty: Silver is like dust, and gold like stones in
our streets, the most precious treasures of divine wisdom and understanding
are open unto us: And have we not as good cause to thank God as Plato had? The
Queen of Sheba came from the South to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and
accounted his men happy, and those his servants happy that stood ever before
him and heard it: Behold a greater then Solomon is here even the Spirit of God,
teaching us in the doctrine of Divinity, the way of life and happiness:
Blessed are your eyes that see and your ears that hear these things: Yea
blessed be God that has given us these means and oportunities: Deus nobis
haec otia fecit.

But I pass to the second exhortation which shall be to the diligent study of
this Doctrine and use of the means thereunto: because there I shall lay open
better the grounds of our thankfulness, and withal keep my self closer to
the matter in hand: Now we may be provoked to alacrity and diligence in this
study from some considerations out of the definitions: the sum of all which
is the excellency of this doctrine above others which may appear in three
particulars.

First, the Certainty of the truths contained in it from the manner of the
conveiance of them to us which I told you was by Divine Revelation.

Second, the Nobility of the object which as this Art is usually and wisely
handled, is God and divine things.

Third, the necessity of the end, which is man's happiness, or Salvation: a
word of each of these and so I will conclude.

First, of the Certainty of the truths: whereas all other Arts, the skill of
which we are to attain unto by natural reason upon observation and experience
are so uncertain for the most part that a man when he has done his best may
remain a Sceptick or Academick: by reason of the weakness of our understanding,
proceeding from the wound of original sin; it is not so with this where we
receive all our light and information from God himself, who being the fountain
of wisdom not subject to the least ignorance, and the Ocean of goodness far
from all malice can neither deceive nor be deceived; and therefore the light of
our knowledge being derived from his light in lumine illius videmus lumen, is
pure from all darkness and eclipse of error: and as among all the delight that
Mathematics afford to the students of them, the evidence and certainty of the
truths, is one great part of the witchcraft, which makes them dote with love
upon them: so I do see no reason why in this the same convenience should not be
an effectual argument to encourage us to digest the labors of our calling
with much alacrity and cheerfulness,

Second, for the Nobility of the object, God and divine things, if the Poets
thought so highly of the study of Astronomy, because it is occupied about the
Spheres and stars and celestial bodies, that he pronounces the first authors
thereof and professors happy: Felices animae quibus haec cognoscere primum,
Inque domos superas scandere cura fuit.
Then how happy are those that are busied in the contemplation of God himself,
who made the heaven and stars and all, for it is not only true which the
father said, facilius invenit syderum conditorem humilis pietas, quam syderum
conditionem superba curiositas, not only facilius, but I am sure much more
felicius: this is the chief happiness (in an higher degree then here we do)
which we look for in heaven as all the Schoolmen determine, (...), says
Nazianzen: this is an Angelical office, for I say unto you, their Angels behold
the face of their heavenly father continually says our Savior.

Third, for the necessity of the end which is that one thing that is necessary
eternal life and happiness: we read in the 19. Acts. That of those that
believed many which used curious Arts (...), brought their books and burnt them
before all men, and they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand
pieces of silver, all other Arts and books in comparison of this are but
superfluous and curious: this is that one thing that is necessary: and if all
were either burnt as they did, or banished as Lycurgus did all unnecessary
trades out of Sparta, that they might be the more unnecessary, that we might
more excel in this, the matter would not be so great.

Fourth, I might add to this the Antiquity, and use no other probation for it
then the last commendation: for as Peter Martyr has well observed, as the
Athenians proved themselves the most ancient people, because the invention of
corn, that most necessary help for the life of man proceeded from them, so
that Doctrine must needs be most ancient, which has the bread of life, and is
therefore most necessary.

Fifth, I might commend it from the Author which I touched in the 1 condition,
God himself: which makes much to inflame our affections toward it: for who
would be ashamed to be Gods Scholar? Or who would not rather think himself
highly honored? When Moses had talked with God in the mount, his face shined:
and shall not the Doctrine of Gods own mouth, make their face shine whom God
vouchsafes to instruct in it.

Wherefore o ye Prophets sons, cast off all impediments, and let no other
employment hinder your alacrity in this study: consider the excellency of this
Science, and know the time of your visitation: while the Sun of prosperity
shines, labor whiles the harvest of the Gospel lasts, gather the sheaves
unto the barn that winter find not you unprovided: (...)
(...).
When the Emperor passing through Jury, beheld the Land a goodly land, but
without culture and tillage through the lazines of the people, he cried out; O
marcomanni, o Sarmatae, o Qua di etc. O lazy Germans, I have found a people
more lazy then you: take heed this be not said of you, that Themistocles said
of them; (...): that fool has a price in his hand, but he has no heart to
use it.

First, be diligent therefore in reading the word of God, say with David, thy
word O Lord is more sweet unto me than honey, and more precious than gold;
Desiderabilia super aurum pretiosum multum, as the old translation has it in
the 19. Psalm. aut multum aurum aut multum pretiosum, aut multum desiderabilia
tum multum hoc haeretico parum, as Austin glosses upon the variety of the
construction.

Second, Be diligent in hearing the word of God: let every word be precious
unto thee, and let not one of them fall to the ground. O how rich, how soon
would this divine husbandry make us:

Third, Be diligent in prayer: the father said he got more by Prayer than by
study, it is most true in this Art: if thou want wisdom, faith James, ask it of
God: the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, says the Psalmist:
this knowledge is better gotten by praying to God, then prying into Schoolmen:

And to conclude, always remember that this is a Practical Art, and requires
not knowing but doing: bare and naked speculation is the tree of knowledge,
that bears nothing but the apple of strife between us, and God, and death:
Practice, Practice is the tree of Life.

CHAP. II. The Distribution of Divinity.
HAving already dispatched the definition of Divinity, with such incident
observations as I thought fittest to raise from thence, the thread of method
leads me by the hand to the distribution thereof, to which I think I may not
unfitly accommodate that common Maxim of Machiavellian policy, Divide and
Regna, divide and rule and say to the best Divines not abusing it, but alluding
to it, Divide and Regna, divide Divinity, and be King of Divines: divide it and
I will warrant you Master of your. Art: these knots of divisions, are nodi
Gordiani, that portend an Empire, as you heard in another case: this Argument
of Distribution is (...), the Royal Argument as Plato calls it, professing also
that if he could meet with such a Captain or leader that had the skill of
dividing aright, he would follow him as some God: and for this Art especially I
would think my self happy to be his companion: my purpose was to have
represented unto you a veiw, a Synopsis of Theology and to have taken some more
then common pains in the contriving thereof by reason of the excellent use it
might have yielded, and the great variety which you shall find among authors:
and withal to have examined some of the most received forms, where I judge
them defective: for the maine I continue still in the same mind, but I shall
not do it so fully as I thought.

First, because of the difficulty, it being the highest pitch and last point of
all in an art, to digest the precepts and parts into method, and supposing an
exact inquisition and certain determination of all particular truths, as you
know out of Logic: but for my self I confess I am but a Scholar to search,
not a Doctor to teach authentically: viator, not comprehensor that I may allude
to the School distinction:

Second, because of the inconvenience: for if I did so, I should be forced to
hold you too long in a Scholasticall and artificial discourse of notions,
which I have done too much already, and desire now to proceed to things rather
substantial and more profitable, if not for instruction of knowledge at least
for direction of practice. And therefore I will contract my meditations and
draw them into as narrow a compass as I can: propounding only two of the most
usual manner of proceeding out of infinite variety, and only propounding them
without any strict search made into them; and then commending a third and new
(for mine own exercise and yours in this inquiry) to your better
consideration: because being now in the entrance of this Art, and so in the
highest and most general, I think this the fittest place for such a prospect,
which may subject to your eyes the particulars: but very brieflly because I
would not seem to lodge you like strangers over the porch or entry, but like
the household of Faith, Domesticifidei, as the Apostle calls them, and of
Divinity likewise, in the inner and more remote rooms, according to the
custom of the Ancient, which you shall observe in Homer were strangers, are
(...), but the householders (...).

The first that I mention shall be that of M. Perkins, and Tilenus, and Soh
nius, and other learned Divines, who divide Theolgoy into two parts:

The first of which treats de Deo,

The second, de actionibus Dei, which they prosequute proportionably in the
particulars, Which I will pass over that I may keep my promised brevity, and
the rather because it is easy for you to be fully informed of them: and that I
may not stand to examine this accurately; I think you may know my judgment
concerning it sufficiently, out of that which I said in the definition,
explaning whether and by what right God may come to be handled in Divinity:
where I showed that in the method of Art he was not, but in the method of
Prudence he might profitably, which ground there laid being now granted, this
Distribution will fall to the ground of it self without any more a do.

This observation only I will now add, that though that division be not
according to the rule of Art, yet many actions of God indeed come to be
considered in this Doctrine, namely, such as, without which man cannot attain
to his last end and happiness, to which this rule guides: for there are some
immediate actions of God, as for example Redemption, and all the actions even
of man, are in some sort actions of God being performed by the help of his
Spirit and assistance of his grace, without which they cannot be performed:
insomuch that Durands puts this for an objection that Divinity is not a
practical Art because these actions are not wholly ours, nor in our power alone
to perform: and in this sense I deny not, but the actions of God are handled in
Divinity so far as they tend to man's happiness: but this helps that
distribution but a little.

First, because that comprehends under it the nature of God and attributes,
which make the first part, not only his actions.

Secondly, because it extends it self to other actions beside those that
confer to the fornamed scope of man's happiness, both which respects show it to
be of too much generality,

And thridly, therefore that which belongs properly to this doctrine is but a
small portion in that distribution, and those actions of God which are
necessary may well be ranked under another order: many other exceptions I might
bring against that division if it would stand with my purpose, but I omit them
both for that reason, and because they shall better appear out of that which
follows.

The second that I will name, shall be that which Ramus, as I think, first
observed, and Polanus after him has much confirmed, and many modern divines
approve and follow, which makes two parts of Theology,

First, of Faith de fide.

Second, de fidei operibus of good works, the first de credendis, the second de
faciendis, and so forward in all the subdivisions: and this I confess I
thought absolute a long time both for the commendation of good authors, as also
for the consanguinity with the Scripture and congruity with Reason, till that
upon better consideration I found it did not satisfy me.

For first, beside the ambiguity of the word fides which cannot be avoided if
it be taken in that infinite extent to comprehend so much and so diverse things
in it as it must of necessity according to that distribution, all which cannot
possibly be conceived to agree in one univocall praedication or formal
respect, as I might easily demonstrate: but are brought under it, not without
apparent force and violence.

And secondly, beside the seeming agreement of the parts one with another
against the nature and rule of a distribution which requires they should be
opposite; which though it may be well answered, yet in my opininon were better
avoided: for it sounds harsh and seems unreasonable that one part should treat
of the habit another of the act of faith: and whereas it may be said for that,
that the meaning of it is not to oppose and sever the habit of faith from the
formal effects of it, for that would be absurd indeed: but by opera fidei you
must understand other graces and virtues, so that the opposition stands between
the habit of faith, and the habit of them graces and virtues which are
therefore called the works of faith, or effects; because beside their own
proper habits from whence they proceed formaliter, they must and do also in
some sort flow from faith, and from it they have all their commendation and
acceptance with God, being without it but splendida peccata, as you all have
heard out of Austin often: for without faith it is impossible to please God,
says the Apostle Paul: but this is not enough if to excuse it, yet not to
justify it.

First, because the terms are so ambiguous that they give too much occasion to
mistakes and stumbling, as I said before.

Secondly, because in sanctification, which they that propound this
distribution range under faith, the habits of all other graces and virtues are
infused, and so included as well as of Faith.

Thirdly, because in the Decalogue, the rule of obedience and good works, and
consequently a principal portion of the second part, faith is also included or
else other worse inconveniences will follow: and so there is a mutual (...),
and immeation in these parts, as Divines speak in another case, which cannot
be without a strange and wonderful confusion: in which regard I cannot see
that these parts are artificially and accurately cut out: but beside that which
has been alleged I could produce many more exceptions which I omit rather:
and in both these I would be thus understood, not as rejecting either as
unprofitable: for I approve them both as very good though not exact: and stand
not much upon formalities of Art, so as they comprehend in them the substance
of Theological truths: preferring this before the other as I would prefer a
piece of gold for weight rather then for workmanship, for value rather then for
elegancy, like that French coin in the historian that in qua plus formae quam
ponderis. And now give me leave to commend a third a new form of this Art to
your consideration with two cautions.

First, I do not think that I can see further, or go beyond those ancient
Heroes in Divinity, who were so richly furnished with understanding, which they
so thriftily improved by incomparable pains and industry: that is far from my
meaning, but only as I said, to exercise my self and you in this inquiry: and
yet ye know what the Philosopher says, that there is an (...), an increase and
growth in all Arts: And the common saying is discipulus est prioris posterior
dies: Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge,
says the Psalmist: and though a Giant be taller then a Pygme, yet a Pygme upon
his shoulders has advantage of him, though ancient surpass modern times, yet
we ploughing with their heifer may understand their secrets, and with their
help may outstrip them: in a word it is with the light of knowledge, as with
the lamps at the games in Athens, one generation caries it as far as it can,
and after it, does tradere lampada, to the succeeding generation, which runs
along further with it.

Secondly, I do not imagine that which I am to propound absolute, though
comparatively I prefer it, or produce it rather either to give some further
light to these dark passages, or at least some illustration to that which has
been said already by others:

Thirdly, though for the general I hope I shall insist in the right way, yet
for the particulars I do not intend them, as full or accurate, neither much
less will I contend they are so: for I could not hope to satisfy my self in
them on the sudden, and therefore content my self to propound them, (...), as
the Philosopher speaks.

Now that I may proceed according to the nature of method, which deduceth one
axiom one precept out of another: for it is there as you see it in spinning,
the lock of wool is first fastened upon the spindle, and out of that the thread
is drawn in a long series, and then an hint of that is left to which the next
is fastened, till all be done in like manner: so in an Art, first, the
Definition is laid down, out of which must be spun, and drawn all the
succeeding precepts: and thus I will do with this: the Definition then you may
remember to have been this.

Divinity is a Doctrine of man's happiness: there be two words which note the
subjectum formale, Happiness; and the subjectum materiale, Man; and according
to these two, I frame the Distribution thus:

First, of Happiness simply considered.

Secondly, of Happiness in the Subject.

First, of Happiness in general.

Secondly, of Happiness in particular, according to the diverse states of it in
relation to the Subject: to illustrate this I will put you in mind of three
other distributions which harp upon this, though they do not fully agree.

The first is of some that considering Divinity to be medicina animarum, borrow
terms from the Physic of the body which they accommodate to this, and part it
proportion ably into (...), of man's misery by nature, and (...), of his
recovery by Christ, from which the common method in Vrfin differs but little:
this supposes man's fall or begins with it, and therefore I think either
omitteth something necessary, or else incurreth a necessary confusion of those
things which would better be more distinctly handled.

The second I find in a learned Author Estius in his preface upon the
sentences, who divides it into Theologia prima, that treats of man in his first
estate of integrity, and Theologia secunda, that considers him after his fall,
as to be guided to his happiness; and this comes a degree nearer to that I
propounded than the former, because it mentions both estates and handles them,
and yet it seems short by one degree.

The third comes up yet closer, and you shall find it in Trelcatius, who
divides Divinity thus: there be two parts.

First, de causis Salutis nostrae eoque de Dei operibus.

Secondly, de Subjecto illius id est Homine, varioque Hominis statu: and
explaning the ground of this distribution in the next words, he speaks for my
purpose more directly: Salus enim (says he) quae Theologiae finis proximus
est, duobus modis consideratur, tum in se and causis suis simpliciter, tum
Relate ad Subjectum ad quod ordinata est, qua ratione vary modificatur, pro
condition Subjecti multiplici in quo est: where ye see ye have the same
distribution of that I gave, and in the same formality of terms almost: and
this superads a degree to the former which I think is necessary.

The first takes man as he is now fallen, and so applies means for recovery of
his happiness:

The second considers, both of his standing first, and then his fall.

This third abstracts, what is common to both estates, what is the common
nature of his happiness, and so descends to the particular accommodation
thereof, according to the difference of his condition: and this I think is full
enough and large in extent, to comprehend all things that this Doctrine is to
meddle with: and I will use no other reason to prove it, because I think it
carries some evidence of truth or at least probability with it, especially
supposing the grounds formerly laid, but only that it is drawn out of the
definition with such facility, that it appears to be a natural distribution:
the doctrine of man's happiness has two parts.

First of Happiness in it self in general.

Secondly, of man's happiness, in reference to the proper subject: and now I
proceed to some few principal subdivisions to give you a view and Synopsis of
the whole Art.

Happiness in general has two things in it to be considered.

First, the parts or degrees, or affections, for I desire you to remember that
I am not curious for terms.

Secondly, the kinds of happiness: the parts or degrees are two.

First, the Constitution of it, or Habitual happiness.

Secondly, the Continuation of it, or Actual happiness: the former I briefly
touched the last time; the latter I conceive to consist in two things
especially.

First, the gracious Administration of all things without a man by God, in
ordine ad felicitatem: for it is impossible that man should natare sine
cortice, and attain to his own suo marti, by his own endeavors, without Gods
providence supporting him, and suggesting all necessaries to him, there being
the same proportion between him and God in this case that there is between
inferior creatures and man: and therefore as it is in architecture and such
like Arts, which in regard of the natural aptitude of the subject may be
speculative, but in regard of the Artificer, whose actions must pass upon it
to bring their potentia to actus, their possibilities to perfection, are
Practical: so or not much unlike in divinity, it is Practical most in regard
of God: as I noted in part before:

The second thing, for the continuation of Happiness, the virtuous and religious
operation of man; which by the help of the former the grace of God: he is able
to produce, in which respect Divinity is also properly Practical on man's part,
as has been said; these are the two things which I call the continuation or
the fluxus of happiness, the Operation of Gods grace toward man, and the grace
of man's Operation toward God: for habitual happiness standing most, as I
said, in the relation reciprocal of God to man being his God, and man to God
being his servant, the (...) and act of it must needs be placed in the
reflection of mutual offices of love, according to the peculiar condition of
either: And now follow the kinds of happiness, which are two.

First, of this life;

Second, of the life to come: in the former according to that which has been
said there be two things.

First Constitution, which is in a certain degree of our union with God, and
consequently fruition of all good, far inferior to the second estate which is
future:

Secondly, the Continuation, which is,

First by the gracious providence of God, supplying all things necessary for
such an estate, and enabling us to action agreeing to his will.

Secondly, our Religious action being thus enabled, which is of two sorts.

First, our general worship of God.

Secondly, our special: the general worship of God is in the observation and
of his will and gracious covenant which he pleases to make with man: where two
things are to be noted.

First, Substance of the Covenant.

Secondly, the Seals: the Substance in two things.

First, to love and honor God above all things for himself.

Secondly, to love other things respectively in subordination to God: and in
these three are diverse particulars, but I must leave them here.

The Seals of the Covenant are sensible things, applied according to the
condition of man's nature, who is both intellectual and sensitive; the use of
which according to Gods institution should both confirm the promises on Gods
part, and as it were engage him to performance, and confirm man in his duty,
and as it were oblige him more to the performance of it: the special worship
of God is in prayer, thanksgiving, praising of his glorious name, and the like:
and this is the happiness of this life: the happiness of the life to come is that
state which God is pleased voluntarily and freely to promise to man; where be
two things likewise.

First, the Constitution, which far surpasses the former, man being to be
elevated above himself in supernatural perfections.

Secondly, the Continuation, first, in Gods singular and immutable Grace,
secondly, by the operations of man, more noble and proportionable to such a
glorious estate: and (which I should have mentioned before) these two are
subordinate, the former to the latter: insomuch that this is called happiness by
appropriation and excellency; the other, but the way and means to this Happiness
among the most of our Divines. And all these come to be handled in the first
part of Divinity concerning Happiness in general, because they belong
indifferently to man in all estates: out of which the second part with some
inflexion, may be easily conceived: and therefore I come to that:

The second part of Divinity is concerning Happiness in special, in reference
to the subject, Man; who must be considered.

First, in the state of integrity.

Secondly, in the state of the fall and corruption: in integrity,

First, the constitution of his happiness, was (in one word) the Image of God.

Secondly, the continuation.

First, in Gods grace giving all things meet, for upholding that estate.

Secondly, man's observance in the worship of God, first general, secondly
special.

First, General for the covenant, first the Substance as it was.

First, Moral in these two things, first to love God above all as a creator,
secondly, all other subordinately.

Secondly, Ceremonial, abstaining from the forbidden fruit of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, secondly for the Seal of the Covenant, which was
then the tree of life.

Secondly, for special worship it was prayer etc, the propiety of which was,
that it might be, without a mediator:

Secondly, the Future life was an elevation above that natural estate to a
better, but inferior to that we look for in Christ: and this for the first
estate of integrity:

The second for the Fall, in regard of the present life is mixed and worse then
the former: and first for substance is the same always, secondly, for
circumstance different:

The substance first for constitution must be bestowed wholly by God, and that
by a double act, first of Redemption by the Son, secondly of Sanctification
by the Spirit.

Secondly, the continuation, first by the grace of God, in Christ, secondly by
the actions of man guided by the Spirit: which are,

First, Observation of the new covenant in a mediator, whereof first, the
substance is in two things, first to love God above all things in Christ, 2.
all other things for Christ, secondly the Seals are all representative of
Christ: and secondly Prayer to be put up in the name of Christ our mediator:
and this is the substance, the sum.

But secondly, this is varied in circumstance, of Christ; first promised,
secondly performed, where the chief difference is in regard of the outward
parts of the Sacraments, and the ceremonies: and this is the state of this
present life: the future life is not only passing the present, but also that
future which Adam should have been exalted to in the state of integrity, as
Divines think, because in it concur both the free gift of God, willing to
advance us, and the merit of Christ purchasing it, and a congruity that the
humane nature being advanced to the incomparable dignity of the hypostaticall
union in Christ the head, should be proportionably dignified in the whole
kind.

I know I must look for many objections which I should encounter withal
concerning the order of the general, and the insufficiency of the particulars:
but I will not incomber my self and you with a long answer; only in brief I
say,

First, if the general mold and frame be convenient, that is as much as I aim
at, the particular passages I stand not much upon.

Secondly, it is no wonder if many Theological things may seem to be wanting;
for my purpose was to touch only summa rerum fastigia, not to descend to all
inferior parts.

Thirdly, you must remember there may be a great difference between Divinity,
as it is usually handled, and as it should be exactly; between the method of
prudence and the method of Art: the latter I would willingly find, because it
keeps closest to the nature of the Object to be regulated: the former
notwithstanding I will be content to follow, and I think is best absolutely,
all things considered, as I am sure it is more usual and more useful: and
among all those methods, as I easily dislike none especially those two that I
mentioned in the beginning: so I most approve that of Trelcatius which
premiseth two principles.

First, Cognitionis, the Scriptures.

Secondly, Re^ which is God: and then proceeds to the parts, because it comes
nearest to the accurate method in general: though in many particulars I prefer
either of the other two before it. I will now in a word commend unto you the
use of that which ye have heard, from whence you shall perceive my scope in
this delineation: I confess I have done it so rudely and rawly, that it may
be rather a means to breed a loathing, than a liking of Divinity: as Socrates
to beat down the pride of Alcibiades (as Aelian tells the story) which the
opinion of his great possessions had bred in him, showing him a map of Greece,
bid him find out his land if he could, but when he could not, said thus to
him, and are not you ashamed then, to be proud of those lands, (...): so may
some man think the worse of the rich possession of Divinity, because in the
little map that I have drawn many parcels are not to be found, and as Tully
says of hangings, or such like, so long as they are folded together and
wraped, there is no sight of them, nothing that may draw liking or wonder: so
long as these Divine truths are folded and plighted together in these few
divisions, there is no luster or light sparkles from them, that may inflame the
beholder with love toward them; but if they were opened and displayed
mirabiles amores excitarent sui: yet my purpose was, because I cannot go
through all, at least to give you a light a far off; as the tempter led our
Savior into an high mountain whence he showed him all the Kingdoms of the
earth, the glory of which might entice him; so have I presented you a view of
all divinity to incite you to a love and study of them: But why do I use such a
comparison: rather as the Lord carried Moses into mount Nebo, whence he saw the
holy land though he could not enter into it: so because I cannot lead you into
the possession of this holy land, I have at least lent you a prospect of it: I
might out of all the particulars single out some more excellent pieces to
kindle your affections, but I must omit it: and end with this counsel; that
every one that intends the study of Divinity, would endeavor to get and hold
(...), as Paul advertiseth Timothy, a form of wholesome words, for the singular
utility that it will bring to him: first in regard of his memory, which is
wonderfully helped by this, as you al know, though I spare to tell you: both
out of your first principles of Art, as also by experience: And he that carries
about with him in his head a frame of Divinity, shall have a safe treasury,
where to repose all scattered and loose notions that he hears or reads, the
several branches of it shall be like so many borders of herbs, so many beds of
flowers, so many boxes of spices, in which he may meet with them again upon
all occasions.

Secondly, in regard of Judgment which is much strengthened and backed by
this: for this will furnish him with the most principal things of the Art,
which he shall behold under one, so that he may compare them together and
examine them at his pleasure: and as in a map a man may see places how they are
situat for North and South or the like, and what distance there is from place
to place, may easily be measured: so in such a frame, or tipe, a man may behold
what agreement or distance there is between one thing and another in Divinity:
how one thing borders upon another etc. without any difficulty, and this
reduced to use will appear better either in a controversy, which will receive
much light, the doubtful truth being reduced to his proper seat, and there
examined and decided by some infallible truths: and so in the explication of a
place of Scripture according as a man has made a plat form of Divinity
familiar to him; so will he expedite himself better or worse according as it
is: for it will direct him how to conceive of a trope or proper signfication of
a word; and so in other cases.

Thirdly, and lastly for invention, this will furnish him with an inexhaust
treasury of matter springing from the conference of one portion with another;
but will be most beneficial, for the discovery of two arguments most
necessary, the Genera I mean, which will appear out of the Series, and the
Definitions which will be as succinct and perspicuous in such an order, as you
see they are obscure and tedions without it: a Divine without this cannot choose
but have all his knowledge snared and entangled, as if he were in a labyrinth
without a clue.

Of the Happiness of MAN. CHAP. III.
MY purpose was, according to the method that is commonly received and
practiced among the best Artists in the delivery of Arts, immediately after the
definition of Divinity explaned, to have proceeded to the distribution: because
I desire to make haste out of these Scholasticall and notionall truths, to such
things as may be more practical and profitable: but the time approaching, and
the duties to be then performed by us, putting me in mind, I will alter my
course a little, and direct my speech so, that if it be not every way suitable,
which my general project would not permit, yet I hope it shall not be
altogether unseasonable: though it concern not the receiving of the Sacrament
in particular, yet it shall in general concern matters of practice and use:
though it direct not receivers in a peculiar manner, yet it shall not stand
Sholars only in hand (as perhaps the other does) but every Christian in their
measure to know and do: for I mean to speak of the Happiness of man, wherein
it consists: and though I intended to have interposed the distribution and
Synopsis of Divinity between the definition and this, as I said, yet as he in
Plutarch said more prittily then piously; when he threw at a dog, but hit his
stepmother, (...) so I may say: for if I had continued in my first resolution
for my method, I should have gone forth by the footsteps of the stock, and fed
my kids, by the tents of other shepherds, as our Savior counsels his Spouse,
in the first of the Canticles, I should not have straid a whit out of the
common road: but as I have now altered it, I think I shall gain this
advantage, to go the nearest way, according to the exact prescript of Art; for
by the same reason that I thought it probable, before that the distribution of
art in general arises from the Object, it being in it self specially
indivisible, and the multiplication of precepts in the same Art arises from the
multiplicity and variety of the several branches of some particular object: I
think it will follow by good consequence, that the Distribution of an Art will
follow the distribution of his object: the Art it self being divided, but by
accident in reference to the object, with which it goes along: even as Logic
would be perhaps not more truly, because the matter is the same, but more
truly (as we say) in formality, be ordered thus, if it were defined Dialectica
est Ars rationis: Ratio est simplex vel Composita, so that you should
understand the object primarily to bear the division, which should
notwithstanding secondarily redound to the Art it self, with which that is
linked in so near a conjunction: but thus much by the way, only upon occasion
of the alteration of that method, which I first propounded to my self: I come
now to the point, I mean to prosequte, namely concerning the Happiness of
man: wherein, that I may proceed with least offense and most expedition,

I will first premise some few observations unfolding the ambiguities of some
terms, that occur in this argument, and may otherwise breed some obscurity in
the matter:

And then secondly, I will deliver the principal things to be known, in two
conclusions or assertions: for the first I will name three only, and that very
briefly.

First, Summum bonum, may be taken two ways.

First, for Bonum praestantissimum and singular, which excels and surpasses
all other in comparison, and that is some one particular good, which is exalted
above his fellows, to the highest degree of eminency.

Secondly, for Bonum integrum or universale which is a collection of all the
particulars, comprehended under the Sphere or latitude of bonum, and therefore
called summum, because all being ranked according to methods heraldry, that
sits in the highest place, that justly challenges the precedence: to
accommodate this to our present purpose, in the first acception, God is said,
and most truly to be summum bonum, for to whom will ye liken me, says the
Lord in the Prophet, or what may compare with God, as it is in the Psalm: but
in the second meaning it is not so, neither is it any one particular that can
claim that name, but it is a confluence and concurrence of all together that
makes summum bonum: the use of this distinction shall appear by and by.

Secondly, you must distinguish between Summum Bonum taken in either of the
former senses, and Beatitudo, as Polanus does: the former consideration is of
good things, barely and absolutely, as so in themselves, the latter beside
that, is respective and includes an habitude in which they stand to man, who
injoies them: or as the Schoolmen have it, in other words there is a double
beatitude, objectiva, the same that summu^, and that is God, as it is taken for
praestantissimu^, or a collection of all, in a word, humanum bonum, according
to the other signification, and secondly formalis, the same that I called
beatitudo in propriety, as distinct from summum bonum, and that is, either that
operation by which we have union with the summum bonum and enjoy it, as they
say commonly, or that habit or state as I rather think from whence a man has
the denomination of Happiness, or both, for both of necessity must be
conceived.

Thirdly, you must observe a triple latitude in the signification of this word
Happiness.

First, in the largest sense, the fruition of any good, being a portion of it,
does also get the name of happiness, and he is at large an happy man, who
injoyes any such particular good, and so we use to say occasionally, hearing of
any good befalls any man, he is an happy man, so far namely as that will extend,
for otherwise the same man may want many things, and be simply to say, very
miserable.

Secondly, in the strictest sense that is happiness only that arises from a
confluence of all humane good, and he only deserves the name in whom they all
meet and are married; and thus no man upon earth, is or shall be happy.

Thirdly, in a middle sense, that is happiness where the fruition of good,
though not free from all mixture of evil; yet is so prevalent and predominant,
that it may justly denominate a man happy simply, though not simply happy in
all respect, and that man is happy where this is to be found: this last you may
call out of the Schoolmen essential happiness and true, the second integrall
and complete happiness, the third for distinctions sake if you will, partial
and incomplete Happiness: I might add something also of true and false
happiness, sound and supposed, but the homonymie is so palpable that I shall
not need, and therefore will content my self with that which has been said
already of the first point, reserving other things that may seem to be of
moment and consequence to their proper oportunities: and pass now to the
second part I promised, which was to show, what happiness is, and wherein it
consists in two conclusions, and that according to the two stricter acceptions
of the word even now mentioned.

The first shall declare what integrall and complete happiness is, and wherein
it consists.

The second what true and essential happiness is, and wherein it consists:
the first I will dispatch briefly meaning to insist most upon the latter.

Complete happiness, I call that where nothing is defective, and you may
conceive it, I think tolerably, by such a description or a like. Happiness is
a perfect estate of a reasonable nature wherein it injoys all good that is due
unto it.

I describe it by estate rather then Operation, because no operation does
denominate the efficient, but happiness does the subject: again every operation
is transient, and in a continual flux, but happiness seems to be something
permanent: and thirdly operation does never perfectly exist: but happiness does:
otherwise, that of Solon should be true which the Philosopher rejects, Ante
obitum nemo supremaque funera foelix: and a man should not be happy till he
were not at all.

Secondly I add a perfect state, which needs no further explication.

Thirdly, I say of a reasonable creature: because as Scaliger well taxes
Cardan, for attributing vitam beatam muscae quae sane ex optimo purissimoque
loquendi genere soli debetur homini: and if the meaning be, because nothing is
wanting to it, non improbe sentit sed plusquam improbe loquitur: for that
reason is no sufficient appellation or warrant for that, for if we would
deglubere significationem, as he speaks in that manner, by the same ambitious
superstition we might call an element happy, because it is in his own place,
which would be nugae sed (...), though we read in Xenophon (...), by a trope
improperly so styled: but whereas, as Scaliger seems to appropriat happiness
to a man, I think that is not right, neither is it his purpose so to restrain
it, for an Angel may be happy even in propriety of language: and therefore
speaking in general I extend it as far as it goes to all reasonable creatures,
though I intend the particular application and use to man only now follows the
other part of the description which says it is such an estate of the
reasonable creature, wherein it injoyes all that good which is due unto it. And
this perhaps might have sufficed alone to have described Happiness to have
been the fruition of all good due to man, though the other make it more plain
and full; where,

First, by good that is due, I mean not by any necessary bond or obligation in
which God is tied to the creature to give it, but that which has proportion
unto and congruity with the nature of man, and to which therefore man has a
natural aptitude and appetite or propension.

Secondly, by all good I say, because man being a compound creature must have a
compound happiness of many ingredients, because the perfection of the whole must
result from the perfection of every part; and you may digest them thus: the
good is either Summum which is God, as I said; or Subordinatum, and this again
is either internum within the essence of a man; or externum without him:
Internum is either Bonum Corporis or Bonum Animae: bonum Animae is either
Intellectus or Voluntatis: or if you had rather take them without this
curiosity of Art, they are five.

First, God and his favor, as the supreme Lord.

Secondly, Reason, right and conformable to God.

Thirdly, a will in tune and conformable to right reason.

Fourthly, a body in good temper and disposition serviceable to a will tuned.

Fifthly, outward blessings answerable to all the rest: these make the sphere
and circle of good; which, upon whose head soever they fall, do crown him
with complete and perfect happiness: which, because of my propounded brevity, it
shall suffice to have made an enumeration of, without illustration.

Thirdly, for fruition I may conveniently and proportionably name five degrees
of it: though perhaps every one of them shall not be judged exactly necessary.

First, possession and usurpation or use of those good (for I join those two
together) because perhaps they cannot always be well distinguished in that
respect (they have to happiness) which is for the most part by the action of
virtue, secondly, knowledge of that possession, and a consideration reflected
upon our riches and happiness, Thirdly delight springing from that knowledge,
fourthly quiet of all parts filled with that delight and satisfied, fifthly,
security of that quiet upon assurance reasonable of the continuance and
perpetuity of that estate and those good: All these where they meet are enough
to milk out all the good that can be in them; to suck out all the juice and
sweetness, all the marrow and fatness that they have: and the name of
felicity sometimes imports some one of these, sometime two or more, and the
opinions of Philosophers and divines accordingly pitch upon them: but where
there is a concourse of all, I cannot see what should be wanting: for he that
has such a fruition of all good eternal, internal, external, in body Soul
and whole man, as brings with it a perfect quietation of the natural appetite
joined with unspeakable delight, and unmoved security (that I may contract all
into a narrow room) Quis non illum beatum dixerit and non potius beatissimum:
I might enlarge these things with illustrations and probations if the matter
required, but I think it so perspicuous and evident to any that will consider
it, that it would be but lost labor to dwell any longer upon it: especially
this being agreeable with that definition which you know is common out of
Boethius, that Beatitudo est status bonorum omnium aggregatione perfectus, and
that of Anselm Sufficientia commodorum omnium, and that of Austin, Beatus est
qui habet quicquid vult and nihil mali vult as they are alleged by Gregory de
Valentia: and I think it is the common notion that presents it self to all
men, when they hear that word Happiness, to think presently upon some
universal good: and he that would make an emblem or picture of happiness,
must set it forth like that of Peace among the Ancients with a cornucopia an
horn of plenty in the hand, or like the picture of Pan, with all shapes and
infinite variety: and therefore according to my promise and desire I will now
proceed to the second assertion which shall explain what essential happiness
is, and wherein it consists: wherein I may be more punctual, because it will
be more properly Theological as you shall perceive:

Essential Happiness I understand, which though it want many particulars, which
are de integritate felicitatis, yet it has all things that are de essentia,
and has enough to salve the name and title of happiness in truth and
propriety: as a man that wants his arms or legs is not integer homo; but so
long as the Soul is united to the body is a man: or, as the name being given
according to the predominant part; wine does not lose the name of wine for a
little water mingled with it: so here, though there be some wants and
consequently some misery mingled with this happiness, yet taking more of
happiness then misery, it has the name and nature of happiness; and this I call
essential Happiness: and this I say must be placed in God alone and our
fruition of him or union with him. But to handle this point more fully, as I
purpose in the rest hereafter to take some place of Scripture for a ground and
foundation to build upon (where it may be done conveniently) so I will do
here: and that you shall find in the last verse of the 144 Psalm, where ye
have these words Blessed are the people that are in such a case, yea blessed
are the people whose God is the Lord: which as you see, speaks of blessedness,
and as I conceive, couch as much of that argument, and for our present scope,
as any that I could meet withal: and I am only sorry the time is so short that
I shall be forced but to name the things I have to deliver, because I resolve
to go through with this point and dispatch it at this time.

The Psalm as may seem, was composed in time of war, and is partly spent in a
laudatory thanksgiving for success and victory; Blessed be the Lord my
strength, which teaches my hands to war and my fingers to fight: and partly is
petitory, containing a suite to God for further safety and deliverance from the
proud enemy and war, that the Church might enjoy the blessings of peace Bow thy
heavens o Lord and come down, touch the mountains and they shall smoke: that
our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that our daughters may be as
corner stones polished after the similitude of a palace: and there having made
a Catalogue of the benefits of peace, the Psalmist concludes all with this
Epilogue, this sweet and patheticall Epiphonema; Blessed are the people that
are in such a case, yea blessed are the people whose God is the Lord: which
has two parts, as ye see, like the portion of Acsah that Caleb gave her, the
Springs above and the Springs beneath; like the blessing of Isaak divided among
his two sons: the blessing of Esau, the fatnes of the earth and the dew of
heaven shall be thy portion; and the blessing of Jacob, the dew of heaven and
the fatnes of the earth: the blessings of the left hand, Blessed are the people
that are in such a case; and the blessings of the right hand, yea blessed are
the people whose God is the Lord: I must speak something of either; and
principally, as appliable to any man single; yet so, that I will sprinkle
something as they concern a nation or people, for which the letter of the text
is most direct.

that outward prosperity and peace is a blessing of God, and confers to our
happiness, whether you consider one person or an whole people: you must
understand this according to the ordinary distinction in this case, of per se
and per accidens; it is so per se, in his own nature, though we through our
sin may interpolare naturam, that I may use Tertullians phrase of the Devil,
in a sense not much different, we may alternature and make that which is of it
self helpful unto us, hurtful: and thus that truth is evident and clear.

aptitude in them to satisfy man's natural appetite: for in every man (being a
compound nature, the vinculum of heaven and earth in which both are, as it
were, married by the conjunction of his soul and body) there is a double man,
inward and outward: now this homo externus, agrees with that (...), as well as
his inward with the (...), as the Platonicks speak: and therefore stands in
need of outward things both for necessity to sustain and preserve him, as also
for lawful delight to cheer and refresh him.

Secondly, outward good things are to him both the subject and instruments of
many virtues, and so great advantages in his course of godliness, both to
furnish himself, and to help and further his brethren, and in both to promote
the honor of God in his true worship, and therefore David, who was a man of
war, could not build the house of God, and that Solomon his son might, God gave
him rest round about from all his enemies, and riches in such abundance that
gold in his time was like stones in the street, and silver like the dust of the
earth, and hence it is,

Thirdly that God is said to give these blessings to his children as
testimonies of his love and favor, and as rewards of their faithful obedience:
he brought the children of Israel out of Egypt the land of bondage into Canaan
the land of promise, out of the land where they were fed with onions and
garlic, into the land that flowed with milk and honey: and wishes pathetically
in the 81. Psalm, O that my people had harkened unto me, and Israel had walked
in my ways, I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand
against their adversaries; He should have fed them also with the finest of the
wheat, and with honey out of the rock, I should have satisfied them: But why do
I go about to prove this since all the world almost is more prone to dote upon
these external blessings, as the only happiness, rather then to doubt,
whether they confer to it at all or no! it was well said that he that called
Riches bona goods first, was a better husband then divine, but it may be
thought that the most are such husbands that enquire who will show us any
goods, as though they were the only good: and therefore I had more need to
improve it by making use, then prove it by reason, and a threefold use, offers
it self to our consideration.

not to fasten our eyes upon the things themselves, but to look up to heaven
and acknowledge God the author of all the good we enjoy, with humble
thankfulness, and thankful humility: Thou crownest the year with thy
goodness o Lord and thy steps drop fatnes, 65. Thou preparest a table before me
in the presence of my enemies. Thou anointest my head with oil my cup runs
over: the Lord has given us that health and prosperity, and peace and plenty
of all things that we enjoy, Blessed be the name of the Lord: But this not
enough but therefore.

2. Let us labor to employ and improve all these blessings, that he has so
liberally bestowed on us, to the best advantage of his glory: least God
complain of us, as of the Jews once in the Prophet, That we abuse his corn,
and his wine, and his oil, I may say, his time and his wit, and his learning,
to our unlawful lusts and lovers: O that now when God has given us peace from
our enemies round about us, while we have means, we had also minds to build
the Temple of the Lord, to advance the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ: let
us make these external favors, but looking glasses through which we may behold
the beauty of God that gave them; but as ladders Scala creaturarum, and stairs
to climb up to heaven: though they have a natural goodness in themselves, yet
they have no moral to us, but in ordine to this end without which they are
vanity.

Thirdly, if these be good blessings and confer to happiness, then let us
sympathize with the Saints that want them; Let us pray for the peace of
Jerusalem: Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity with in thy palaces:

And now I come to the second and more principal point, which I thought to
have stood most upon, but the time has prevented me: and therefore I will
delineate only the particulars, and perfect them at some other opportunity; for
the former is not enough: he is not an happy man, whose bones are full of
marrow, and his eyes stand out with fatness: that swims in pleasure and
riches, and shines in purple and scarlet and fares deliciously every day: that
lives in a land that flows with milk and honey, and washes his paths in
butter: but who then? Blessed is the man, the people whose God is the Lord: the
point then is this:

Our chief happiness consists in our union, with God and fruition of him: the
phrase I think whose; God is the Lord imports thus much, they who are in
covenant with God, when God accepts some for his people and servants and
testifies so much especially by acquainting them with his ordinances, and when
reciprocally they acknowledge and embrace him for their God walking in humble
obedience to his commandments, so that happiness stands.

First, in that relation between us and God.

Secondly, is maintained by those actions mutual on either part: and thus the
truth may be clear for these reasons.

God is the most eminent good of all, imcomparably beyond all other, both
severally and jointly; and therefore the fruition of him is essential happiness
though others be wanting, because there will be more good then evil in such an
estate, as that man is rich that has a pearl suppose of infinite value, worth
many thousands though he want many things.

Secondly, because God conteines all other things virtually in himself, so
that he that has God has all, for he alone can and will give all.

Thirdly, because God alone can supply the want of all the rest, in the proper
effect of Happiness by himself, and all that we would desire to find in them,
we may have in him; for a full content and quiet of the mind and satisfying of
the whole appetite, is that which we hunt for, and would feign distill, and
milk out all the particulars we desire, but this is richly and royally afforded
us by God alone: How excellent is thy loving kindness o God when the children of
men put their trust under the shadow of thy wing, they shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatnes of thy house; and thou shall make them drink of the
river of thy pleasure; for with thee is the fountain of life, in thy light
shall we see light.

The uses of this point may be these,

pleasure, some in honor, some in riches, the most reasonable in virtue, which
well interpreted has some truth, we have better learned to place it in the
fruition of God.

Secondly, for reprehension of the practice of carnal and worldly men, that
even in the bosom of the Church and School of Christ, are such non
proficients, that they seek no further, neglecting the communion with God, and
following those things with great greediness, tanquam haec sint nostri
medicina doloris.

Thirdly, for instruction of all, Many say who will show us any good: but come
hither, and as God said to Moses, Ostendam tibi omne bonum, when he gave him
but a glimps of himself, and his glory, god is al good god is perfect happiness.

4. For Exhortation, there is no man but desires happiness: when the jugler
undertook to tell every man what he wished for, and desired, and much company
was met to see the issue of his promise with great expectation, out comes the
mountebank and bids them be attentive, and then said, Hoc omnes vultis, vili
emere and caro vendere: and another said Omnes laudari se exoptant, this Austin
finds fault withal. At si dixissent inquit omnes beati esse vultis, miseri
esse non vultis, dixissent aeliquid, aute^ nullus in sua no^ agnosceret
voluntate: Behold then this happiness to enjoy the favor of God to have
communion with him, labor therefore for this, use al means that God has
appointed, particularly this Sacrament to which God invites us now at this time;
wherein God offers himself to every believer in a most near communion: the
Sybarites, when they invited to a feast were wont to give their women a years
warning to deck and trim and prepare themselves: this is an anniversary
solemnity with some, and it were to be wished it were not so seldom with us:
let us prepare our selves accordingly to be fit guests, for this table, not
without the wedding garment: that we may present our selves before our God
adorned with lively faith in Christ, and a resolute purpose of denying our
selves and our lusts and yielding sincere obedience to all his Commandments,
and so he may dwell with us, and we may walk with him: we may be incorporated
into him, he may live in us, and we in him: we may be assimilated to him in all
holiness and righteousness and conformed to his image, which near union is
livly set forth in this Sacrament, in a word we may be so nourished with this
heavenly mannah that we may go on from strength to strength till we see God in
Syon:

Fifthly and lastly, for Consolation for those that enjoy God a mid all other
wants: Excellently the Prophet Habakuck, Although the figtree shall not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines: the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flesh shall be cut off from the
fold, and there shall be no heard in the stalls: though all earthly comforts
forsake us, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation.

FINIS.
November. 26 1639.
Imprimat.

Tho. Wykes.


