A fourth Proceeding in the Harmony of King David's Harp.

That is to say; A Godly and learned Exposition of six Psalms more of the
princely Prophet David, beginning with the 62. and ending with the 67. Psalm.

Done in Latin by the reverend Doctor Victorinus Strigelius Professor of
Divinity in the university of Lypsia in Germany Anno 1502.

Translated into English by Richard Robinson Citizen of London. 1596.

Seen, perused, and allowed.

Keep me O Lord from the hands of the ungodly: preserve me from the wicked
men,

Psalm 140.4. Behold, he that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep,

Psalm. 121.4. The Lord himself is thy keeper, the Lord is thy defense upon
the right hand,

verse. 5. LONDON Printed by Valentine Simmes. 1596.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms

Qui LEO de Judah est, and FLOS de Iesse, Leones Protegat and Flores ELIZABETHA
tuos.

Brief Contents of these six Psalms.
Of Doctrine 62 Of Prayer and Doctrine 63 Of Prayer and Doctrine 64 Of Praise
65 Of Thanksgiving and Praise 66 Of Thanksgiving, as Psalm 67
Judith. 9.11. Humilium Deus Auxilium.

Reu. 5.5. Vincat Leo de tribu Judah radix David.



To the right honorable Sir Thomas Egerton knight, Lord keeper of the great
Seal of England, grace, mercy, peace, and plenitude of temporal and eternal
beatitude in Christ Jesus our Lord, and Savior everlasting.
NOw, even now amongst us in these later days (right Honorable and chosen
Patron) do the providence, presence and promises of God appear, work, and
prove effectually according to that saying of the holy God of Israel* in the
days of Samuel. Th^^ that honor me I will honor, 1. Samuel. 2.30*
and they that despise me shall be despised. This was then spoken and
afterward effected touching the careless and disobedient children of Ely and
their posterity, as inward adversaries of the welfare of Gods Israel. This was
also then spoken, 2* Sam. 8.17.
and afterward effected in a godly religious and justified Zadok (succeeding
Abiathar, one in authority with king David) against his outward enemies the
Philistines and other nations in those victories* For as in all ages and
nations there have been, are, and shall be both inward adversaries and outward
enemies, dishonouring God, and honoring man more then God: So the Lord of all
power, and God of all grace, has ever had a righteous Abraham in Caldea, a
just Lot in Sodom, a godly Daniel in Babylon, a devout Tobyas in Niniuie, a
patient Job in Husse, and a zealous Nehemias in Damasco: who both amongst
inward and outward enemies have honored God and been honored by him,
despising those which have despised him. And again, Gods providence, presence,
and promises have been no less effectual with others, as Ionathas in the
Court of Saul to favor David: Obadia in the Court of Achab to entertain the
Prophets: Abdemelech with king Zedechias, to entreat for Jeremy: Petrus,
Dorotheus and Gorgonius in Dioclesians court to embrace Christianity: and
generally to honor God, which has honored them, and to despise those which
have despised him. Neither in our time has Gods goodness in this failed. For
like as we have had, and still have inward adversaries, as Athistes, Epicures,
Hypocrites, and voluptuous worldlinges which contemning the grace of God,
pervert both their own ways, and hinder, discourage, diminish, and blemish
the welfare of the godly elect by faith: So this our age and present happy
state, wants not foreign enemies far off, which with Tyranny, Papistry,
Infidelity, Heresy and Schisms lie lurking, looking for a day to assault us,
and bend all their policies, and powers to subvert us, which have honored
God, who has honored us, and who may justly contemn them that contemn him.
As blessed be God for his loving favor and unspeakable mercies manifested
long agone, and of late time upon this our little Bethulia of England, where
our gracious Judith humbling her self in his fear, seeking the honor of God,
has been honored by his providence, is honored by his presence, and shall be
honored by trusting in his promises above humane expectation, to his endless
glory and praise, and our continual comfort: but to the contempt and confusion
of all contrary opposite powers whatsoever. In respect whereof (Right
Honorable) and for that both Prince and Piere, rich and poor have just cause
to rejoice in his fear, and to be thankful for the enjoying of this his
favor: As I (of many others which may do better) acknowledge my self to be
one of the least in ability, yet for that I would not be the last in good will
of any which can or may any way express their dutiful endeavor in Honoring
that God which has honored us, and contemning them which contemn him, and
us. Having these xx. years and vpwardes, applied my time and talent in
translating learned men's works out of Latin into English, approved by
authority, and furthered by faithful benefactors, whereas I did certain years
past dedicate some of these Expositions unto the right honorable learned and
virtuous Sir C. H. K. Lord Chancellor, of England, and after him another
portion to the right honorable Sir I. P. K. Lord Keeper, etc. your honors
Antecessor: and last of all, another part, to the Queens most excellent
Majesty well accepted: Do now address, and dedicate the exposition and
translation of these few Psalms mo unto your honorable good Lordship: as
unto that honorable personage, Ie^^mie 44.19.
chosen of the Lord, for a shepherd to stand before him in practice against
all inward adversaries of Gods Israel amongst us, Isay. 49.2.
and as a chosen shaft in the quiver of the Lord for prayer, against all
foreign enemies far from us. Humbly beseeching your honorable good Lordship
herein thankfully to accept my good will: to the furtherance of my poor pen
and study: And my hearty and thankful prayer shall be daily pressed unto
almighty God for your honorable lordships long life, health, increase of
honor and permanent heavenly felicity in Christ Jesus.

London in S. Brides parish, 2. November, 1596. Your Honors humble and devoted
Orator, Richard Robinson, Citizen of London.

PSALM. LXII. Nonne Deo subiecta erit, etc.
To the excellent Musician Ieduthun: a Psalm of David. When he left Asaph and
his brethren before the ark of the Lord's covenant to minister there. As in 1.
Chron. 16.39.40.41, 42.

THE ARGUMENT.
THe whole Psalm is a doctrine inioyning us to have confidence reposed in God
alone, The effects of this Psalm.
and forbidding us to trust in any humane helps: For he that puts his
trust in the friendship and familiarity of men, as in demonstrations or rules
immovable, he holds himself by a slender and intrueth a rotten thread; as
that most pleasant Orator Demades sometime said. But not with less elegancie
is it said by Solomon. Prou. 27. verse. 19. As in water face answers to face
so is the heart of man unto man. The rewards of wicked amity.
Every history is full of examples, but we for breuities sake will be content
with the example of Aratus the Siconian. Aratus whom Polybius calls the Grand
Guide, of the Achaians commonwealth, lived long most lovingly, and most
familiarly with the Macedonian kings: But at length through fained suspicions
conceived by them against him, poison was given unto him: which having d^unke
up and received into his inward parts: Aratus said, Haec sunt praemiae Regiae
amicitiae. These the rewards be of kingly amity. Neither in deed are such
kings and princes favors only more ebbing and flowing then any arm of the
sea, but the zeales of all men without exception are uncertain, and more
easily changed then the Moon, which never keeps one countenance. This
inequality makes the 146. Psalm there saying Verse 2. O put not your trust in
princes, nor in the sons of men in whom there is no help. But few at any
time do believe these sayings without experience, which is the Schoolemistres of
fools, according unto the proverb: Stultus accepto damno sapit. It is ever
the fools guise, by harm received to be wise. For there is not any man whom
you shall see not a little proud with a small puff of wind rising from the
favors of mighty persons, and in trusting hereunto do busy themselves in
matters unneedful. But we being thoroughly moved with Gods admonishments, let
us amend these evils, and let us learn, that God is only a faithful and firm
friend, counselor and helper, who indeed forsakes not his, in the midst of
death.

The Psalm and exposition thereof.
Verse 1 My soul truly waits upon God, for of him comes my salvation.

Verse 2 He verily is my strength, and my salvation: He is my defense, so that
I shall not greatly fall.

Doctrine of the first Commandment touching Silence and Hope, as I said, is
delivered in this Psalm: ver. 1. Wait (says he) upon the Lord, Of patience
and hope in God, when we are afflicted.
address thy self unto him, and hope in him. Waiting or silence is opposed
against impatience, and disdain, to him that seeks remedies not granted, or
else granted: but in despising the order which God has ordained, as many seek
for medicines or helps from Southsayers against the commandment of God,
which forbids to ask counsel of the devil and his instruments. Others
run for help unto Physicians, whose science although it be granted and
approved by God, yet ought it not to be the first and principal object of
man's will. Let us therefore in miseries be patient, and let our hope be deeply
rooted in Gods promises, which cannot be wearied, nor in any wise moved out of
place. But afterward let us in a right order seek remedies granted us,
least we sin upon the contrary part, namely in tempting God according to
the saying of Syracides chap. 38.9. My son fail not in thy sickness: but
pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee whole. Defer not to turn unto God,
and then give place unto the Physician. Verse. 11. These rules if we shall
follow we shall never be cast out of our standing, but we shall stand like
rocks immovable, whereupon the frothing foam of the sea dashing, does again
fall away from them.

Verse 3 How long will ye imagine mischief against every man? ye shall be slain
all the sort of you: yea as a tottering wall shall ye be, and like a broken
hedge.

Like as the raging devil vexes and greeueth the Church in her old age,
Satan's extreme outrage against the church in her old age,
which by reason of age is weaker and feebler: So the instruments of the
devil do insult upon dead persons and such as are brought low, and ^o not
make up the broken wall with fortified watches; but with violence and assault
endeavor what they can, quite to euerthrowe the same. This proper mark of
devilish rejoicing at good men's miseries, let us not suffer to be burning in
us: but let us be moved with other men's miseries, and let us study as our
vocation and ability will serve us, rather to pacify then increase them. For
he that stands let him take heed lest he fall: for it may happen to every
man that does happen to any man.

Verse 4 Their devise is only how to put him out, whom God will exalt: their
delight is in lies, they give good words with their mouth, but curse with
their heart.

Though our whole life be full of dissimulations, yet the examples of Courts
are more manifest: for there the face, countenance, and eyes do often
dissemble, but the speech most often: for the greatest part of Courtiers do
flatter a man to his face, but privily, if occasion be, can lay a cold pad in
the straw. And specially if they see any stranger to prosper, ^mulation in
princes courts, etc.
and to be of any estimation with the prince: unto this man's destruction do
they prepare and bend all their enterprises. But these plagues of Courts, are
better known then that they require long recital of them here by me in this
place.

Verse 5 Nevertheless my soul, wait thou still upon God, for my hope is in
him.

Verse 6 He truly is my strength and my salvation: So that I shall not fail.

Verse 7 In God is my health, and my glory: the rock of my might, and in God
is my trust.

Antonius says by Ciceroes citing: Haec mea in dicendo ratio est* vt si quid
boni causa habet (...) habitem, haeream, commo^^ar, etc. This rule hold I in
speaking, that if the cause I take in hand have in it any goodness, or right,
in the same I may dwell, stand and remain, etc. So the holyghost twice or
thrice repeateth here that which is excellent, that he may keep still the
hearer or learner of his Psalm in the cogitation of most excellent matters:
for as Epictetus notably said, Non potest doctrina aculeos relinquere in animo,
nisi quis eadem quotidie aud^at and ad vsum transferat. Doctrine can leave no
strength in the mind, except a man daily hear the same, and apply it unto
use. Let us not then with a certain loathing and satietie be quite carried
away from repeating of most excellent sentences, but let us give thanks unto
the holyghost that he speaks the same matters from the same purposes, and
with this confirms our faith.

Verse 8 O put your trust in him always (ye people) pour out your hearts before
him, for God is our hope.

He applies his example unto the universal church, as if he should say; God
is much more ready to give, then we are to receive. Come ye therefore unto this
good and gracious Lord, who is more truly called, The delights of mankind,
then was Titus the son of Vaspasian, and freely put forth your petitions in
his presence, yea pour out your hearts before him: for he rejoices and is
delighted in this consent or unity. Last of all, put your trusts in him, not
only in prosperity, but most specially in adversity, and believe ye that you
are received and heard, yea, though all creatures seem to have conspired your
destruction. Hitherto appertains the notable saying of Saint Paul Ephesians. 3.
where he affirms, that we have these three things, by Christ, easy access
unto the Father, free speech, and sure confidence to be heard. Doubtless it is a
great thing for a man to come in the sight of God; and a greater matter to
speak franckely and manifestly, that which a man thinks. But the greatest
matter of all is, without doubting to believe, that God denies us nothing.
Now think with your self what and how great thanks is due unto the Son of
God the Mediator, through whose grant and gift we possess all these things.

Verse 9 As for the children of men, they are but vain, the children of men
are deceitful upon the weights, they are altogether lighter then vanity it
self.

Verse 10 O trust not in wrong and robbery, give not your selves unto vanity:
if riches increase set not your hearts upon them.

Every law is a commandment of that which is right, and a conuincer of that
which is wrong: And Justice comprehends the eschewing of vices, and the
study of well doing. Like as therefore he has hitherto delivered us a rule or
precept touching confidence settling it self in God: So now afterward he
forbids ungodly confidence in humane things. For our body is weak, our
feature or beauty frail, our health uncertain, our life most short and fickle
fading, honor is vain, because it is either fained, or not of continuance,
our will is corrupt, wisdom is small, virtue languishing, and finally affection
troublesome. Seeing therefore al humane things are weak, britle and frail, may
we doubt yea or no, but that it is more safe and far better to trust in God
only, then to nourish an ungodly confidence, not only in Princes and Peoples
good will, but also in their wealth and other things, which while they
glitteringly shine, are brickely broken.

Verse 11 God spoke once and twice; I have also heard the same, that power
belongs unto God.

Verse 12 And that thou Lord art merciful: for thou rewardest every man,
according to his work.

The last verses contain a Reason, why it is better to have our hope reposed
in God, then in creatures: because there is in God a will and power to help
and save. Creatures either lack will, or power, or both. For first as Plato
says elegantly, Amicus est animal naetura mutabilis: A friend is a creature,
soon changed in nature. Next of all, second causes can not any way work,
without the first: But the will of God toward the godly ones is unchangeable,
according to that saying, Isay 54. verse 10. But my mercy shall not depart from
thee, nor the covenant of my peace shall be moved, says thy merciful Lord. And
how say ye to it that gods power has nothing to withstand or let it, but all
things give place to it, and all things yield and obey the same? Let therefore
our hope endeavor it self with the will and power of God, and not with humane
endeavors and helps. But the phrase of Law [ Thou shall reward every man
according to his work,] let that be understood according to the
interpretation of the gospel: for the preaching of the gospel teaches, who be
just, and who be unjust, Who be just, and who be unjust.
in what manner works do please or not please God. The person is just, that is
accepted unto God, not for works, but for the Mediators sake whom man's faith
reverently embraces with a kiss. Again, obedience be it never so lame and
imperfect, yet notwithstanding when faith in the Mediator shines forth before
the same, it is acceptable unto God. But he that believes not in the son,
upon him remains the wrath of God, than which nothing may be thought more
sorrowful.

PSALM. 63. Deus, Deus meus, ad te de luce, etc.
A Psalm of David when he was in the wilderness of Ziph in the Country of Judah.
1. Sam. 23.24.

THE ARGUMENT.
LIke as sound health is more acceptable unto them which are recovered and
brought out of sickness, then unto others which were never sick in body: even
so good things long before desired, do more delight us then those which we have
continually received. The want of a goo^ thing makes it more to be desired.
For of Privation or wanting (if I may so say with the Logicians) are the
habites esteemed, and men in wanting understand how precious good things be.
The same thing has been usually happening to the godly ones: for although
they loathe not their present benefits, namely the voice of the ministry, and
lawful use of the sacraments, nor yet with fullness are estranged from them.
Yet notwithstanding more fervently do men desire these benefits, so often as
from their mothers breast (that is, from the public ministry, and from the
outward society of the church) they are taken and plucked away. For then the
milk of Gods word waxes sweeter and sweeter, and the crummes falling from the
Lords Table are had in more price and reverence. To this purpose saint John
Chrysostom expounding the first chapter of the epistle to the Romans says,
S. John Chrysostom his wo^des upon the first chapter of Saint Paul to the
Romans appliable to this place.
Nunc verbum Dei inter nos habitat abunde cum omni sapientia, and sine periculo
docetur and discitur, quia pij Principes suscipiunt patrocinium docentium and
discentium eu^ngelij doctrinam. Hac autem copia verbi, and praesenti
tranquillitate non ita afficiuntur homines vt par ^erat. Veniet igitur tempus
triste and luctuosum, qu^ dissipatis publicis caetibus ecclesiae, pauci exul^^
in aliquo angulo trepide convenient, and inter se communicabu^t fragmenta
caelestis doctrinae and consolationes, and pro his reliquiis Deo ingentes
gratias agent. In English thus: Now the word of God dwells plenteously
amongst us. with all wisdom, and is without danger taught and learned,
because godly Princes take upon them to defend the teachers and learners of the
doctrine of the gospel. But men are not so well given to favor this plenty of
the word, nor to further this present peaceable estate, as meet it was they
should have done. Therefore a heavy and lamentable time shall come, wherein the
public congregations of the Church being scattered here and there, a few
persons shall assemble themselves in some corner with fear, and shall
communicate amongst themselves the fragments of the heavenly doctrine, and
consolation, and for these fragments shall render great thanks unto God. This
same opinion of Chrysostom has such familiarity and likeness with this our
age, that neither may one egg be more like another, nor milk more like milk:
For all churches, and all schools, do even as it were thoroughly rage with the
daily preachings of the gospel, and the sacraments are rightly administered. But
because the greatest part of men is unthankful unto God for so great plenty
and abundance of his word, We must fear a famine will come, not indeed of
bread and wine, but of the word of God. Let us therefore walk in the light,
while we have light, lest darkness come upon us, John 12.35. And although
godly exiles and certain others oppressed in miserable manners are not able to
come to the hearing of the gospel preached: yet with this consolation do they
sustain themselves, that not only they are the citizens and members of the
Church, which by the grant and gift of GOD do hear the preachers of the
gospel and ministers thereof in Churches and Schools; but they also which join
together their prayer and confession with the true church: for like as David
was not at all severed from the society of Gods church, because he was
banished: So the godly ones with Turkish or pontifical tyranny being oppressed
and destitute of public ministry, are and remain citizens of the church, if
they adioyne their prayers and worshippings unto those congregations, wherein
the gospel is preached: and do not cast away their confession of the truth.

The Psalm and exposition thereof.
Verse 1 O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee.

Verse 2 My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh also longs after thee in a
barren and dry land, where no water is.

THis is a notable description of a fervent desire. For like as the Heart being
pursued, flies, and is made weary with long chase, so that he earnestly
desires the lively running waters, to quench his thirst, and refresh himself
withal: so the godly mind unfeignedly, and from his heart desires to have
recourse unto the public congregation of the church, wherein sounds the pure
word of the gospel, and the sacraments are rightly administered: for so says
the 27. Psalm verse 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will
require, even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my
life, to behold the ^a^e beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy temple. And
the 95. psalm and fourth verse says, Blessed is the man whom thou chusest and
receiuest unto thee; He shall dwell in thy Court, and shall be satisfied with
the pleasures of thy house, even of the holy temple. These and such like
sayings which are every where extant in the psalms do instruct the Reader
touching greatest matters. For first they do teach that there is no thing
better, nor any thing more wishfull then to live most friendly and lovingly
with the congregation which is the Temple and dwelling house of God and shall
for evermore enjoy the sight of God. Secondly, they accuse and condemn the
erroneous persons which will be members of no church, but seek for Platoes
city, wherein is no infirmity. Let such know that they are not chosen unto
the society of life everlasting, because they are not of that congregation of
those that be called, according to that saying of S. Paul Romans 8.14. Whom he
has chosen, those he has called. Thirdly, they comfort the godly ones, who
endure great sorrow in their minds to be absent from the common assemblies of
the church: for Mat. 5.6. They are blessed which hunger and thirst after
righteousness: and most earnestly wish and desire to be joined with the true
church. Last of all, they discern the true church from other Sects. For the
church holds fast the possession of the holy and sacred fountain, from whence
are drawn necessary doctrine and whole some consolations. But other sects
are desert places full of errors and darkness, and void and barren of al
consolation: for though they retain a particle of the Law, yet they either
are utterly ignorant of, or corrupt the gospel. But touching this difference I
have oftetimes elsewhere spoken in the Psalms.

Verse 3 So have I looked for thee in holiness: that I might behold thy power
and glory.

He expresses plainly the cause of this desire, because God is in the Church
alone truly acknowledged and called upon, and the special presence of God is
perceived: for he calls Gods glory, the proper ornament of the church;
namely the pure doctrine of the gospel, and signs of grace, which are called
usually the Sacraments. The power of God; he signifies that manner of presence
wherewith god is present unto his church alone: for though God in power and
substance be every where, according to Ieremies saying 23.24. Do not I fill
heaven and earth? And Paul says Acts 17.28. In him we are, live, and move:
yet, by another reason God dwells in his church: for there he is by his word
and sacraments so effectual, as he may regenerate and sanctify many unto life
everlasting. This power does not reason see, which is mal-contented with the
simple and base outward show of the word and sacraments. But David and other
the godly ones feel in their heart a new light, and the beginnings of
everlasting life, inflamed by the word and signs of grace, Romans 1.16 The
gospel is the power of God for salvation unto all that believe.

Verse 4 For the loving kindness is better then the life it self: my lips
shall praise thee.

He amplifieth the cause of fervent desire by comparison of present and
eternal benefits. The greatest part of men seeks after honors and
pleasures, and thinks these fading and vanishing shadows the chief good
gifts or blessings. But I prefer thy mercy promised in the gospel before al
benefits which are momentanie in this life: For what does the whole possession
of the world profit a man, if thereby he endanger his own soul? with this
sentence our minds are so to be confirmed, that we may even despise those,
which deride us so thinking.

Verse 5 So long as I live will I magnify thee on this manner, and lift up my
hands in thy name.

Verse 6 My soul shall be satisfied as it were with marrow and fatness, when
my mouth praises thee with joyful lips.

He spoke before of the impulsive cause* that is, of the object, which man's
will chiefly desires: Now adds he the small causes of so great a desire: I
desire not the conjunction or aggregation unto the church, with a certain
ambition or covetousness, associate themselves with the church for wealth and
promotions sake, but I look for, and seek after those chiefest and most
excellent conclusions, that I may call upon God, and declare my thankfulness
unto him both with tongue and other duties. For although in these miseries of
banishment I do call upon God, yet with sighs and tears I make my
supplications. Seeing then God loves a cheerful giver, there should be
nothing more wishful unto me, then with a joyful mind and mouth to worship and
honor God. And if I might be once partaker of this desire, I should judge my
self of nothing more happy, and with my head to touch the top of the skies.
But the first five verses do excellently describe the reason of his prayer:
For first in his prayer shines faith believing that we have God merciful
unto us as the Psalm in this place says. O God thou art my God. Secondly his
fervent prayer rises of this faith, which is compared unto a thirst: My soul
thirsts for thee. Thirdly praying he sees God, that is, A repetition of
David's prayer* and five reaso^^ thereof.
feels the special presence of God: So have I looked for thee in holiness.
Fourthly, the feeling of Gods mercy and comfort far passes all pleasures:
For thy loving kindness is better then the light it self. Fifthly, unto prayer
is the worshipping of God adjoined, or rather made like: My lips shall praise
thee, etc. Last of all: The mind is fed full of consolation, none otherwise
then the body is with fat meat, in these words. As it were with marrow and
fatness, etc.

Verse 7 Have I not remembered thee in my bed, and thought upon thee when I was
waking.

Verse 8 Because thou have been my help; therefore under the shadow of thy
wings will I rejoice.

Verse 9 My soul hangs upon thee; thy right hand has vpolden me.

He confirms his affirmation from a strong reason, as if he said: If I now do
duly remember thee with thankfulness in my sorrowful and lamentable
bannishment, what think thou that I will do when I shall be restored into
the rightful recovery of that which I have lost wrongfully? For then will I
frankly and freely, fully and wholly give thee thanks, and I will drive the
ship as it were with oars, but I will sail with large spread sails and
prosperous winds, that is, I will most evidently declare that I am thankful
unto thee for thy help, defense and restitution. Unto thee I say I will wholly
deuote my self, and in thee will I repose and as it were consecrate all that is
mine.

Verse 10 These also that seek the hurt of my soul, they shall go under the
earth.

Verse 11 Let them fall upon the edge of the sword, that they may be a portion
for Foxes.

He adds unto his other affectes or motions, (which are most fervent in this
Psalm) a just indignation against his enemies, and being full of faith, and the
holy ghost fore-prophecieth unto them a tragical end of their mischief. David
prays for the destruction of his enemies.
Now indeed Saul proudly rules, carries stately countenance in the world,
and lays snares for me poor Innocent: But within a while my enemies shall be
miserably slain and shall die and be buried with dishonor. These storms do
I foresee, sitting as it were in a Tower, and am partly sorrowful for the
everlasting destruction of many souls and partly rejoice that God sets
forth a testimony of his presence in the Church, whereinto others looking, may
learn to fear God.

Verse 12 But the king shall rejoice in God, al they also that swear by him
shall be commended: for the mouth of them that speak hes shall be stopped.

He affirms that he will become a king trusting in Gods promise, according
to that saying; Haba^uk 2.3. If the Lord shall tarry, look for him, because
when he comes, he will come speedily and will not linger. He also adds a
perticle touching an oath, which is not to those that understand the doctrine
of obscure the second Commandment. For an oath is a kind of calling upon the
name of God, wherein we promise something, putting or taking God first for a
witness and judge in the cause. For we pray that he would confirm our promise
with his testimony, and punish and destroy the parties guilty of perjury, or
false forsworn persons, according to ye threatening added in the second
commandment, And as God alone is to be called upon, so were it a wicked thing
to swear but by the name of the true God, as in Deuter. 10. Moses commands.
But the full doctrine touching an oath cannot be here explaned: wherefore let
ye godly ruler take and apply them for that purpose out of books methodically
written and published. His protestation of thankfulness toward God.
For in this Co^mentary we do not entreat upon common places, but with a
certain grammatical diligence, we interpret the same Psalm so, as the
reading of them may be more easy and pleasant unto the younger sort.

PSALM. 63. Exaudi Deus orationem meam.
To him that excels, a Psalm of David; against his enemies, and touching
their punishment, and destruction.

THE ARGUMENT.
THis Psalm is a prayer against Sycophantes and slaunderers in kings and
princes courts, which most subtly seek to stain the true doctrine and the
godly ones: For, such both understand and prove the saying of Megiu^ who was a
Sycophant in the court of Alexander the Great: Calumniare audacter, quia
aliquid semper haeret: Slander still boldly, something always sticks in thee.
But the Psalm threatens unto them a punishment of recompense, which is
described in the verse of the poet. Struens alteri malum, struit fuo epati
malum, Who seeks a mischief to another man, may seek his own destruction now
or then. Again, Iusta malis haec ad misso pro crimine p^^na est. Si quae
feterunt eadem patientur and ipsi. Null^^ enim p^^na iustior est quam necis
artifice^ art per^r^ su^.

A punishment just to the wicked men,
This is for crime so committed by them,
That if they have done any wickedness,
They therefore should smart al remediless:
For no punishment more just can be,
Then the wicked in their wickedness perish to see.
Of this rule there are examples set down in the history of Daniel and Hester:
For, indeed they which slaundered Daniel were cast into the den of Lions:
and Haman was hanged upon the same gebet, which he had prepared for Mardocheus.

The Psalm aed exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Hear my voice, O God in my prayer* preserve my life from fear of the
enemy.

Verse 2 Hide me from the gathering together of the froward, and from the
insurrection of wicked doers.

Verse 3 Which have whet their tongue like a sword: and shoot out their
arrows, even bitter words.

Verse 4 That they may privily shoot at him, which is perfect, and suddenly do
they hit him, and fear not.

Verse 5 They courage themselves in mischief: and commune among themselves,
how they may lay snares, and say that no man shall see them.

Verse 6 They immagine wickedness and practice it; that they keep secret
among themselves, every man in the deep of his heart.

Albeit there seem to be no remedy against the Sycophantes biting or nipping
girdes; yet we must crave of God, that he himself would repress and vanquish
those Sycophantes, which bend the most hurtful weapon to do mischief, namely
their tongue: and do nothing lawfully, nor manifestly, Apelles his description
of Slander, with her adherentes.
but work all in secret and by subtle deceiptes. When I read these things
the declamation of Lucian the poet comes into my mind, which he made against
slander: for he declares that there was such a description of slander set
forth by Apelles painter of Ephesus, viz. There sat a noble great person with
very long ears, reaching forth his hand unto slander, coming a far off unto
him; about which person stand two silly women, Ignorance, and Suspicion. To him
strait comes Slander bravely attired, showing even the very countenance,
gesture of body and all manner action, of beastly cruel anger, and in her left
hand holding a burning brand, but with her right hand haleth by her a silly
wretched young man whom she holds by the hairs of his head, he stretching
forth his hands up to the Gods, and taking the immortal Gods to witness.
There comes for most next a pale fellow, vile in show, the sight of his eyes
nothing dim, but one very like unto those whose putrified bodies are scarce
covered with a thin skin. You may soon suppose this fellow is malice. Now come
after Slander two or three wretched women her companions, whose office is to
exhort, instruct, and make ready three mystris: The interpreter of the picture
said, these were snares and deceites. At his back in mournful weed all ragged
and torn follows Repentance, who turning her head behind her, with tears
and shame, spieth Truth coming.

We looking upon this table, as it were into a certain glass, let us learn
that Ignrance and Suspicion are the feeding or furthering instruments which
quickly conceive the burning flames of slander. As also let us consider that
the welspring of this mischief is Malice and Emulation, which strive and
contend for excellency, and greeueth at others welfare. And Slander is
furnished with all sleights of harming, such as are flattery, lying, perjury
and impudency. And though this kind of people be fearful and dare not hand
to hand fight with an enemy: yet in their dark places, and as it were in a
deep dungeon, they dare put forth all wilful boldness. Wherefore most worthy of
hatred it is, and to be cursed of all men, seeing it has nothing of truth,
or soundness in it.

Verse 7 But God shall suddenly shoot at them with a swift arrow: that they
shall be wounded.

Verse 8 Yea their own tongues shall make them fall: Insomuch that whosoever sees
them shall laugh them to scorn.

Verse 9 And all men that see it shall say, this has God done; for they shall
perceive that it is his work.

The second part of the Psalm denounces punishments unto Sycophantes, which
they deserve: For as they with their weap^ns cast down whatsoever they hit; so
again are they cast down by God, that their destruction might be unto others
an instruction and example.

Every history is full of examples, but we for brevity sake will be content
with that delaration which Lucianus sets down, touching Apelles and
Antiphilus: For although Apelles had neither seen Tyrus at any time, nor yet
known Theodota, author of the sedition stirred up in Tyrus at any time, yet
one Antiphilus envious of the art and favor which Apelles had, was bold to
accuse him before the king of the conspiracy moved in Tyrus, and stayning him
with this slander brought him within the danger, and predicament of losing
his head. Apelles accused of moving sedition by Antiphilus, how he was
acquitted thereof and the reward of them both.
And had not one of the Conspirators which were taken and put in prison been
bold detesting ye mischief of Antiphilus, and pitying the unhappy estate of
Apelles, to prove that he had nothing to do with those seditious persons,
doubtless he had suffered death as punishment for the mischiefs pretended by
them of Tyrus. Therefore when king Ptolomeus knew the matter, he changed his
purpose, and rewarded Apelles with 100. talents, putting into bondage
Antiphilus the Slaunderer.

Verse 10 The righteous shall rejoice in the Lord, and put their trust in him
and all they that are true of heart shall be glad.

Like as to the shining beams of the sun* the smokes and clouds do give
place: So by the help of God, truth is at length conqueror of Slanders:
which like foming waves dashing upon the rocks do again fall off from them,
Truth the conqueror of Falsehood.
when the same rocks afterward stand steadfast and immoouable: with this
purpose, the holy ones being confirmed, let them go with joyful minds
rejoicing, and with hope lighten themselves of their dangers.

PSALM. 65. Te decet Hymnus Deus in Syon.
To him that excels a Psalm or song of David, being a thanksgiving to God
for his benefits in the three states, Ecclesiastical, Political, and
Oeconomicall.

THE ARGUMENT.
LIke as God by his unmeasurable wisdom and goodness ordained three degrees
of life; namely, The ministry of the gospel, whereby an actual church is
gathered; The effect of this Psalm.
The politic Magistrate a preserver of discipline and peace, and Matrimony,
which is a wel-spring unto the Church and government: A thanksgiving to God
for the estate ecclesiastical, (...) and oe^^nom^call.
so this Psalm gives God thanks for all his benefits necessary for the body
and the soul, for the gift of his word, and gathering of his Church, for
peace, wherein gouernements do flourish, and finally need of doctrine, as the
chiefest, but also of his daily bread in which phrase, peace, living, and other
assistant helps are contained. And to the end that Prayer and Thanksgiving
for these benefits may become more fervent, let us forecast, and propone in
our minds the confusions and troubles of all degrees, which not only rise
from man's ignorance and negligence, but also are mightily increased of the
devil as most cruel enemy unto all goodness. And the corruption of the first
order or degree is in deed Heresy troubling the church with strange opinions
of God and counterfeit worshippings. Three degr^^ of enemies to those states.
This plague is

We considering this mass of mischiefs outraging in the Church, government,
and household affairs, let us most fervently crave of God, both the removing of
that which is evil, and placing of that which is good, and for the residue of
the chiefest benefits, namely, of the pure doctrine of the gospel, peace, and
living, let us give thanks unto God: and in that behalf let us follow David's
example, who in this Psalm, with a thank full mind and utterance of tongue
aduaunceth Gods benefits, ecclesiastical, political, and oeconomicall; and
with an excellent method begins a thanksgiving, from craving forgiveness of
sins: forasmuch as all the confusions of the three orders touching which I
have spoken, are nothing else but most grievous punishments for sin.

The Psalm and exposition thereof.
Verse 1 Thou O God, art praised in Sion; and unto thee shall the vow be
performed in Jerusalem.

THat which Cicero said of Eurypides; that every one of his verses was a
several testimony; the same may much more truly be said of the Psalms:
wherein not only every verse, but also all and every word and words have in
them very much weight and moment. For let us, if it please you, call here to
account the words of the first verse.

To thee (says he) the creator and preserver of the three Hierarchies, that
is, of the Church, Policy, and Economy, be rendered glory, praise and honor
for ever and ever, so long as no space of time may fully describe. Thou art to
be magnified with word and writings of all men for thy institution and
preservation of the chiefest things, wherein shine thy wisdom, goodness, and
righteousness. For whereas nothing may be more excellent then order, who
maruelleth not by right, that mankind is by Gods providence most wisely
distributed into three degrees or orders as it were: and certes to this end,
that the true knowledge of God should be of every one according to their
vocation preserved and advanced. For as it is ordained that Physicians do
teach, that is, by the providence of the workman to be directed unto a
certain rule, and to a certain end. And how great goodness is that, where
these three estates (as I may so say) are not overthrown by the outrages of
the Devil and the World, but are by God effectually preserved and defended:
for albeit our unthankfulness deserve the universal destruction of our
churches, policies and matrimonial estate; yet God (such is his goodness)
does withstand infinite molestations and general havoc, then which nothing
may be thought or conceived more grievous? Last of all the justice of god
shines and is manifestly seen in the punishments of Heretics and seditious
persons. The history of the tragical end of Arrius is known. But no less
are known the histories touching the punishing of seditious persons, whose
last end agrees with the rule Matthew. 26.52. He that takes the sword (namely
not given him by the laws) shall perish with the sword.) These punishments
declare that god is a just Judge destroying things contrary to his order. But
why in this place is added before the words [ praised in Sion] after some
translation [ in silence.] Because, as Isaias says 30.15. The churches
strength consists in quietness and confidence. That is, in patience and hope
of Gods help. And S. Paul wills the church, To pray without wrath, or
doubting, 1. Timot. 2.8. That is, without grudging against God, such as for
most part appears amongst men in a great violence of tempests and concourse
of calamities; and without Academicall doubting touching the will of God: yet
how hard a thing it is to perform both, the godly ones do find by experience
in great calamities and temptations wherein they seem to be forsaken or cast
away from God. But here is required a means of godliness, and this is the way
whether it be easy or hard, by this must we needs go. And if any man seek
for any other, let him call upon Fortune, as some do use to say: for it likes
me to borrow the same words in this place, which Plato uses in Epimaenides,
praising the studies of the doctrine touching numbers, figures, and heavenly
motions.

Again, some man would peradventure ask, why makes he mention of Sion?
Verily to bring us down to the testimonies wherein god made himself known:
for, like as Sailers direct their course unto the little star Cynosura; so let
us bend our minds and eyes unto gods manifesting of himself: and as in the
old testament the prayer of the godly ones was tied unto the Arc of the
covenant: so now the whole world is Sion, according to that saying John 4 23.
True worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth. For now the
Propiciator, or merciful Savior (whom the golden table laid upon the arc did
signify) is prepared or set down before the face of all the people: as Simeon
sings most sweetly, verse 3.

Also that may be demanded, touching what vow the psalm may here speak,
saying, [ Unto thee shall the vow be performed.] The answer is most plain,
that the vow in this place signifies the covenant of the first precept, or
the promise made in our baptism: for like as the first commandment
rehearses unto us duties touching Fear and Faith: so Baptism binds us
unto the acknowledgement and prayer of the true God, as Peter says, 1. Pet.
3.21. Baptism is the promise of a good conscience toward God by the
resurrection of Christ. For Baptism is a mutual league wherein god receives
us for his sons sake, and indueth us with his holy spirit: and now again
promise perpetual due obedience and true woorshippe unto Almighty God.

Verse 2 Thou that hear the prayer^ unto thee shall all flesh come.

There was in Creet an image of Jupiter without ears, which doubtless some
Epicure had placed: even to signify that men's prayers are neglected of God.
Against this fury the psalm sets down a constant affirmation: yea he
says, as it were, our God is neither dumb, nor deaf, but has made himself
known both by his word, and notable testimonies, and also in purpose and event
proves that he hears the prayers and sighings of the godly ones. And lest
any man should think that there is respect of persons with God, he says
expressly, that all flesh shall come unto thee: That is, all men shall easily
come unto God, and that no man's mind is so ready to receive, as God is ready
and diligent to give benefits. Whereas then we do not obtain nor attain
unto all things that comes to pass by our fault, and not by gods: for although
he willingly hears us, without grudging and loathing: yet our hearts wax too
cold in praying: therefore let us not accuse God, who is liberal toward all
men, but our own coldenesse, and our slouthfulnes which scarcely asks any
thing faintly, much less can it strongly knock at the gates of God, or
complain doubtfully and earnestly, that God hides himself. But let there be
always in our hearts, ears, and tongues sounding and resounding this most
sweet title, wherewith the psalm aduanceth God. He says, God is not only
a hearer, but also a full hearer of our prayer: whereby it follows that we
are not only suitors, but full suitors: So in the one hundred and twenty
psalm, and in the first verse it is said: When I cried unto the Lord in my
trouble, he heard me fully. Let us therefore imprint this title no otherwise
in our minds, then the image of the seal is printed upon wax, that we may
most steadfastly believe that our prayers are received, and heard at full.

Verse 3 My misdeedes prevail against me, O be thou merciful unto our sins.

The Psalm takes away the chiefest impediment of prayer: for this objection
troubles men in time of their praying, to wit, John the ninth chapter, God
hears not sinners. I am a sumer, with what face then shall I come unto god,
who is angry with sinne^ God is a consuming fire, That is, punishing and
destroying the guiltiness of the offense. David grants the minor, and
feels sin by the law to be made sin mightily, as appears in the
seventh chapter of the epistle of the holy Apostle saint Paul to the Romans,
but therewithal he craves forgiveness of sin, promised in the gospel:
and such sinners truly repenting and craving forgiveness, shall without doubt
be heard. Let us therefore learn by this verse, what rule serves best to
begin our prayer by: namely, the confession of sin, which is void of
dissimulation, and a fervent prayer for remission of sins. For, before all
petitions, prayer touching forgiveness of sins, ought first to shine forth, as
elsewhere is often time said* Hitherto is recited the beginning of the psalm,
now comes he unto the thanksgiving.

Verse 4 Blessed is the man whom thou chusest and receiuest unto thee: He
shall dwell in thy court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy
house, even of thy holy temple.

He gives god thanks for the ministry of his word whereby an eternal
church is gathered unto god: for he calls the church of god, the
congregation wherein sounds the preaching of the gospel, and wherein God is
truly called upon. To be a citizen of this congregation is the chiefest and
greatest benefit upon earth: Because by his word god makes himself known
unto us, comfort us, and with his holy spirit governs us, lest we should
(being quailed with temptations and calamities) utterly despair in our selves.
But as in David's time god dwelt in the tabernacle, and afterward in the
Temple of Solomon; So now god dwells in the whole world; wheresoever
thankful praise is spread of Christ. O the immense goodness of God* who has
not only chosen the Jews, but also the Gentiles unto everlasting salvation,
and has called them to the society of the true church. Hereupon we may reason
by a contrary position, as in the eight chapter to the Romans, and the
fourteenth verse, Whom he has chosen, those he has called. Therefore al
which are not called, are not chosen: for it is sure, that the chosen ones are
no where to be sought for, but in the society of them that are called, that
is, of them which retain the foundation, and do not stubbornely defend
worshipping of idolles. But what are the pleasures of the house and temple of
God? God has given unto his church excellent pleasures, his son Christ,
faith which overcomes al dangers, right good works, the holyghost,
understanding of the scripture, peace of conscience, and other benefits which
are innumerable.

Verse 5 Thou shall show us wonderful things in thy righteousness, O God of
our salvation: thou that art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of
them that remain in the broad sea.

He joins unto thanksgiving, a prayer very necessary, wherein he craves
that god would preserve the ministry, and confirm that which he has begun
in us. For the doctrine touching Justification is wonderful, that is, put or
placed far beyond and above the capacity of man's reason. Doctrine of
Justification.
Therefore unto the Jews it is an offense, and to the Gentiles foolishness,
1. Corinthians. 1. For, what I pray you seems more absurd, then that man should
be just before god, not by his own, but by an others obedience, nor by his
own, but by another merit, especially seeing the law requires our works?
Hereof grow those clamours of our adversaries, The doctrine of faith is the
corruption of manners, and liberty of discipline. Again, Men, when they hear
this doctrine are made more slow to live well and blessedly. But the godly
ones do know where faith alone reigns, and what must be esteemed of works:
for in that place where it is handled touching remission of sins, and
reconciliation with god: and touching attainement unto everlasting life, our
works are no other thing but the filthiness of dogs, so far as pertains
unto merit, and the cause of Justification. In this circle (if I may so say)
the alone Mediator bears all the rule, and has the preeminence, whom faith
acknowledges and takes hold upon, and believes, that for his sake only, we
are freely by God received into favor, and are endued with life everlasting,
as these sayings following do witness, Romans the third chapter and four
and five and twenty verses, All are justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God has set forth to be a
reconciliation through says in his blood. Also 1. Corinthians. 1. Ye are of him
in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us, wisdom and righteousness, and
sanctification and redemption: That he that rejoices should rejoice in the
Lord, verse. 30, 31. Moreover, 1. Corinthians. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet
am I not thereby justified, but he that judges me is the Lord:

But after that we have obtained forgiveness of sins, also reconciliation
ioy^ed with the gift of the holy ghost, and life everlasting, and do again go
out of the holy of holiest, there good works are not in us as it were
filthiness of dogs, but (by faith first shining forth)* are made
worshippings of God, and sacrifices of thanks giving which God will have
rendered unto him, that with his obedience we may declare our thankfulness,
and inuit others by our example to the honoring of God. To this purpose says
Paul. Gal 6. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself, and not in another. And 2. Cor. 1. For our rejoicing is
this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly
pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our
conversation in the world, and most of all to you wards. Let this thing
therefore remain in this cause, which cannot be changed: Christ only is the
salvation of God; Again, as Symcon sings, A light to lighten the Gentiles
and the glory of the people of Israel. But seeing the purity and simplicity
of this doctrine cannot by man's alone diligence be retained in use, let us most
fervently crave of God: That he would not only the guide and giver, but also
the performer and effecter, of this doctrine, and seal the same thoroughly in our
hearts, that we forgo not the word it self, or the natural meaning of the
word.

Verse 6 Which in his strength sets fast the mountains, and is girded about
with power.

He gives thanks for the institution and preservation of the estate
politic: A thanksgiving to God for the preservation of the prince and
present state of government.
For the mountains by an usual figure signify kingdoms, and dominions: As
in Jeremy, the 51.25. Babylon is called a destroying mountain, These
mountains has not man's wisdom and power ordained, but in the order of
gouernmentes there shines wisdom, in punishments Justice, and in preserving
the^ the goodness and power of God. For most wisely and most truly is it said
by Plato: Vbi non Deus sed mortalis aliquis dominatur, ibi malorum and
aerumnarum nullum esse effugium: Whereas, not God, but some mortal man bears
rule, there can be no escape from mischief and miseries. And John Baptist
says, A man can receive nothing except it be given him from heaven, cap. 3.
ver. 27. That is no government is happy and wholesome, except it be ordered and
helped by God: For humane helps are more weak then that they are able to
conserve or keep the policies or estates. And that I be not here so long in a
thing manifest, I will be content with one only saying of Cicero, which is
extant in his oration for Rabirius: Deorum open and auxilio multo magis haec
Respublica, quam ratione hominum and consilio, gubernatur: Esset enim
impossible politicam societatem in tantis confusionibus and furoribus hominum
durare, nisi Deus eam sua potenti dextera tueretur. The Commonwealth is much
more governed by the aid and help of God, then by the counsel and reason of
men. For it were a thing impossible that the politic society of man should
endure or hold out in so great confusions and outrages of men, except God with
his mighty right hand did defend the same.

Verse 7 Which stilleth the raging of the sea, and the noise of the waves, and
the madness of his people.

He compares the wars and the seditious unto the raging of the sea, and
noise of the waves: For like as these raging seas and noise of the waves are
not in our power to pacify: so there should be no end of wars and
seditio^s, except God did extinguish the burning brands of such great fires.
God repressed Tha^ ^o, Sennacherib and Attilas. He ouerthrewe and appeased the
tumult of the base country people, which men thought would have utterly
destroyed Germany. Therefore is peace the gift of God most worthy of admiration
and estimation.

Verse 8 They also that dwell in the utmost parts of the Earth shall be afraid
at thy tokens thou that make the outgoinges of the evening and the morning to
praise thee.

He calls ( tokens of God) the punishments wherewith Tyrants and Seditious
persons are punished: for they fall not headlong into punishment by chance,
but these so great calamities are the works of Gods justice, which do admonish
others af repentance and of the future judgment: And he recites also
benefits of peace, The blessings of peace.
wherein not only they whom nature has given understanding, but even the very
houses and fields me thinks do rejoice. For in peace, marriages are had in
reverence, causes are handled in the court, traffic and buying and selling
are daily frequented, the fields are tilled, The miscries of wars.
yt grounds are fruitful, orchardes and vinyardes do bring forth increase and
store: Finally, all things are full of joy and gladness in harvest time, and in
Autumn. Contrariwise, in wars is every where lamentable loss, fear, and a
great description of death. For as Plautus the poet says, Vbicunque rebus
commotis tanquam mari stratiotici, mores, inundant ibi, pietas, religio* bonae
arts, cultus, honestatis eliditur atque interit. Facultatum enim and rei
familiaris naufragia, ipsaque mors etiam tum laeuissima sunt mala. Natura and
legum ^ura violantur, non iusiurandum seruatur, Instituta maiorum conculcantur.
A notable saying of Plautus the Heathen poet*
Foris omnia sunt expositae praesentibus periculis. Domus autem quae debebat
cuique esse tutissimum refugium ea rapinis and iniurijs externorum patet. Non
ibi dominorum ius and dignitas defendi, non protegi liberorum castitas potest.
Talia infelix bellum efficit. Whersoeuer the states of countries are troubled,
men's lewd lives flow over with mischiefs (as it were in a troublesome raging
sea) there godliness, religion, good sciences, and the regard of honesty
utterly perish and decay: for the losses and spoils of men's goods, and
household stuff, yea and death it self are then thought most light and slender
mishaps. The ordinances of nature and of the laws are violated, neither faith,
nor firm promises kept, the institutions of the elders, are resisted, all
things are every where laid open for present dangers. The house which ought to
be most safe refuge for every inhabitant, the same stands open for the
spoils and injuries of strangers. There can neither the owners interest nor
dignity be defended, nor the chastity of his children be protected.
Unfortunate wars cause such miseries.

Verse 9 Thou visitest the earth and blessest it; thou make it very plenteous.

Verse 10 The river of God is full of water; thou preparest their corn, for so
thou prouidest for the earth.

Verse 11 Thou waterest her furrows, thou sendest reign into the little
valleys thereof; thou make it soft with the drops of rain, and blessest the
increase thereof.

The last verses of this Psalm contain a Thanksgiving for husbandry and
sustenance of food for man. For we must not imagine, that God goes quite away
from his work, and that the creature is left only to his own government, like
as the Carpenter leaves his ship ready builded for the Seas, to be governed by
the Sailers: But we must persuade our selves in this that God always is
present with his work, and plaieth the part of a diligent husbandman, who
walking about his grounds, ouerseeing them himself, leaves the print of his
feet to be seen: For not by chance, or by natures order only is the earth
made fruitful every year, but the blessings of God are the fruitfulness of
the earth, and the chaunges of times and seasons made fit for the ripening of
fruits, as in 1. Cor. 3.7. Paul says, Neither is he that planteth any thing,
neither he that waters, but god that gives the increase. And that indeed by
Gods grant and gift our sustentation is given unto us, those most sweet words
do witness, Verse 10. The river of God is full of water. For he compares
our grounds, orchardes and vineyardes unto an everlasting river which is never
made dry: And he calls it expressly, The river of God, because he would
refute our imagination which faineth that by our industry we are able to get
sufficient sustentation.

Verse 12 Thou crownest the year with thy goodness. ^. part.

In this Verse he comprehends all benefits which God sends us, in the
Spring time, Summer, Autumn, The monthly and fruitful properties throughout
the year.
and Winter. For March gives us violets, April grass, May* plenty of flowers,
butter, honnie, milk, and cheese, June and July, hay, August, corn,
September, apples; October, new wine: The other months do yield us as it
were by Gods direction, birds, connies, fish, and flesh of all sorts. Now
think with your self how great the goodness of God is, that he gives us the
increase of so many, so diverse and so sweet things for sustentation of our
body; and the same not at one time of the year, to the end we may always be
delighted with novelty and plenty of all things.

Verse 12.2. pars. And thy clouds drop fatness.

The clouds are taken for the steps of the Lord, in the heavens, which (as
writers of husbandry affirm) do make fat the field: The clouds di^^ill the
dewes from heaven.
So God sends not forth servants to ouerlooke his grounds, but he vieweth
them with his own eyes, and treads them with his own feet, because they
shall take no harm.

Verse 13. They shall drop upon the dwellings of the wilderness: and the
little hills shall rejoice on every side.

Verse 14 The solds shall be full of sheep: the valleys also shall stand so
thick with corn, that they shall laugh and sing.

The places of the wilderness, are the villages and waste grounds, The
benefits which the earth brings us.
which are far distant from Cities. These also have the wealth of the
country, as for example, milk, butter, cheese, eggs, hens, etc. The hills
are compassed with Vines: In pasture grounds, whole flocks do feed: The
valleys are full of corn. All these benefits do cheer and rejoice our
minds, both because they are beautiful in our eyes, and also because they are
most beneficial for our use: And here the conclusion of this Psalm.

PSALM. 66. Iubilate Deo omnis terra, etc.
A Psalm of David, to him that excels upon Which was either a musical
instrument or a solemn tune unto the which th^s Psalm was sung,
Alamoth, a song committed to the sons of Korah.

THE ARGUMENT.
David in this Psalm gives not only thanks unto God for public and private
deliverances: but also by his example exhorts the whole church of God, and
all the godly ones, that they would with thankful voice publishe abroad the
noble testimonies of Gods presence: The effects of the Psalm, ^ratulat^^ie and
Exhortatorie*
For albeit God is present with all his creatures (so far as to the
preserving of the substance of them appertains) so long until they be
preserved: yet notwithstanding, he is otherwise present with persons
regenerate, not only preserving the substances, but also by his Son, and
holy Spirit, beginning in them new light and righteousness. Touching this
degree of Gods presence in the true Church: memorable is this saying of S
Augustine: Deus est vbique per diuinitatis praesentiam, S. Augustines saying,
touching Gods presence with his people.
vt non vbique est per habitationis gratiam sed in solis tantummodo fidelibus.
God is every where by the presence of his godhead, but God is not every where
dwelling by grace, but in the alone faithful ones only: And how I pray you
does he defend and preserve the whole body of his Church, although some
members of her be persecuted either by temptation of abiectio^, or by
confession of their faith? For these great benefits, I give thanks unto God
the eternal father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and I beseech him with all my
whole heart, that for his sons sake our Lord Jesus Christ (for us crucified
and raised from death to life) he would henceforth and for ever govern us
with his holy spirit, Amen.

The Psalm and Exposition thereof.
Verse 1 O be joyful in God all ye lands; sing praises unto the honor of
his name, make his praise to be glorious.

Verse 2 Say unto God, O how wonderful art thou in thy works: thorough the
greatness of thy power shall thine enemies be found liers unto thee.

Verse 3 For all the world shall worship thee, sing of thee, and praise thy
name.

Verse 4 O come hither and behold the works of God: how wonderful he is
in his doing toward the children of men.

TRuly spoke one of the ancient writers, Raram esse ho^oram and breue^ moram
laetitiae spiritualis, quae Deum ardent^r, sincere and suauiter celebrat:
Seldom comes the hour, and short is the stay of spiritual gladness, which
fervently and sweetly worshippeth God: For our hearts are too cold in setting
forth Gods benefits and the multitude of conflictes and dangers hinders the
sincerity and sweetness of thanksgiving. Let us therefore acknowledge and
bewail this our coldness, and crave of God with his spirit of grace and
prayers he would kindle in us true thankfulness. And although the beginning
of the Psalm consists in a proposition exhortatory: Yet there is placed in
the same a little clawse, which is not to be neglected. viz. Verse 2. In the
greatness of thy power shall thine enemies be found liers. This consolation let
us fix fast within the depth of our hearts, and now let us set the same before
us in our present dangers. Great is the power of the Turkish tyrants, great
are the furies of the Pope and his Champions, but they shall be found liers: That
is, the purposes and practices of these enemies shall be disappointed, so far as
to the effect of the matter it may appertain: For they shall neither destroy
the kind of doctrine delivered from God, nor yet the whole Church, as it is
said, Acts. 5.39. That which is of God shall not be destroyed.

Verse 5 He turned the sea into dry land* so that they went through the water
on foot, there did we rejoice thereof.

Seeing the circumstances do bring a special light unto histories I will
briefly speak touching the place and time of that wonderful transporting of
the people of Israel by the river of Jordan: An explanatio^ of the miracle how,
when, and where the Is^aelites passed over Jordan.
for albeit we are moved with consideration when we read and hear that the
people of Israel could not pass over that water, until by gods power the
course thereof being stayed gave safe passage to all the company by dry steps:
yet if we consider the circumstances in wondering at Gods work, we stand as
it were made utterly amassed: for first some light shall appear unto the
history, if a man be instructed that the Israelites passed on that side of the
country by the river Jordan, which was near unto the city of Jericho
sometime most flourishing; whereas not far thence the same river runs into
the dead sea, being first increased with very many little rivers and floods,
which discharge their fullness into the same. Wherefore it must needs seem,
that the stream was there much more broader and deeper then it was in other
places nearer to the channel or springs thereof: so the description of the
place makes more famous the greatness of the wonder, and of gods goodness.
Again, if a man consider also the other circumstance; namely, the time of that
same wonderful passage over Jordan, we shall see yet even in this circumstance,
the power and goodness of god more notably manifested: for we read in Ioshuah
chap. 3. That the people was carried over that place in the first month of the
year as the Hebrews accounted, which answers almost to our April, which
was the beginning of their harvest, what time Jordan was wont every year to
run over the brimme, David Chytraeus in his chronicle reports this to be
done in the year of the world 2493. and (before Christ was bapti^^d by S. John
in the same Jorden) just 150^. years.
so that it filled, not only both rivers, but also passed over, and out of
the same. But this same Jordan, before this time an invincible wall, namely,
running and flowing over with full brimme, did God make to give way for his
people, so as the water standing and gathering upon an exceeding great height
above toward the spring, and the other water below running into the lake
Asphaltite, the Israelites might pass through Jorden with dry feet. So also
the consideration of the time very much augmentes the greatness of the miracle.
For the church so lives always, even as the people iournieng through the red
sea, and by the river Jordan: for as that same terrible huge heap of water
gathered unto an exceeding height always threatened destruction to the
passengers: so the church is never without great dangers: but like as Joshua
transported the people by Jordan into the land of promise, so the son of god
the true captain and guide of his church, brings us through the midst of
death and great calamities of this world, into life everlasting.

Verse 6 He rules with his power for ever: his eyes behold the people, and
such as will not believe, shall not be able to exalt themselves.

Here is a notable description, attributing unto God immense and eternal
power, and affirming that God cares for mankind: for like as he made of no
thing all things: so thenceforth he has been willingly present at his work,
and either helps the order of second causes, or hinders them, or altogether
changes them.

Non igitur est Deus noster numen,
Parcarum carcere clausum:
Our God then is no such god at all,
as Death shuts up in his prison wall.
Ipse potest Solis currus inhibere volantes,
Ipse velut scopulos flumina stare iubet:
The shining Suns swift race he stays,
And makes floudes stand like rocks in seas.
And although many are the testimonies of Gods providence: yet the justice of
God is specially seen in his punishments: for by usual rules, grievous
punishments always are companions of grievous offenses: Herodotus lib. ^*
and the examples of Tyrants are so usual as the Poet cries out: Ad generum
Cereris, fine caede and vulnere pauc^^, Iuuenal. Satyr. 1^

Descendunt reges, and sicca morte tyranni:
Unto Dame Ceres son in law few kings go down we see,
From death, or wound, or tyrants, with a dry death escape scot fr6ee.


And Claudianus the Poet confesses that he was by Ruffinus his punishment,
vehemently confirmed against doubting of gods providence in these verses.

Saepe mihi dubium traxit sententia mentem, Claudianus lib, 1*

Curarent Superi terras, an nullus inesset
Rector, and incerto fluerent mortalia casu, etc.
Postea.

Abstulit hunc tandem Ruffini paena tumultum,
Absolu^tque deos, iam non ad culmina rerum,
Iniustos cr^uisse quaror: Tolluntur in altum
Vt lapsu grauiore ruant, etc.
In English thus: This sentence often in doubt has drawn my mind,
Whether that the gods had of the earth regard:
Or that there were no governor assignde,
Or humane matters ran by hap hazard, etc.


Afterward.

But this same doubt Ruffinus death did clear.
Pardoning the gods: That people now unjust:
(I say) clime not so high, but lift up here,
With greater fall, they down lie in the dust.
Verse 7* O praise our God (ye people) and make the voice of his praise to be
heard.

Verse 8 Which holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to slip.

He repeateth the proposition exhortacorie, and lays unto the same a new
reason: because he says the Lord is the author and fountain of life, not
only of that life here which is common unto us with plants and other living
creatures, and which is the passage to death, but of that life also which alone
is to be named a life. For as it is said in Deuteronomy. 30.20. The great odds
between this life and the life everlasting.
For he is our life, and the length of our days, in him we are, live, and
move. And as it is said in the 17. chapter of the Acts, For in him we live,
and move, and have our being, verse 28. But seeing this life figurative is not
steadfast to continue long, but scarce for one day (for reckon our longest age
with eternity) we shall be found almost in the same shortness of life, as
Aristotle says, the silly worms of the earth do live but one day) God (such
is his goodness) does also impart unto us the fellowship of life everlasting,
then which no thing may be thought better, nor more abundant in all blessings.
In the mean while, He suffers not our feet to slip: that is, he governs
us with his holy spirit, lest we should fall headlong into epicureall furies,
or other fanaticall errors. This government, if any do think it to be a
slender benefit, they are more foolish then the Thracians, which as Aristotle
writes, could not in numbering reckon any further then five only.

Verse 9 For thou, O God have proved us, thou also have tried us like as
silver is tried.

Verse 10 Thou broughtest us into the snare, and laidest trouble upon our
loins.

Verse 11 Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads: we went through fire
and water, and thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.

As saint Paul says, Romans chap. 5. verse 2. We rejoice not under the hope o^
the glory of God only: but also we rejoice in tribulations, knowing that
tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope: And hope makes not ashamed, The rejoicing of the faithful, even in
greatest dangers three ways*
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy ghost which
is given unto us, verses 2, 3, 4, 5. As if he said, we esteem it a thing to
be rejoiced of, not only to have full deliverance from sin and death, but
also when we perform obedience unto God in our calamities. For first we our
selves which endure calamities, do Doctrine and Immortality. Last of all, the
holy ones by their example, confirm the weak ones, and move others unto the
acknowledgement of the true God.

Verse 12 I will go into thy house with burnt offerings, and will pay thee my
vows which I promised with my lips, and spoke with my mouth when I was in
trouble.

Verse 13 I will offer unto thee fat burnt sacrifices with the incense of
Rams: I will offer bullockes and goats.

It is an usual thing in this life of lewd men which Pindarus the poet says,
Unthankfulness of mankind.
Vetus gratia dormit and homines sunt immemores:
Old grace and favor sleeps,
And man little in mind keeps.


And many are so false of faith, that the earnest vows which they made in
their miseries, they trifle out with ungodly mockery. There is extant an
apology of one suffering shipwreck, who when amongst floods and storms he
had promised unto god a recompense above his degree, afterward, coming to
shore, laughing said, he saw no man claim that he promised, and that he
could pacify God with a salt cake* Such unthankfulness is not in David, who
both acknowledges by whom he is preserved, and performs promised
thankfulness with a good faith. And I have often said that Leuiticall
sacrifices were not therefore ordained, to take away sins, but to be signs
of the promise touching the Deliverer that should come, and marks discerning
this people from other sects. Also that they might be means to strengthen the
ministry. David therefore offers bullockes and goats, David's
thankfulness.
not being bewitched with a pharisaicall opinion, but understanding those
ends, whereof I have briefly spoken. Let us now that the policy and temple
of the Jews is destroyed, offer unto god the calves of our lips, that is,
thanksgiving and confession, and let us walk in our vocation for the glory
of God.

Verse 14 O come hither and hearken all ye that fear God: and I will tell you
what he has done for my soul.

Verse 15 I called unto him with my mouth, and gave him praises with my tongue.

Verse 16 If I incline unto wickedness with my heart, the Lord will not hear
me.

Verse 17 But God has heard me: and considered the voice of my prayer.

Verse 18 Praised be God which has not cast out my prayer, nor turned his
mercy from me.

Hitherto has he celebrated the public deliverances of the church: now
makes he mention of private deliverances to the end he would increase and
confirm in others faith, prayer, and hope of deliverance: for as one said
elegantly, The examples of godly persons are towers builded upon the wall of
faith. Also this place teaches, that god sees the sighings of our hearts,
and discerns hypocrisy from true prayer. For prayer is not heard except it
be made in spirit and truth. And he can not pray which has in him an error
striving with faith, or goes on forwards in sinning against conscience:
because it is written in the first epistle of the holy apostle Saint Paul, the
sixth chapter and the twelft verse Fight the good fight, having faith and good
conscience. Again, God hears not sinners which do not repent them of their
sins. And it is said in the first epistle of Saint John the third chapter,
If our heart condemn us not, then have we boldness toward God: that
whatsoever we ask we receive of him, etc. verse. 21. and 22. Let us therefore
walk wisely, not as fools; that we may rightly call upon God.

PSALM. 67. Deus misereatur nostri.
To him that excels on Neginoth, a Psalm, or Song, or Prayer for the Church
to obtain the favor of GOD; that his judgments may be known throughout
the world, and for the coming of his universal kingdom under Christ Jesus.

THE ARGUMENT.
THere is extant a most sweet sentence in the first epistle of saint Paul unto
Timothy the third chapter and the sixteenth verse, which contains the effect
of this Psalm; Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness, which
is, God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world and received up in glory.
For think with your self what a thing it is that the Son of God being
consubstantial and coequall with his Father, The humanity and divinity of
Christ the Son of God.
has not taken away the equality of God, that is, has not abused his power
against his vocation, but has debased himself, taking upon him the form of a
servant, that is, nature of man, having all the strength and desires proper to
nature, only without sin, and at length was made obedient unto death even to
the death of the Cross. Again, this Messiah for us crucified and raised from
death to life, is endewed with notable, and infallible testimonies of the holy
ghost: for publicly does the holy ghost bear witness touching the person and
benefits of this Lord, not only by the preaching of the Apostles, but also by
new strange and unusual miracles, which were the Seals of doctrine: and
publicly martyrs and other the godly ones have felt joy to be enlightened in
the acknowledgement of Christ, which is the vanquisher of death. And where he
adds that Christ was seen of Angels, let not that be understood of an idle
or vain contemplation, but of that sense or meaning whereof S. Peter speaks:
that is, To whom the Angels and powers and might are subject. For although we
earthly persons do not greatly marvel at the copulation of the two natures in
Christ: yet Angels which are the most wisest spirits and always (as S. Math,
says, Behold the face of the father, Math. 18.10.) being astonished with
maruelling at this mystery, stand amazed and cannot take pleasure enough with
beholding it. For, what is more marvelous, then that flesh of our flesh, and
bone of our bones should sit at the right hand of God? This mystery as the
Poet says, I'ts not enough we once it see,
It vayles we still ^t viewing be.


Furthermore what is so much to be marvelled at, as that the Gospel touching
Christ, is not only preached unto the Gentiles, but also that the effects of
faith are left in many men's hearts: We do less marvel that the doctrine of
the gospel is spread amongst the Jews, in whom there have always remained some
of the doctrines of the Prophets and honest Disciples. But whereas this pearl
is cast unto the Gentiles, separated from the policy of Israel, which were
nothing but hogs and dogs, The Gentiles for their unthankfulness, compared
unto hogs and dogs*
that indeed is most worthy of admiration. For the Ethnikes or heathen people
having forsaken the doctrine of the fathers, have devised Idols without end,
and have polluted themselves with all vices and sins whereof the filthiness
is such, that I eschew and tremble with fear to speak of them. Neither indeed
must we marvel less that the Apostles being furnished with no power, and
destitute of all humane helps within a small time have gathered unto God out
of this rabble of mankind, an everlasting Church. For, that I may say nothing
of the miserable and weak outward estate of the Apostles, which estrangeth in
a sort many from the gospel, who would not by right marvel that the same kind
of doctrine ordained far above and beyond the reach of man's reason, and
joined with greatest dangers could take root, yea and spread abroad also,
amongst so many and diverse impedimentes? For some do deride the gospel, as it
were a monstrous fable, and scoff at this opinion, which affirms that the
death of a man crucified, was the cause and merit of Justification before God,
and of life everlasting. Others do judge this new doctrine to be the fire
brand and trumpets of seditions. But Hypocrites which are in love with their
own righteousness, Hypocrit^^.
do much more bitterly hate the gospel, as it were the corruption of good
manners, and the liberty of discipline. Therefore although the thinking hereof
seemed hard and almost impossible wherewith we must withstand so many diseases
together: yet the Apostles, the son of God guiding them, and the holy Ghost
accompanying them within 40. years space have culled and chosen out of
mankind, a good and great part of the Church, in spite of the devils, and
their instruments. Last of al, the son of God is taken up in glory, that is:
He was from death gloriously restored unto life, and when he had showed
himself familiarly for the whole space of 40. days unto his Apostles, he
ascended into heaven and now sits at the righthand of his father, giving us
his holy spirit, and other necessary gifts for the body and the soul. David
thinking upon so great matters prays most fervently, that the Messiah even at
the first time would come upon earth, destroy the works of the devil, sin,
and death; and unto his church gathered from both Jews and Gentiles, would
restore, life and righteousness euetlasting.

The Psalm and Exposition thereof.
Verse 1 God be merciful unto us and bless us: and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us.

Verse 2 That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all
nations.

BY the law says S. Paul, comes the acknowledgment of sin, and the law
works wrath. Romans 3.20. For there is a spiritual judgment accusing all
sins in men; Inward, and outward, and denouncing the wrath of God: according
to that saying. Deuteronomy. 26*27. Difference of the law, and the gospel.
Cursed be every one, etc. But in the gospel there is revealed the mercy of
God, and the blessing is promised by, and through, and for Christ's sake: that
is, full deliverance from sin and death, and the restoring of righteousness
and life everlasting. Wherefore David looking into the glass of the law, and
therein beholding sin and the wrath of God, craves that God would send his
son as a most sure pledge of mercy, and to bless us with all spiritual and
heavenly blessing, and to love us for his beloved sons sake. For then does
God with a cheerful and lovely countenance look upon us, when he
reconcileth us unto him in Christ, not imputing unto us our sins, and loves
us with the same fatherly affection wherewith. This foundation once laid, that
is, we acknowledge the mediator, and receiving by his means, and for his sake
forgiveness of sins and reconciliation, we may cry aloud with that most
holy old Simeon: Now Lord let thou thy servant depart in peace according
to thy word: For mine eyes have seen thy salvation; which thou have prepared
before the face of all people: To be a light to lighten the gentiles, and to
be the glory of thy people Israel. But seeing the sayings of Isaias (wherein
Christ is called the salvation of God) are known unto all men, they seem not
needful for me here to recite them at this time.

Verse 3 Let the people praise thee (O God:) yea let all the people praise thee.

Verse 4 O let the nations rejoice and be glad: for thou shall judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.

Verse 5 Let the people praise thee O God, let all the people praise thee.

Quod latet ignotum est, ignoti nulla cupid^. That which is kept close, is not
known, the thing unknown no man desires: How shall they believe if they
hear not, How shall they hear, if none do teach? He therefore craves of
God, not only to send his son, but also to advance the gospel, whereby is
gathered unto the son an everlasting inheritance both from amongst the Jews
and Gentiles. And I have spoken in the argument, as also elsewhere how great a
benefit the calling of the nations is to the society of the true Church, and
unto life everlasting. And there is not any vice or wickedness, wherewith the
Ethnickes or heathen people have not wickedly and filthily defiled themselves.
For they have devised a great number of Gods, they have called upon dead men,
they have slain men for their sacrifices they have mixed their lusts with
sacr^fices, The wickedness of the heathen people in time past.
and finally all kinds of mi^chiefes as it were furies sent out of hell, have
wandered every where. Whereas then such outcastes are cooptate or chosen and
regenerate of God into the society of the everlasting Church, that ought all
men's minds and tongues celebrate or have reverence. Their regeneration by
Christ in the time of grace.
For if God should deal with severe judgment toward blind and miserable
persons he might or should have stricken downeright all men with the
thunderclap of his wrath, and caused the ground to swallow them up into
everlasting destruction. But he in his wrathful displeasure thinking upon his
mercy, has not brought us utterly to nothing, nor cast away this our wretched
lump of ours into everlasting torments, but with an unspeakable equity and
lenity, has granted us a space to turn unto him, and has given us Teachers
which might call us back from our error and idolatry, unto true
acknowledgement of God, and to the right use of calling upon him. Therefore let
every one say with Jeremy, Lamentat. 3.22. It is the mercies of God, that we
are not consumed. And again with the patriarck Jacob. I am unworthy O Lord of
all thy mercies bestowed upon me, Genes. 32.9, 10.

Verse 6 Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God even our own
God shall give us his blessing.

Verse 7 God shall bless us, and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

In the latter verses are two notable places, one of the efficacy of the
ministry of the gospel: an other of the mystery of the Trinity. Truly the
teachers and preachers of the gospel seem to profit no more therein then as
the proverb is) The Oxen plowing upon the sand, or as he that rolleth a stone
up against a hill. But that the labor of them which teach in the church is
not in vain, these sayings do witness, Isay 55.10.11. Surely as the reign
comes down, and the Snow from heaven, and returns not thither, but
waters the earth, and makes it to bring forth, and budde, that it may give
seed to the sower and bread unto him that eats: So shall my word be that
goes out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but it shall
accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent
it. The fruitful (...) of Preachi^g.
In the first Psalm 3. verse. A Teacher of the Gospel is compared unto a
fruitful tree, Which brings forth sweet and whole some fruits. In the 15.
of S. John's Gospel, 16* verse, the son of God says: I have ordained you that
ye do go and bring forth fruit and that your fruit remain. etc. That is,
the labors of them which teach* shall not only for a small time profit
mankind, but shall gather unto God an everlasting Church: and the same Doctors
or Teachers shall have their everlasting rewards. With these and such like
sayings, let godly teachers comfort themselves, and let them not forsake their
standing, by reason they find contempt of the word, now and then also poverty,
banishme^ts and other dangers, but let them go with merry and joyful minds,
and with hope lighten their damages. But not in vain, nor without good cause
is The name of God here repeated thrice. For although there is one divine
essence: yet notwithstanding there are three persons of this Godhead, namely
the Eternal father, who sent his son to take our humane nature upon him: One
God in essence 3. distinct persons.
The same son who is called by John. 1. cap. verse 1. the word; and by Isayas
cap. 7.14. cap. 8.8. and Mat. 1.23. Immanuel: and The holy Ghost proceeding
from them both. And although ungodly and profane persons do deride us so
believing and speaking: yet notwithstanding men's minds must with testimonies of
divine manifestations be so confirmed, that they which defend contrary opinions
may by us be both despised and refuted. For there can be made no true prayer
without considering of the difference in these three persons. Let our mind
therefore be directed unto this true God, who made himself known by sending
his son our Lord Jesus Christ for our sakes crucified and raised from death
to life. And truly let us express in the beginning of our prayer the persons
by name, and let us consider what is the property of each of them, that may be
discerned from all creatures, and let our true prayer be discerned from the
prayer of the heathen, and although it is here meant, that the reviving is
given and made by all the three persons, yet this is done by order: The son
who gathers a Church immediately by the preaching of the gospel moves our
hearts, shows the Father, and gives the holyghost: Therefore says this
psalm in the last verse, God shall bless us, that is, Emanuel God with us,
the son of God, who took upon him our nature to become our mediator,
redeemer, iustifier and savior. Again the everlasting high priest of the
church, always making intercession for us giving the word of the gospel and
remission of sins. Also a king he is, gathering, keeping, The effectual
blessings of God in Trinity.
and preserving, and protecting his church, giving his holy spirit, and
restoring us to life and righteousness everlasting. The everlasting Father
then blesses or reuiueth us, the Guide, the Son, as the Giver, and the
holighost, as the performer. That is, the everlasting Father is the fountain
of all benefits, because he made the decree touching our redemption testifying
of the same publicly in the ministry of the gosp^ll, and privately in the
hearts of them which are converted unto God, and which do support and comfort
themselves with the voice of the gospel. I have spoken touching so great
matters, not as I ought, but, as I could: for as a certain godly Emperor
said, We speak not so much as we ought, but so much as we are able.

FINIS.
Praised be God.

