The Anatomy of Abuses: Containing A DISCOVERY, OR BRIEF Summarie of such
Notable Vices and Imperfections, as now reign in many Christian Countries of
the World: but (especially) in a very famous ISLAND called AILGNA: Together,
with most fearful Examples of Gods Judgments, executed upon the wicked for
the same, as well in AILGNA of late, as in other places, elsewhere.

Uerie Godly, to be read of all true Christians, every where: but most
needful, to be regarded in ENGLAND.

Made dialogue-wise, by Phillip Stubbes.

Seen and allowed, according to order.

MATH. 3. ver. 2. Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand. Lvc. 13. ver. 5.
I say unto you (says Christ) except you repent, you shall all perish. Printed
at London, by Richard Jones. ^^^^aij. 1583.

To the Right Honorable, Phillip Earl of Arundell: Phillip Stubbes wishes
health of body and soul, favor of God, increase of Godly honor, reward of
laudable virtue, and eternal felicity, in the Heavens, by JESUS Christ.
NOBILITAS Patriae DECVS
THE Lord our God (right honorable) having by the power of his word, created
Heaven and Earth, with all things what soever, for the comfort and use of Man:
the last of all other (even the sixth day) made Man after his own similitude
and likeness, that in him he might be glorified above all other Creatures. And
therefore, whereas in making of other things, he used only this Word, FIANT,
be they made, or let them be made: when he came to make Man, as it wear
aduysing himself, and asking council at his wisdom, he said, FACIAMVS
HOMINEM, let us make* Man, that is a wonderful Creature: and therefore is called
in greek MICROCOSMOS, a little world in himself. And truly he is no less,
whether we consider his spiritual soul, or his human body. For what
Creature is theare upon the face of the Earth comparable to man, either in
body or in mind? what creature has a soul immortal inherent in his body, but
only Man? what Creature can forsee things to come, remember things past, or
judge of things present, but only man? what Creature bears the image of God
about with him, but Man? what Creature is made so erect to behold the Heavens,
as man? What Creature may be likened to man, either in proportion of body, or
gifts of the soul? And (finally) what Creature has the promise of the
resurrection and glorificatio^ of their bodies, and of eternal life but only
Man? Than seeing the Lord has made Man thus glorious, and preferred him in
every degree, before al other Creatures (the Angelical Creatures set a part)
it is manifest, he has done it to some end and purpose, namely, that he might
be glorified in him, and by him above all other his works, according to the
measure of his integrity excellency and perfection. And hereby we may learn
that it is the will of GOD, that we bend all our force to the aduauncing of his
glorious Name, the edification of his People, and the building up of his
Church, which he has redeemed with the blood of his dear Son.

Which thing (me think) is notably figured forth unto us in the.25. of EXODUS
where the Lord commanded Moses to build him a Tabernacle, or house of prayer,
to this end and purpose (doubtless) that therein his law might be read, his
Ceremonies practiced, Sacrifices, Victimates and Holocaustes offered, and his
glorious Name called upon and obeyed. To the erection whereof, every one
conferred some what, some brought gold, some silver, and some brass, lead and
tin, other brought silk, purple, skarlet, and other ornaments, and the
meanest brought some what, namely, skins hear, sand, lyme, mortar, wood,
stone, and such like. Even so (right honorable) would the Lord have every one
to confer some what, even such as he has, to the building of his spiritual
house, the Church purchased with the blood of Christ. Wherefore seeing it is so,
that every one is to further this spiritual building to his possible power, I
have rather chosen with the simplest, and meanest sort to bring, though but
heir, sand, skins, lyme, mortar, wood or stones, than altogether to contribute
nothing.

Not doubting, but that the chief Master and Builder of this house, Christ
Jesus, will not dislike, but accept of my poor contribution, no less than he
did of the poor wydowes Mite, to whom was imputed that she had cast more, in
Gazophilatium Templi, into the treasury of the Temple, than all the rest: for
what she wanted in effect, that she supplied in affect, And for that also the
Lord our GOD committing his tale^ts to every one, whether more or less, not
only requires of us the same again simply, but also, as a straight
computist, demands interest and gain of every one of us: and for that not
only, he is a murderer and a Homicide before God, who slays or kills, a
Man with material sword* but he also, vho may prevent the same, and will not.
And not only, he is guilty of heinous transgression that commits any evil
really, but also he who consents to it as he does, who holds his peace, or
he who by any means might avoid it, and either for negligence will not, or for
fear of the world dare not. Therefore, albe it, that I have received, but one
poor tale^t, or rather the shadow of one, yet least I might be reproved (with
that unprofitable Servant) for hyding my small talent in the Earth* not
profiting therewith at all, either my self, or others, I have adue^tured the
making of this little treatise, entitled, (The Anatomy of Abuses,) hoping that
the same (by divine assistance) shall somewhat conduce to the building of this
spiritual house of the Lord.

And although I be one (most honorable Lord) that can do least in this Godly
course of life (palpable barbarism forbidding me so much as once to enter
into Wysdomes school) yet for that somewil not, for fear of losing worldly
promotion (though in the mean time they lose the Kingdom of Heaven,) Other
some dare not for displeasing the world: I say, for these, and semblable causes
together, with the zeal and goodwill I bear unto my Country, and fervent
desire of their conversion and amendment, I have taken upon me the contryuing
of this book: Which GOD, grant may be with like plausible alacrity received,
as with pains and good will, I have published it, for the benefit of my
Country, the pleasure of the Godly, and amendment of the wicked. And I doubt
not, that as none, but the wicked, and perverse whose gawld backs are tutched,
will repyne against me, so the Godly and virtuous, will accept of this my
labor, and travail herein, whose gentle favor and goodwill, shall
counterpoyse, (and far surmount with me) the malign stomachs, and stearn
countenances of the other. After that I had (right honorable) fully perfected
this book, I was minded, notwithstanding, both in regard of the straungenes of
the matter it entreats of, and also in respect of the rudeness of my pen,
to have suppressed it for ever, for diverse and sundry causes, and never to
have offered it to the view of the world. But, notwithstanding, being overcome
by the importunat request, and infagitable desire of my friends, I granted to
publish the same, as now you see, is extant.

But, when I had once granted to imprinte the same, I was in greatter doubt
than before, fearinge, to whom I might dedicate the same so rude and
impolished a work. And withal I was not ignorant, how hard a thing it is in
these days to find a Patron of such books as this, which shows to every
one his sin, and discovers every Man's wicked ways, which indeed, the ungodly
ca^ not at any hand abide, but as it were mad-me^ disgorging their stomachs
(Cum in Authore^ tum in codicem plenis buccis, and dentibus plusquam caninis
rabide feruntur:) they rage, they fume and rail both against the AVTHOR and
his book. Thus (vacillante animo) my mind wandering too and fro, and resting,
as it wear in ecstasy of despair, at last I called to mind your honorable
Lordship, whose praises have pierced the Skies, and whose laudable virtues are
blown, not over the realm of England only, but even to the furthest costs
and parts of the world.

All whose virtues, and condign praises, if I should take upon me to
recounte, I might as well number the stars in the Sky, or grass of the Earth.

For, for Godly Wisdom, and zeal to the truth, is not your good Lordship
(without offense be it spoken) comparable with the best? For sobriety,
affabilite, and gentle courtesy to every one, far excelling many.

For your great de^otion and compassion to the poor oppressed, in all places
famous: For Godly fidelity, to your Sovereign, love to the CVNTREY, and
virtues in general, every where most renowned.

But least I might obscure, your Worthy commendations with my unlearned pen,
(little, or no thing at all emphaticall) I will rather surcease, than further to
proceed, contenting my self rather to have given a shadow of them, than to
have ciphered them forth, which indeed are both infinite, and inexplicable.

In consideration (whereof) not withstanding that my Book be simpler, baser,
and meaner, than that it may (without blushing) present it self to your good
Lordship (being far unworthy of such an honorable Personage) yet according
to your accustomed clemency I most humbly beseache your good Lordship to
receive the same into your honors Patrociny and protection, accepting it as an
infallible token of my faithful heart, service, and good will toward your
honorable Lordship: For proof whereof, would GOD it might once come to pass,
that if not otherwise, yet with my humble service, I might show forth the
faithful and ever willing heart I bear in breast to your good Lordeship,
protesting before Heaven and Earth, that though power want yet shall fidelity,
and faithfulness fail never.

And because, this my Book is subject (my very good Lord (to as many
reproaches, tauntes and reproves, as ever was any little book (for that few ca^
abide to have their sin^ detected) therefore I have had the greatter care to
commit the same to the guardance and defense of your honor, rather than to
many others, not only for that GOD has made your honor a Lamp of light unto
the world, of true nobility and of al integrity and perfection, but also has
made you his substitute, or vicegerent, to reform vices, punish abuses, and
correct sin.

And as in mercy he has given you this power and authority, so has he given
you a hungry desire to accomplish the same according to his will: Which zeal
in your sacred breast, the LORD increase for ever.

And as your Lordship knows, reformation of manners and amendment of life,
was never more needful, for, was pride (the chiefest argument of this Book)
ever so ripe? Do not, both Men and Women (for the most part) every one in
general go attyred in silks, veluets, damasks, satan's, and what not? which are
attire only for the nobility and gentry, and not for the other at any hand?
Are not unlawful games, Plays and Enterluds, and the like every where used?
Is not whordome, covetousness, usury and the like daily practiced without all
punishment or law?

But hereof I say no more, referring the consideration, both of these and the
rest, to your Godly wisdom. Beseaseaching your good Lordship, to perdon my
presumption in speaking thus much, for (Zelus domini huc adegit me:) the zeal
of my God has driven me heather.

Knowinge, that the LORD has ordained you, to himself a chosen vessel of
honor, to purge his Church of these Abuses, and corruptions, which as in a
table are depainted and set forth in this little book.

Thus I cease to molest your sacred eare^s any further with my rude speeches,
most humbly beseaching your good Lord ship not only to admit this my Book into
your honors patronage and defense, but also to persist the just Defender
thereof, against the swynish crew of railing ZOILVS and flowting MOMVS, with
their accomplices, to whom it is easier to deprave all things, than to amend any
thing them selves. Which, if I shall perceive to be accepted of your honor,
besides that I shall not care for a thousand others, disliking the same, I shall
not only think my self to have received a sufficient guerdon for my p^^^es, and
shall be thereby greatly incoraged (if GOD permit) hereafter, to take in hand some
memorable thing to your immortal praise, honor and renown, but also shall
daily pray to GOD, for your good Lordship long to continue, to his good
pleasure and your hearts desire, with increase of Godly honor, reward of
laudable virtue, and eternal felicity in the HEAVENS, by Jesus Christ.

Columna gloriae virtus. Your Honors to command, PHILLIP Stubbes.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Thought it convenient (good Reader, who soever thou art, yt shall read these
my poor labors) to admonish thee (least happily you might take my words
otherwise than I meant them) of this one thing: That whereas in the process of
this my book, I have entreated of certain exercyses, usually practiced amongst
us, as namely of Plays and Enterludes, of dancing, gaming, and such other
like: I would not have thee so, to take me, as though my speeches tended, to
the overthrow and utter disliking of all kind of exercyses in general: that
is nothing my simple meaning. But the particulare Abuses, which are crept into
every one of these several exercyses, is the only thing, which I think
worthy of reprehension.

For, otherwise (all Abuses cut away) who sees not, yt some kind of plays,
tragedies and enterluds in their own nature, are not only of great ancie^tie,
but also very honest and very commendable exercyses, being used and practiced
in most Christian commonweals, as which contain matter (such they may be)
both of doctrine, erudition, good example and wholesome instruction? And may be
used in time and place convenient, as conducible to example of life and
reformation of manners. For such is our gross and dull nature, that what thing
we see opposite before our eyes, ^o pearce further, and printe deeper in our
hearts and minds, than that thing, which is hard only with the ears, as
Horace, the hethen Poet can witness. Segnius irritant animum, dimissa per
aures, quam quae sunt hominum occulis obiecta. So, that when honest and chaste
plays, tragedies, and enterluds, are used to these ends, for the Godly
recreatio^ of the mind, for the good example of life, for the avoiding of that,
which is evil, and learning of that which is good, tha^ are they very
tolerable exercyses. But being used (as now commonly they be) to the
profanation of the Lord his sabbath, to the alluring and inuegling of the
People from the blessed word of God preached, to Theaters and unclean
assemblies, to ydlenes, vnthriftynes, whordome, wanto^nes, drunke^nes, and what
not? and which is more, when they are used to this end, to maintain a great
sort of idle Persons, doing nothing, but playing and loytring, having their
lyuings of the sweat of other Men's brows, much like unto dronets devouring ye
sweet honey of ye poor laboring bees, than are they exercyses (at no hand)
sufferable. ^ But being used to the ends that I have said, they are not to be
disliked of any sober, and wise Christian.

And as concerning dancing, I would not have thee (good Reader) to think that I
condemn the exercise it self altogether, for I know the wisest Sages and the
Godlyest Fathers and Patriarchs that ever lived, have now and than used the
same, as David, Solomon, and many others: but my words do touch and concern
the Abuses thereof only. As being used upon the Sabbath day, from morning
until night, in public assemblies and frequencies of People, Men and women
together, with pyping, fluting, dromming, and such like inticements to
wantonness and sin, together with their leapinges, skippings, and other
unchaste gestures, not a few. Being used, or rather abused in this sort, I
utterly discommend it.

But upon the otherside, being used in a man's priuat-chamber, or house for his
Godly solace, and recreation in the fear of GOD, or otherwise abroad with
respect had to the time, place and persons, it is in no respect to be disalowed.

And whereas I speak of gaming, my meaning is not, that it is an exercise
altogether unlawful. For, I know that one Christian may play with another, at
any kind of Godly, honest, civil game, or exercise, for the mutual recreation
one of the other, so that they be not inflamed with coueitousnes, or desire of
unlawful gain: for the commandment says, thou shall not covet: wherefore,
if any be void of these affections, playing rather for his Godly recreation,
than for desire of filthy lucre, he may use the same in the fear of God: yet
so as the use thereof be not a let, or hinderance unto him, to any other Godly
exploit.

But, if a man make (as it wear) an occupation of it, spending both his time
and goods therein, frequenting, gaming howses, bowling allies, and such other
places, for greediness of lucre, to him it is an exercise altogether
discommendable and unlawful. Wherefore, as these be exercyses lawful, to them
that know how to use them in the fear of GOD, so are they practices at no hand
sufferable to them that abuse the^, as I have showed. But take away the abuses,
the things in themselves are not evil, being used as instruments to Godlynes,
not made as spurs unto vice. There is nothing so good, but it may be abused,
yet because of ye abuses, I am not so strict, that I would have the things,
themselves removed, no more than I would meat and drink, beit is abused,
utterly to be taken away.

And whereas also I have spoken of the excess in Apparel, and of the Abuse of
the same, as well in men, as in women generally, I would not be so understood, as
though my speeches exte^ded, to any, either noble, honorable, or worshipful:
for, I am so far from once thinking that any kind of sumptuous, or gorgeous
attire is not to be worn of any of them, as I suppose them rather Ornaments in
them, than otherwise.

And that they both may, and for some respects, ought to were such attire
(their birthes callings, functions and estats requiring the same) for causes in
this my Book laid down, as may appear, and for the distinction of them from
the inferior sort, it is prouable both by the Word of GOD, Ancient Writers,
and common practice of all ages, People and Nations, from the beginning of the
World, to this day.

And therefore, when I speak generally of the excess of Apparel, my meaning
is of the inferior sort only, who for the most part do far surpass,
either noble, honorable, or worshipful, ruffling in Silks, Ueluets, Satens,
Damasks, Taffeties, Gold, Silver, and what not? with their swoords, daggers,
and rapiers guilte, and reguilte, burnished, and costly engraven, with all
things else, that any noble, honorable, or worshipful Man does, or may wear,
so as the one cannot easily be discerned from the other.

These be the Abuses, that I speak of, these be the evils, that I lament, and
these be the persons that my words do concern, as the tenure of my Book
consideratly wayed, to any indifferent READER does purport.

This much I thought good (Gentle Reader) to inform thee of, for thy better
instruction, as well in these few points, as in all other the like, whersoeuer
they shall chance to occur in my Book. Beseaching thee, to construe al
things to the best, to bear with the rudenes thereof, and to give the same thy
good-woord, and gentle acceptaunce. And thus in the LORD, I bid thee, farewell.

Thine to use in the Lord, PHILLIP Stubbes.

Phillippus Stubeus CANDIDO LECTORI.
OFfendit nimia te garrulitate libellus
forte meus, Lector miror id ipse nihil.
Obsitus est etenim verboru^ colluuione
plusquam vandalica, rebus and insipidis.
Quare si sapias operam ne perdito post hac
nostra legendo, legas vtiliora, vale.
Idem in Zoilum.
ZOILE cum tanta rabie exardescis in omnes,
no^ aliter rabidus, quam solet ipse canis:
Dent^ Theonino rodens alios, calamoque,
incessens hos, qui nil, nocuere tibi:
Vipeream in cunctos vibrans O Zoile linguam,
linguam qua^ inficiunt toxica dira tuam:
Cum Debacchandi sinis ^it Zoile nullus,
hora quieta tibi nullaque praetereat:
Cum tumeas veluti ventrosus ZOILE bufo,
demiror medius quod minus ipse crepes.
Aliud in eundem.
Daemones ad tetrum descendat Zoilus antrum,
hunc lacerent furiae, Cerborus ore voret*
Imprecor at misero quid paenas, cui satis intus?
daemona circumfert pectore namque suo.
Eiusdem aliud.
Si tibi prolixus nimium liber iste videtur
pauca legas, poterit sic liber e^^e breuis.
A. D. In commendation of the Author and his Book.
IF Mortall-man may challenge praise,
For any thing done in this life:
Than may our Stubbes, at all assayes,
Enjoy the same withouten strife.
Not only for his Godly zeal,
And Christian life accordingly:
But also for this book in sale,
Hear present, now before thine eye:
Herein the Abuses of these days,
As in a glass thou may behold:
Oh buy it than, hear what he says,
And give him thanks an hundred sold.
I. F. In Commendation of the AVTHOR and his Book.
SHall men profane, who toys have writ,
And wanton pamphlets store,
Which only tend to noorish vice:
And wickedness the more,
Deserve their praise, and for the same,
Accepted be of all,
And shall not this our AVTHOR than
Receive the Laurel pall?
Who for good will in sacred breast
He bears to native soil,
Has published this Godly Book,
With mickle pain and toil.
Wherein, as in a Mirror pure
Thou may behold and see,
The vices of the World displayed
Apparent to thy eye.
He flattereth none, as most men do,
In Hope to game a price:
But shows to all their wickedness,
And Gods divine Justice.
A Godlyer book was never made,
Nor meeter for these days:
Oh read it than* thank GOD for it,
Let T'HAVTOR have his praise.
THE AVTHOR AND HIS BOOK.
NOw having made thee, seely book,
and brought thee to this frame:
Full loath I am to publish thee,
lest thou impair my name.
The Book.
Why so? good Master, what is the cause,
why you so loath should be,
To send me forth into the World,
my fortune for to try?
The Author.
This is the cause, for that I know,
the wicked thou will move,
And eke because thy ignorance:
is such, as none can love.
The Book.
I doubt not, but all Godly Men,
will love and like me well,
And for the other I care not,
in pride although they swell.
The Author.
Thou art also no less in thrall,
and subject every way:
To MOMVS and to ZOILVS crew,
who will daily at thee bay.
The Book.
Though MOMVS rage, and Zoilus carpe:
I fear them not at all,
The Lord my GOD in whom I trust,
shall soon cause them to fall.
The Author.
Well, ^^th thou would so feign be gone,
I can thee not withhold:
Adieu therefore, GOD be thy speade,
And bless thee a hundred fold.
The Book.
And you also good Master mine,
GOD bless you with his grace:
Preserve you still, and grant to you
In Heaven a dwelling place.
The Anatomy of the Abuses in AILGNA.
The Interlocutors, or Speakers. Spudeus. Philoponus. God give you good morrow,
Master Philoponus.

Philo. And you also, good Brother Spudeus.


Spud. I am glad to see you in good health, Flying fame oftentimes lies,
for it was bruted abroad every where in our country (by reason of your
discontinuance, I think) that you were dead, long ago.


Philo. In deed, I have spent some time abroad, else where, then in my native
country, (I must needs confess) but, how false that Report is (by whom soever
it was first rumored, or* how far so ever it be dispersed) your present eyes
can witness.


Spud. I pray you, what course of life, have you lead in this your long
absence, forth of your own country?


Philo. Truly (brother) I have lead the life of a poor Trauayler, The place
where the Author has trauayled.
in a certain famous Island, once named, Ainabla, after, Ainatirb: but now
presently called Ailgna, wherein I have lived these seven winters, and more,
travailing from place to place, even all the Land over indifferently.


Spud. That was to your no little charges, I am sure?


Philo. It was so: but what tha^? I thank God I have achieved it, Travailing
chargeable.
and by his dyuine assistance prosperously accomplished it, his glorious name
(worthy of all magnificence) be eternally praised therefore.


Spud. And to what end, did you take in hand this great travail, if I may be
so bold as to ask?


Philo. Truly, to see fashions, to acquainte my self with the natures,
qualities, properties, The causes that moved the author to take this travail
in hand
and conditions of all men, to break my self to the world, to learn
nurture, good demeanor, and cyuill behavior: to see the goodly situation of
Cities. Towns and Countries, with their prospects, and commodities: and
finally, to learn the state of all things in general: all which I could
never have learned in one place. For who so sits at home, ever commorante or
abiding in one place, knows nothing, in respect of him, that trauayleth
abroad: and he that knows nothing, is like a brute Beast, but he that
knows all things (which thing none does but God alone) he is a God
amongst men. And seeing there is a perfection in knowledge, as in every thing
else, every man ought to desire that perfection: for in my judgment, there is
as much difference (almost) betwixt a man that has trauayled much, The
difference betwixt a man the has trauayled, and a man that has not.
and him that has dwelt ever in one place, (in respect of knowledge, and
science of things) as is between a man lyuinge, and one dead in grave. And
therefore I have had a great felicytie in trauayling abroad.


Spud. Seeing that by divine providence, we are hear met together, let us
(until we come to ye end of our purposed journey) use some ^onference of the
state of the World now at this day* as well to recreate our minds, as to cut
of the tedyousnes of our iorneye.


Philo. I am very well content so to do, being not a little glad of your good
company: For, Comes facundus in via, pro vehiculo est. 1. A good Companion too
travail withal, The benefit of a good Companion to travail withal.
is in stead of a Wagon, or Chariot. For as the one does ease the painfulnes
of the way, so does the other alleuiat ye yrksomnes of the journey intended.


Spud. But, before I enter combat with you (because I am a country man, A
request to avoid offense.
rude and unlearned: and you, a Cyuilian, endued with great wisdom, knowledge
and experience) I most humbly beseech you, that you will not be offended with me
though I talk with you somewhat grossly, without either polished words, or fyled
speeches, which your wisdom does require, and my insufficiency and inabylitie
is not of power to affoorde.


Phil. Your speeches (I put you out of doubt) shall not be offensive to me, if
they be not offensive to God, first.


Spud. I pray you, what manner of Country is that Ailgna, where you say you
have travailed so much?


Philo. A pleasant and famous Island, immured about with the Sea, Ailgna, a
goodly cu^try.
as it were with a wall, wherein the air is very temperate, the ground
fertile, and abounding with all things either necessary to man, or needful
for beast.


Spud. What kind of people are they that inhabit there? The people of Ailgna.



Philo. A strong kind of people, audacious, bold* puissant, and heroycal, of
great magnanimity, valiauncie and prowes, of an incomparable feature, of an
excellent complexion, and in all humanity, inferior to none under the Sun.


Spud. This people, whom God has thus blessed, must needs be a very godly
people, either else they be mere ingrate, to God the author of all grace, and
of these their blessings especially?


Philo. It greeueth me to remember their lives, or to make mention of their
ways, The lives of the people of Ailgna.
for notwithstanding that the Lord has blessed that Land, with the knowledge
of his truth above all other Lands in the world, yet is there not a people
more abrupte, wicked, or perverse, living upon the face of the earth.


Spud. From whence spring all these evils in man, for we see every one is
inclined to sin naturally, and there is no flesh which lives, and sins not?


Philo. All wickedness, From whence all euilles spring in man.
mischief, and sin, (doubt you not brother Spud.) springs of our ancient
ennemie the Devil, the in^eterate corruption of our nature, and the intestine
malice of our own hearts, as from the originals of all uncleanness, and
impuritie whatsoever. But we are now new creatures, and adoptiue children,
created in Christ Jesus to do good works, We ought to have no dealing with
the works of the flesh,
which God has prepared for us to walk in. Wherefore we ought to have no
fellowship with the works of darkness, but to put on the armor of light
Christ Jesus, to walk in newness of life and to work our salvation in fear
and trembling, as the Apostle says, and our savior Christ bids us so work,
as our works may glorify our heavenly Father. But (alas) the contrary is
most true, for there is no sin, that was ever broached in any age, which
florisheth not now. And therefore the fearful day of the Lord cannot be far
of: at which day all the World shall stand in flashing fire, and than shall
Christ our Savior come marching in y^ clouds of heaven, with his Taratantara
sounding in each man's ear: arise you Dead, The day of Dome not regarded.
and come to judgment, and than shall the Lord reward every Man after his own
works. But how little this is esteemed of, and how smally regarded, to
consider it greeueth me to the very heart, and there is almost no life in me.


Spud. It is but a folly to grieve at them, who sorrow not for them selves.
Let them sinck in their own sin: Every Man must answer for him self.
live well your self and you shall not answer for them, nor they for you. Is
it not written? vnusquisque portabit suu^ onus. Every one shall bear his own
burden. Anima quae peccauerit, ipsa morietur ye soul that sins shall die:
wherefore surcease to sorrow or grieve any more for them: for they are such, as
the Lord has cast of into a reprobat sense, and prei^dicat opinion, and
preordinat destruction, that his power, his glory and justice may appear to
all the World.


Philo. Oh brother, there is no christian man, in whose heart shines scintillula
aliqua pietatis, any spark of God his grace, which will not grieve to see his
brethren and sisters in the Lord, members of the same body, coheyres of ye same
kingdom, and purchased with one and the same inestimable price of Christ his
blood, to run thus desperately into the gulphe of destruction and laberinth
of perdition. If the least and meanest member of thy whole body, be hurt,
wounded, cicatriced or bruised, does not the heart, and every member of thy
body, The mutual harmony of one member with an other
feel the anguish and pain of the grieved part, seking and endeavoring them
selves, every one in his office and calling, to repair the same, and never
ioying, until that be restored again to his former integrity and perfection?
Which thing in the balance of Christian charity, consideratly weighed, may
move any good Man to mourn for their defection, and to assay, by all possible
means, to reduce them home again, that their souls may be saved in the day
of the Lord. And the Apostle commands us, that we be (alter alterius
emolumento) an aid and help one to an other. And that we do good to all men,
dum tempus habemus, whylest we have time. To weep with them that weep, to
mourn with them that mourn, and to be of like affection one toward an
other. And common reason aduertiseth us, that we are not borne for our selves
only: for, Ortus nostri partem patria, partem amici, partem parents
vendicant. Our Country challenges a part of our birth, our brethren and
friends require an other part, No man born for himself.
and our parents (and that optimo iure) do vendicate a third part* Wherefore
I will assay to do them good (if I can) in discovering their abuses, and
laying open their inormities, that they seeing the greeuousnes of their
maladies, and danger of their diseases, may in time seek to the true
Physician, and expert Surgeon of their souls Christ Jesus, of whom only
comes all health and grace, and so eternally be saved.


Spud. Seeing that so many and so heinous sins do reign and rage in Ailgna,
as your words import, and which move you to such intestine sorrow, and
grief of mind, I pray you describe unto me more perticularly, some of those
Capital crimes, and chief Abuses, which are there frequented, and which
dishonor the majesty of God the most, as you suppose?


A particular description of PRIDE, the principal Abuse: and how manifold it
is in AILGNA.
PHILOPONVS. YOu do well to request me to cipher forth unto you part of those
great Abuses (and Cardinal Uices) used in AILGNA, for no man in any
Catalogue, how prolixe soever, is able to comprehend the sum of all abuses
there in practice. The number of Abuses infinite.
And whereas you would have me to speak of those Capital or chief Abuses,
which both are deadly in their own nature, and which offend the majesty of
God most. Me think you shake hands with the sworn enemies of God the
Papists, who say, there are two kinds of sin, the one venial, the other
lethall or deadly. All sin in it own nature is mortal.
But you must understand, that there is not the least sin, that is committed
either in thought, word, or deed, (yea, Vae vniuersae iustitiae nostrae, si
remota misericordia iudicetur. Woe be to all our righteousness, if mercy put
away they should be judged:) but it is damnable, dempta misericordia Dei, if
the mercy of God be not extended. And again, there is no sin so grievous,
which the grace and mercy of God is not able to counteruaile withal, and if it
be his pleasure to blot it out for ever. So yt you see now, there is no sin
so venial, but if the mercy of God, be not stretched out, it is damnable: nor
yet any sin so mortal, which by the grace and mercy of God, may not be
done away. And therefore as we are not to presume of the one, so we are not to
despair of the other. But to return again to ye satisfying of your request.
The greatest abuse, The greatest abuse which offends god most* is pride.
which both offends god most, and is there not a little advanced, is the
execrable sin of Pride, and excess in apparel, which is there so ripe, as
the filthy fruits thereof have long since, presented themselves before the
throne of the majesty of God, calling and crying for vengeance day and night
incessantly.


Spud. Wherefore have you intended to speak of Pride the first of all, giving
unto it the first place in your tractation? Because it is evil in it self,
and the efficiente cause of evil, or for some other purpose?


Philo. For no other cause, Pride the begyning of all evil.
but for that I think it to be, not only evil and damnable in it own
nature, but also the very efficient cause of all evils. And therefore the wise
man was bold, ECCLES. 10.
to call it Initium omnium malorum, the beginning and welspring of al evils.
For as from the root all natural things do grow, and take their beginning:
so from ye cursed root of pestiferous Pride do all other euilles sproute, and
thereof are ingenerate. Therefore may Pride be called not improperly, Matercula
and origo omniu^ vitioru^, What is it but pride dares attempt it.
the mother and nurse of al mischief: for what thing so heinous, what crime so
flagitious, what deed so perilous, what attemptso ve^terous, what enterpriseso
pernicious, or what thing so offe^siue to God or hurtful to man, in all ye
world, which man (of himself a very Sathanas) to maintain his pride withal,
will not willingly atchieue? hereof we have too much experience every day,
more is the pity.


Spud. How manyfold is this sin of Pride, whereby the glory of God is defaced,
and his majesty so grievously offended?


Philo. Pride is tripartite, namely, ye pride of the heart, Pride is three fold,
pride of the heart, pride of the mouth and pride of apparel.
the pride of the mouth, and the pride of apparel, which (unless I be
deceived) offends God more then the other two. For as ye pride of the heart
and mouth is not opposite to ye eye, nor visible to the sight, and therefore
entice not others to vanity and sin (notwithstanding they be grievous sins
in the sight of God) so the pride of apparel, remaining in sight, as an
exemplarie of evil, induces the whole man to wickedness and sin.


Spud. How is the pride of ye heart committed?


Philo. Pride of the heart is perpetrate, when as a man lifting him self on
high, thinks of himself, above that which he is of himself: dreamyng a
perfection of himself, when he is nothing less: And in respect of himself,
contempneth, vilefieth and reproacheth all men, thinking none comparable to him
self, whose righteousness, notwithstanding, is like to the polluted cloth of a
menstruous woman:

Therefore, the Pride of the Heart, may be said, What pride of the heart is.
too be a Rebellious elation, or lyftynge up of the mind, against the Law
of God, attrybutynge and ascribing that unto himself, which is proper to God
only. And although it be the Lord, Qui operatur in nobis velle, and posse,
who works in us both the will and power to do good, Ne gloriaretur omnis caro,
least any flesh should boste of his own power and strength, yet Pride, with
his Cousin germayn Philautia PHILAVTIA.
which is Selfeloue, persuades him, y^ he has need of no man's help but his
own: that he stands by his own proper strength and power and by no man's else,
and that he is al in all, yea, so perfect and good, as no more can be exacted
of him.


Spud. How is Pride of words, or pride of mouth, committed?


Philo. Pride of the mouth, How pride of words, or of the mouth is committed.
or of words, is, when we boast, brag or glory, either of our selves, our
kindred, consanguynitie, birth, parentage, and such like: or when we extol our
selves for any virtue, sanctimonie of life, sincerytie of Godlynes, which
either is in us, or which we pretend to be in us. In this kind of Pride (as in
the other) almost every one offends: for shall you not have all (in a manner)
boast and vaunt themselves of their Auncetors, and progenitors? saying, and
crying with open mouth: I am a Gentleman, I am worshipful, I am Honorable, I
am Noble, and I can not tell what: my father was this, my father was that: I am
come of this house, and I am come of that: Whereas, Dame Nature, brings us all
into the world, after one sort, and receives all again, into the womb of
our mother, I mean, the bowelles of the earth, al in one and the same order
and manner, without any difference or diversity at all, whereof more hereafter
shall be spoken.


Spud. How is Pride of Apparel committed?


Philo. By wearyng of Apparel more gorgeous, How pride of apparel is
perpetrate and committed.
sumptuous and precious than our state, calling or condition of life requires,
whereby, we are puffed up into Pride, and enforced to think of our selves, more
than we ought, being but vile earth and miserable sinners.

And this sin of Apparel (as I have said before) hurts more then the
other two: For the sin of the heart, hurts none, but the Author, in whom it
breeds, so long as it bursteth not forth into exterior action: And the
Pride of the mouth (which consists, as I have said, in ostenting and
braggyng of some singular virtue, either in himself, or some other of his
kindred, and which he arrogateth to himself (by Hereditarie possession, or
lineall dissent) though it be mere ungodly in it own nature, yet it is not
permanent, (for words fly into the air, not leaving any print or character
behind them to offend the eyes.) But this sin of excess in Apparel,
remains as an Example of evil before our eyes, and as a prouocatiue to
sin, as Experience daily shows.


Spud. Would you not have men to observe a decency, A decorum to be observed.
a comeliness and a decorum in their usual Attire? Does not the word of God
command us to do all things decenter, and secundum ordinem ciuilem: decently,
and after a cyuile manner?


Philo. I would wish, that a decency, a comely order, and as you say, a decorum
were observed, as well in Attire, as in all things else: but, would God the
contrary were not true: For most of our novel Inventions and new fangled
fashions, Our apparel rather deformeth, than adorneth us.
rather deforme us then adorn us: disguise us, then become us: making us
rather, to resemble sauadge Beasts and stearne Monsters, then continent, sober
and chaste Christians.


Spud. Has this contagious infection, of Pride in Apparel, infected and
poisoned any other country, beside Ailgna, suppose you?


Philo. No doubt, but this poison has shed forth his influence, and powered
forth his stinking dregs over all the face of the earth, but yet I am sure,
there is not any people under the Zodiac of heaven, how clownish, rural or
brutish soever, that is so poisoned with this Arsnecke of Pride, or has drunk
so deep of the dregs of this Cup, as Ailgna has, with grief of conscience
I speak it, with sorrow I see it, and with tears I lament it.


Spud. But I have heard them say, that other Nations pass them, No Country so
drunken with pride as Ailgna.
for exquisite bravery in Apparel: as, the Italians, the Athenians, the
Spaniards, the Caldeans, Heluetians, Zuitzers, Venetians, Muscouians, and such
like: now, whither this be true or not, I greatly desire to know.


Philo. This is but a visour, or cloak, to hide their Sodometrie withal:
only spoken, not proved: forged in the deceiptfull Mint of their own
brains: For (if credit may be given to ancient writers,) the Egyptia^s are
said, never to have changed their fashion, or altered the form of their first
Attire, from the beginning to this day: as Iacobus Stuperius, lib. de diuer sis
nostrae aetatis habitibus, Page 16, affirms: The Grecians, are said, to use
but one kind of Apparel without any change: that is to wit: a long Gown,
reaching down to the ground.

The Germaynes, are thought to be so precise in observing one uniform fashion
in Apparel, as they have never receeded from their first Origina: as the said
Stuperius says, in these words: Non enim mores leuiter mutare vetustos,
Germanus vnqnam consueuit incola: Which in Englysh Uerse, is thus much in
effect.

The Germayne people never use,
lightly to chop and change
Their customs old, or else Attire,
wherein abroad they range.
The Muscouians, Athenians, Italians, Brasilians, Affricanes, Asianes,
Cantabrians, Hungarians, Ethiopians, or else, what Nation soever, under the
Sun, are so far qehinde the people of Ailgna, in exquisitnesse of Apparel,
as in effect, they esteem it little or nothing at all, so it repel the cold,
and cover their shame: yea, some of them are so smally addicted thereto, that
setting apart all honesty and shame, they go clean naked. Other some meanly
apparelled, some in Beasts skins, some in hair, and what ever they can get:
some in one thing, some in another, nothing regarding either hosen, shoes,
bands* ruffes, shirts, or any thing else. And the ciuilest nations that are, be
so far estraunged from the pride of of apparel that they esteem him as
brauelye attyred that is clothed in our carzi^s, frizes, ruggs, and other kinds
of cloth, as we do him that is clad all over in silks, veluets, satens,
damasks, grograins, taffeties, and such like. So that herby you see, that they
speak untruly that say, that other nations exceed them in bravery of
apparel. For it is manifest that all other Nations under the sun how strange,
how new, how fine, or how comely soever they think their fashio^s to be, when
they be compared with the diverse fashions, and sundry forms of apparel in
Ailgna, are most vnhandsame, brutish and monstrouse. And herby it appears
that no People in the World is so curiouse in new fangles, as they of Ailgna
be. But grant it were so, and admit that others excelled them, (which is
false) shall we do evil, because they do so? shall their wickedness excuse us
of sin, if we commit the like and worse? shall not the soul that sins
dye? wherefore let us not sin of presumption, with the multitude, because they
do so, least we be plagued with them because we do the like. Moreover those
Cuntreyes are rich and welthie of them selves, Other countries not to be
blamed though they, go in silk^ veluets, and why:
abounding with all kind of preciouse ornaments, and rich attire, as silks,
veluets, Satens, damasks, sarcenet, taffetie, chamlet, and such like (for all
these are made in those foraine cuntreyes) and therefore if they wear them,
they are not much to be blamed, as not having any other kind of clothing to
cover themselves withal. So if we would content our selves with such kind
of attire, Other Countries esteem not so much of silks, veluets, as we do.
as our own Country does minister unto us, it were much tolerable. But we
are so surprised in Pride, that if it come not from beyond the seas, it is not
worth a straw. And thus we impouerish our selves in buying their trifling
merchandises, more pleasant tha^ necessary, and enrich them, who rather laugh
at us in their sleeves, than otherwise, to see our great folly in affecting of
trifles, and departing with good merchandises for it. And how little they esteem
of silks, veluets, satens, damasks, and such like, we may easily see, in
that they sell them to us for wolles, frizes, rugges, carzies, and the like,
which they could never do, if they esteemed of them as much as we do. So
that you see they are forced of necessytye to wear such rich attire, wanting
other things (whereof we have store) to inuest themselves withal. But who
sees not (except wilfully blind) that no necessity compels us to wear
them having abundance of other things to attire our selves with, both hansomer,
warmer, and as comlie as they in every respect? But far fetched, and dear
boughte, is good for Ladies they say.


Spud. Do you think it not permitted to any having store of other necessary
clothing^ to wear, silks, veluets, taffeties, and other such rich attire, of
what calling soever they be of?


Ph. I doubt not, Every man may wear apparel according to his calling.
but it is lawful for ye potestates, the nobility, the gentry, yeomanrie,
and for every private subject else to wear attire every one in his degree,
according as his calling and condition of life requires, yet a mean is to be
keept, for, omne extremum vertitur in vitium, every extreme, is turned into
vice. The nobilitye (though they have store of other attire) and the gentry
(no doubt) The nobility may wear gorgiouse attire, and why.
may use a rich, and preciouse kind of apparel (in the fear of God) to
innoble, garnishe and set forth their byrthes, dignities, functions and
callings, but for no other respect, they may not in any manner of wise. The
maiestrats also, and Officers in the weal public, by what title soever they
be called (according to their abylities) may were (if the Prince, or
Superintendent do Godly command) costly ornaments and rich attire,
Maiestrats may were sumptuouse attire and why
to dignifie their callings, and to demonstrat and show forth, the excelency,
and worthiness of their offices, and functions, thereby to strike a terroure and
fear into the hearts of the people, to offend against the majesty of their
callings: but yet would I wish, that what so is superfluous or ouermuche,
either in the one, or in ye other, should be distributed to the help of the
pore members of Christ Jesus, of whom an infynite number daily do perish,
through want of necessary refectio^, and due sustentation to their bodies.
And as for the private subjects, it is not at any hand lawful that they should
wear silk, veluets, satens, damasks, gould, silver and what they list (though
they be never so able to maintain it) except they being in some kind of office
in the common wealth, Not lawful for private subjects to wear sump^^ous
attire.
do use it for the^ dignifying and inno^^ing of the ^ame. But now there is such
a confuse mingle mangle of apparel in Ailgna, and such preposterous excess
thereof, as every one is permitted to flau^t it out, in what apparel he lust
himself, or can get by any kind of means. So that it is very hard to know,
who is noble, who is worshipful, who is a gentleman, who is not: for you shall
have those, which are neither of the nobylitie gentilitie, nor yeoma^ry, no,
nor yet any Magistrate or Officer in the commonwealth, Hard to know a Gentleman
from another by apparel.
go daily in silks, veluets, satens, damasks, taffeties* and such like,
notwithstanding that they be both base by birth, mean be estate, and seruyle
by calling. This is a great confusion and a general disorder, God be merciful
unto us.


Spud. If it be not lawful for every one, to wear, silks, veluets, satens,
damasks, taffeties, gold, silver, preciouse stones, and what not, wherefore did
the Lord make and ordein them?


Philo. I deny not, but they may be worn of them, who want other things to
cloth them withal, or of ye nobylity, gentilytie, or magistery, for the causes
abouesaid, Wherefore the lord made rich ornaments*
but not of every proud ^^xnet indifferently, that have store of other attire
enough* And yet did not the Lord ordeane these rich ornaments and gorgiouse
vestments to be worn of all men, or of any, so much as to garnish, bewtifie,
and set forth, the majesty and glory of this his earthly kingdom: For, as
cloth of gold, Arase, tapestrie, and such other rich ornaments, pendices and
hangings in a house of estate, serve not only to manual uses and seruyle
occupatio^s, but also to decorate, to bewtifie and become the house, and to
show the rich estate and glory of the owner: Whereto rich ornaments do
serve*
so these rich ornaments and sumpteouse vestments, of the earthly territory of
this World, do not only serve to be worn of them, to whom it does appertain
(as before) but also to show forth, ye power, wealth, dignity riches, and glory
of the Lord, the Author of all goodness. And here in, the providence and mercy
of God appears most plainelye, for where there is store of other clothing
there has he given, less store of silks, veluets, satens, damasks* and such
like: and where there is plenty of them, there is no clothing else, almost, and
thus the Lord did deal, for that every country ought to content themselves,
with there own kind of attire: except necessytie force the contrary, for than
we are to use our liberty in the fear of God.


Spud. I pray you let me entreat you, to show me wherefore our apparel was
given us, and by whom?


Philo. Your request is both diffuse and intricate, and more than my weak and
infirm knowledge is able to comprehend: When, where, and for what cause our
app^rell was given us.
yet, least I might be adjudged unwilling to do good, I will assay to do the
best I can.

When the Lord our God* a spiritual, intellectible understanding substance,
incomprehensible, immensurable, and inaccessible, had by his word, and
heavenly wisdom Christ Jesus, created and made ye world, and all things
therein contained, ye sixte day he created man, after his own similitude and
likeness, in innocence, holiness, righteousness, and all kind of perfection, he
placed him in Paradise terestrial commanding him to till and manure ye same.
Tha^ ye devil, an old maligner of mankind, who before was an Angel in heaven,
and through sin of pride in arrogating to himself ye seat and throne of Gods
majesty, cast down into ye lake of hell, enuying^ man's glorious estate, which
he than had lost, came unto man in Paradise, The fall of man by the malice of
the devil.
and enticed him (o^^ torteouse serpent) to eat of ye forbidden fruit* whereof
the Lord God had forbidden him t^ taste, on pain of his life: notwithstanding,
Ada^ condescending to his wife her persuasions, o^ rather to the Serpent,
having buzzed his venomous suggestions into their ears, took of the apple,
and did eat, contrary to ye express commandment of his God. This done their
eyes were opened, they saw their nakedness, and were not a little ashamed (and
yet before sin was committed, they being both naked, were not ashamed, but sin
once committed, they became unclean, filthy, loathsome, and deformed) and
sewed them garments of fig leaves together, to cover their shame withal. Than
the Lord pitying their misery, and loathing their deformity, gave the^ pelts,
and felles of beasts to make them garments withal, to the end that their
shameful parts might less appear: yet some are so brazen faced and so
impudent, Impuden^ beasts.
that to make y^ devil and his members sport, will not stick to make open
show of those parts, which God commands to be covered, nature wills to be
hid, and honesty is ashamd once to behold or look upon.


Spud. I gather by your words three special points. First, yt sin was the
cause why our apparel was given us. Secondly, yt God is the author, and giver
thereof. Thirdly, yt it was given us to cover our shame with all, and not to feed
ye insatiable desires of men's wa^to^ and luxurious eyes?


Philo. Your collectio^ is very true. Than seeing yt our apparel was given us
Wherefore our apparel was given us.
of god to cover our shame, to keep our bodies from cold, and to be as pricks
in our eyes, to put us in mind of our frailties, imperfections and sin, of our
backslyding from the commandments of god and obedience of the highest, and to
excite us the rather to contrition, and compunction of the spirit, to bewail
our misery, and to crave mercy at ye merciful hands of God, let us be
tha^kfull to God for them, be sorry for our sins, (which wear the cause
thereof) and use them to the glory of our God, and the benefyte of our bodies
and souls, against the great day of the Lord appear. But (alas) these good
creatures, which the Lord our God, gave us for the respects before rehearsed,
we have so perverted, as now they serve in stead of the devils nets, to
catch poor souls in: for every one now adays (almost) covet to deck and
painte their living sepulchers Men's bodies living sepulchers.
or erthly graves (their bodies I mean) with all kind of bravery, what soever
can be devised, to delight ye eyes of the unchaste behoulders, whereby God is
dishonored, offense is increased, and much sin daily committed, as in
further discourse shall plainly appear.


Spud. Did the Lord cloth our first parents in leather, as not having any thing
more preciouse to attire them withal, or for that, it might be a permanent
rule, or pattern unto us (his posterity) for ever, wherafter we are of force to
make all our garments, so as it is not now lawful to go in richer arraye,
without offendinge his majesty?


Philo. Although ye Lord did not cloth the^ so meanly, for that he had nothing
else, more preciouse to attire them withal (for Domini est terra, and plenitudo
eius, the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, says the Lord by his
Psalmist: And by his Prophet. Gold is mine, silver is mine, and all the riches
of the world is my own) yet no doubt, but he would yt this their mean and base
attire, should be as a rule, or pedagogie unto us, to teach us yt we ought
rather to walk meanelye, In our apparel we ought rather to oby necessity,
than to feed vanity.
and simplye, than gorgiously, or pompously: rather serving present
necessitye, than regarding the wanton appetits of our lasciuiouse minds: Not
withstandinge I suppose not, that his heavenly majesty would, that those
garments of lether, should stand as a rule or pattern of necessytie unto us,
wherafter we should be bound to shape all our apparel for ever, or else
greeuouslye to offend: but yet by this, we may see, his blessed will is, that
we should rather go an ace beneth our degree, than a jot above. And yt any
simple covering pleases the Godly, so that it repel the cold, and cover the
shame, it is more than manifest, as well by the legends both of profane
Historyographers Cronologers, and other writers, as also by the censures,
examples and lives of all Godly, since the beginning of the world: And if the
Lord would not, that the attire of Adam, should have been^* sign, or pattern
of mediocritie unto us, Ada^ his meankind of attire was a ^igne (...)
mediocrity unto us ^n our ^pparell.
h^ both in mercy would, and in his almighty power could have invested them in
silks, veluets satens, grograins, gold, silver, and what not. But the Lord our
God foresawe, that if he had clothed man, in rich and gorgiouse attire (such
is our proclyuitye to sin) he would have been proud thereof as we see it is
come to pass at this day (God amend it) and thereby purchase to himself, his
body and soul, eternal damnation.


Spud. Than it seems a thing material, and of great importance, that we
resemble our first Parents in austerity, and simplicity of apparel, so much
as may be possible, does it not?


Philo. I put no religion in goinge, No religion reposed in apparel.
or not goinge in the like simple attire of our parents Adam, and Eua, (as our
Papists, Papists? no, Sorbonists, Sorbonists? no, Atheists, atheists? no,
plain Sathanists do, placing all their religion in hethen garments, and Romish
rags) so that we observe a mean and exceade not in pride. But
notwithstanding, if we approached a little nearer them, in Godly simplicity and
Christian sobriety, both of apparel and manner of lyuinge, we should not only
please God a great deal the more, and enritche our Country, but also avoid
many scandals and offenses, which grow daily by our excessive riot* and
ryotouse excess in apparel. For does not ye apparel stir up the heart to
pride? The fruit of Pride.
does it not entice others to sin? and does not sin purchase hell the guerdon
of pride?


Spud. But they say, they please God, rather than offend him in wearing this
gorgiouse attire, for thereby the glory of his workmanship in them does more
appear. Besides that, it makes a man to be accepted, and esteemed of in every
place: whereas otherwise, they should be nothing less.


Philo. To think that the Lord our God is delighted in the splendente show of
outward apparel, The Lord accepts no man after his apparel.
or that it sets forth y^ glory of his Creatures, and the majesty of his
kingdom I suppose there is no man (at least no perfect christian man) so
bewitched or assotted. For that wear, as much, as to say, that stinking pride,
and filthy sin, tended to the glory of God, so that the more we syn the more
we increase his praise and glory. But the Lord our God is so far from
dilightinge in sin, that he adiudgeth them to eternal Death, and damnation,
that commit the same. Than who is he that will take pleasure in vain
apparel, which if it be worn but a while, will fall to rags, and if it be
not worn, will soon rotte or else be eaten with mothes. His ways are not our^
ways, his judgments, not our judgments, as he says, by his Prophet: and
whereas they hold, that Apparel sets forth the glory of his Majesty in
his creatures, making them to appear fairer, No attire can make the creature
of God seem fayrer.
than other wise they would of themselves, it is blasphemously spoken, and
much derogateth, from ye exellency and glory of his name. For says not God by
his prophet Moses, that after he had made all creatures, he beheld them all,
and behold they wear (and especially man, the excellentest of all other his
creatures, whom he made after his own similitude and liknesse) exceeding good?
And were all creatures good and perfect, and only man not perfect nor fair
enough? If these their speeches were true (which in the fullness of their
blasphemy they shame not to speak) tha^ might we easily convince the Lord of
untrue speaking, who in his sacred word, informs us, that man is the
perfectest Creature, and the fairest of al others, yt ever he made (excepting
the heavenly spirits, and Angelical creatures) after his own liknesse: as
before. O man who art thou, that reasonest with thy Creator? shall the clay
say unto the potter, why have thou made me thus? Every one is to content him
self with his creation and to pr^yse God for it.
Or can y^ clay make himself better favored than the potter, who gave him his
first stamp and proportion? Shall we think that stinking pride, can make the
workma^shippe of the Lord to seem fayrer? Than why did not the Lord cloth us
so at ye first? or at least, why gave he not commandment in his will, and
testament which he sealed with the price of the blood of his son to cloth our
selfs in rich and gorgiouse apparel to set forth his glory ye more? But away
with these dogs, and hellish haggs, who retain this opinion, that cursed pride
glorifieth God, and sets forth or bewtifieth his workma^shippe in his
creatures. In vain is it, for me to expostulat with them, for doubtless no^
hold this, but such as be misecreants (or devils incarnate) and men cast of
into a reprobate sense, The Lord ou^ God is a consuming fire, to destroy all
impeniten^ si^ner^.
whom I beseech the Lord in the bowels of his mercy, either speedely to convert
that they perish not, or else confound, yt they hurt not, that peace may be
upon Israel. Thus having sufficiently (I trust) refelled their false
positio^s, I leave them to the Lord, beseechinge them (as they tender their own
salvation linguas co^pescere digitis: to stop their sacrilegiouse mouths
with there fingers, and not to spit against heaven or kick against the prick
as they do, any longer. For the Lord our God is a co^suming fire, and upon
obstinate sinners shall rain down fire and brimston, and consume them in his
wrath. This is our portion acquired by sin.


Spud. But what say you to the other branch of their conclusion, namely, that
Apparel makes them to be accepted, and well taken in every place?


Philo. Amongst the wicked, and ignorante Pezants, I must needs confess,
they are the more esteemed, in respect of their apparel, but nothing at all the
more, but rather the less, amongst the godly wise. So far of will all wise
me^ be, The wise will not accept of any, after apparel.
from accepting of any for his gay apparel only, that (be he never so
gallantly painted, or curiously plumed in the deceiptfull^ feathers of pride)
they will rather contemn him a great deal ye more, taking him to be a man,
puffed up with pride and vain glory, a thing both odiouse, and detestable to
God and good men And seeing it cannot stand with the rule of god his justice,
to accept or not to accept any man for his apparel, or any other externe show
(...) deceiptfull vanytie, it is manifest, that man doing the contrary, is a
Judas to the truth, (...) Traitor to justice, and an enemy to the Lord (...)
wherefore far be that from al good christian^ and if those that go richely
clothed should b^ esteemed ye rather for their rich apparel, tha^ a contrario
must those that go in mean, an^ base attire, be the more contemned, and
despised for their poverty. And than should Chris^^^ Jesus our great
Ambassador from the king (...) heaven, and only Savior, be comtemned: for
(...) came in poor, and mean array: but Christ Jesus is blessed in his pore
rags, and all others ar^ contemned in their rich and precious attire. U^^der a
simple cote, many times lies hid great wisdom and knowledge: and co^trarely
under bra^^^ (...) sometime is covered great ydiotacy and folly. Wisdom not tied
to exterior pomp of apparel.
Hereof every days success offreth proof sufficient, more is the pytie.


Spud. Wherefore would you have men accepted, if not for Apparel?


Philo. If any be so foolish to ymagin, that he shall be worshipped, reverenced
Reverence due to virtue not to attyr^.
or accepted the rather for his apparel, he is not so wise, as I pray God make
me. For surely for my part, I will rather worship and accept of a pore man
(in his clowtes, and pore rags) having ye gifts and ornaments of the mind,
than I will do him yt roisteth and flaunteth daily and howrely, in his silks,
veluets, satens, damasks, gold or silver, what soever, without ye induments of
virtue, whereto only al reverence is due. And therefore as any man is endued, or
not endued with virtue, and true godliness, so will I reverence, or not
reverence, accept, or not accept of him: wherefore if any gape after reverence,
worship, or acceptance, let them thirst after virtue, as namely, wisdom,
knowledge, discretion, modesty, sobriety, affability, gentleness, and such
like, than can they be without reverence, or acceptatio^ no more than ye son
can be without light, the fire without heat, or the water without his natural
moisture.


Sp. Tha^ I gather you would have me^ accepted for virtue and true Godliness,
would you not?


Ph. I would not only have me^ to be accepted and reverenced for their virtue
(though the chiefest reverence is only to be attributed to him, Wherefore man
is to be worshipped and had in reverence.
whose sacred breast, is fraught with virtue, as it may well be called, the
Promptuarie or Receptorie of true wisdom and Godliness, but also (in part) for
their byrthes sake, parentage and consa^guinitie, and not only that, but also,
in respect of their callings, offices and functions, whether it be in the
Temporal Magistery a or Ecclesiastical presbitery (so long as they govern
godly and well:) For, the Apostle says, that those Elders which govern well
amongst us, are worthy of double honor: But yet, the man whom God has blessed
with virtue and true godlynes, though he be neither of great birth nor
calling, nor yet any Magistrate whatsouer, is worthy of more reverence and
estimation then any of the other, without the ornaments of ye mind and gifts
of, virtue above said. For what preuayleth it to be borne of worshipful
progeny, Gentilitie without virtue is no ge^tilitie.
and to be destitute of all virtue, which deserves true worship? what is it
else, then to carry a golden Swoorde in a Leaden Scabbarde? Is it any thing else,
then a golden Coffyn or painted Sepulcher, making a fair show outwardly, but
inwardly is full of all stinche, and lothsomnes? I remember once I red a
certain story of one, a Gentleman by birth and parentage, who greatly
reproched, and withal disdayned an other, for that he was come to great
authorytie only by virtue, being but a poor man's child by birth: What? says
the Gentleman by birth, art thou so lusty? Thou art but a cobblers son, The
exordium of virtue, is the exordium of gentilitie, and worship, and want of the
one, is the decay of the other.
and will thou compare with me, being a Gentleman by birth, and calling? To
whom the other answered, thou art no Gentleman, for thy gentilitie ends in
thee and I am a Gentleman, in that my gentilitie begins in me. Meaning
(vnlest I be deceived) that the want of virtue in him, was the decay of his
gentility, and his virtue was the beginning of true gentilitie in him self:
for virtue therefore, not for apparel, is every one to be accepted. For if we
should accept of men after apparel only respecting nothing else, tha^ should
it come to pass, that we might more esteem of one, both mean by birth, base
without virtue, seruyle by calling, and poor in estate, more than of some by
birthe, noble, by virtue honorable and by calling laudable. And the reason is
because every one, tagge and ragge, go brauer, or at least as brave as those
that be both noble, honorable and worpshipfull.


Spud. But I have hard say, there is more holiness in some kind of apparel,
than in othersome, which makes them so much to affecte varytie of fashions, I
think.


Philo. Indeed I suppose that the sum of their religion, does consiste in
apparel. No holiness in apparel.
And to speak my conscience I think there is more or as much holiness in
the apparel, as in them, that is just none at all. But admit that there be
hoylnesse in apparel (as who is so infatuat to believe it) than it follows
that the holiness pretended is not in them, and so be they plain Hipocrits to
make show of that, which they have not. And if ye holiness by there attire
presaged be in them selves, tha^ is it not in the garments, and why do they
than attribute that to the garments, which is neither adherente to the one nor
yet inherent in the other? Or if it were so, why do they glory of it to the
world, but I leave them to their folly, hastinge to other matters more
profitable to entreat of.


Spud. But I have hard them reason thus. That which is good in it own nature,
cannot hurt: An argument trimly contryued.
apparel is good, and the good Creature of God, ergo no kind of apparel can
hurt. And if there be any abuse in it, the apparel knowethe it not. Therefore
take away the abuse, and let the apparel remain still, for so it may (say
they) without any hurt at all.


Philo. These be well seasoned reasons, and substantial asseuerations in deed,
but if they have no better arguments to lean unto, than these, their kingdom
of Pride will shortly, fall without all hope of recovery again.

The apparel in it own nature is good, and the good Creature of God (I will
not deny) and cannot hurt except it be through over own wickedness abused.
And therefore woe be to them that make the good Creatures of God instruments of
dampnation to them selves, by not using them, but abusing them. And yet not
withstanding, it may be said, to hurt, or not to hurt, as it is abused, or
not abused. And whereas they would have the abuse of apparel (if any be) taken
away, and the apparel to remain still, it is impossible to supplant the one,
without the extirpation of the other also. For it is truly said, sublata
causa, tollitur effectus: But not, subrepto effectu, tollitur causa. Impossible
to take away pride, except sumptuouse apparel be taken away also.
Take away the cause, and the effect falls, but not contrarylye, take away
the effect, and the cause falls. The efficiente cause of Pride is gorgiouse
attire, the effect is pride it self ingenerate by attire: But to begin to
pluck away the effect (to wit pride) and not to take away the cause first
(namely sumptuouse attire) is as if a man intendinge to suppl^^t a Tree by the
roots, should begin to pull ^he fruit, and branches only, ^or to pull
down heaven, should dig in the earth, workinge altogether preposterouslie,
and indyreclye.

And the reason is, these two collateral Cosins, apparel, and Pride (the
Mother and Daughter Apparel and pride combined togetheas mother, and daughter.
of mischief) are so combinate together, and incorporate the one in the other,
as the one can hardly be dyuorced from the other, without the distructio^ of
them both. To the accomplishmente whereof God grant that those wholesome laws,
sanctions, and statuts, which by our most gracious and serene princess (whom
Jesus preserve for ever) and her noble, and renoumed Progenitors, have been
promulgate, and enacted hertofore, may be put in execution. For in my opinion,
it is as impossible for a man, to were preciouse apparel, and gorgiouse
attire, and not to be proud thereof (for if he be not proud thereof, why does he
wear such rich attire, whereas meaner is both better cheap, easier to be
had, as warm to the body, and as decent, and comely to any chaste christians
eye?) as it is for a man to carry fire in his boso^e, Impossible not to be proud
of rich attire.
and not to burn. Therefore would God every man might be compelled to wear
apparel, according to his degree, estat, and condition of life: which if it
were brought to pass, I fear least some who ruff^^ now in silks, veluets,
sate^s, damasks, gold silver, and what not, should be glad to wear frize cotes,
and glad if they might get them.


Spud. What is your opinion? did the people of the former world so much esteem
of apparel, as we do at this present day, without respect had either to sex,
kind, order, degree estat, or calling?


Philo. No doubt but in all ages, they had their imperfectio^s and faults, for
Hominis est errare, labi, and decipi, it is incident to man, to err, to fall,
and to be deceived. The Godly have ever detested pride of apparel.
But notwithstanding as the wicked have always affected not only pride in
apparel, but also all other vices whatsoever, so the chaste Godly, and sober
Christians, have ever eschewed this excess of apparel, having a special
regard to wear such attire as might neither offend the majesty of God,
provoke them selves to pride nor yet offend any of their Brethren in any
respect. But (as I have said) not only the Godly have detested and hated
this vain superfluitye of apparel in all times since the beginning of the
World, The very hethen have contemned sumptuouse apparel.
but also the very panims, the heathen Philosophers, who knew not God* (though
otherwise, wise Sages, and great Clarks) have contemned it, as a pestiferouse
evil: in so much as they have writ (almost) whole volumes against the same,
as is to be seen in most of their Books yet extant.


Spud. Are you able to prove that?


Philo. That I am very easilye, Testimonie^ of hethen people who derided rich^
attire.
but of an infinyte number, take a taste of these few. Democrates being
demanded, wherein the beauty, and comlie feature of man, or woman consisted?
answered, in fewnes of speeches well tempered together, in virtue, in
integrity of life, and such like. Sophocles saying one wear gorgeouse
apparel, said to him, thou fool, thy apparel is no ornamente to the, but
(...) manifest show of thy folly. Socrates being asked what was the greattest
ornamente in a woman? answered, yt which most shows her chastity, and good
demeanoure of body, and mind and not sumptuouse attire, which rather shows
her adulterate life. Aristotle is so district in this point, that he would have
men to use meaner apparel, than are permitted them by the law: The Wife of
Philo the Philosopher, Virtue is the comlyest orname^t of all.
being upon a time demanded why she ware not gold, silver, and preciouse
garments, said, she thought the virtues of her husband sufficient ornaments
for her. Dionisius the king sent the richest garments in all his wardrobes to
the noble Women of the Lacedaemonians, who returned them from whence they came,
saying, they would be a greatter shame to them, than honor. King Pirrus
sent rich attire to the Matrones of Rome, who abhorred them, as menstruous
clowtes. The conceived opinion amongst the Grecians to this day is, that it is
neither gold, nor gorgiouse attire that adorneth either Man or Woman, but
virtuous conditions, and such like. Diogines Dio^ines his ^suerity.
so much contemned sumptuous attire, that he chose rather to dwell in
wilderness amongst brute beasts, all his life long than in the pompouse
courts of mighty kings one day to be commorante. For he thought if he had the
ornaments of the mind, that he was than fair enough, and fine enough also,
not, needing any more.

A certain other Philosopher, addressed himself toward a kings court in his
Philosophers attire, that is in mean, base and poor array: But so sone as the
Officers espied him, they cried away with that rogue, what does he so nie
the kings majesty court.

The poor Philosopher seeing it lighten so fast, retired back, for fear of
their thunderclappes, and repayringe home, appaireled himself, in rich
Attire, and came again marchinge toward the court, he was no sooner in sight,
but every one received him plausiblie, and with great submission, and
reverence. When he came in presence of the king, and other mighty potentats,
he kneled down, and ceased not to kiss his garments. The king and nobles
marueylinge not a little thereat, asked him, wherefore he did so?

Who answered, The example of a Philosopher deriding the pomp (...) World.
O noble king, it is no marueyle, for that which my virtue and knowledge
could not do, my Apparel has brought to pass. For I coming to thy gates
in my PHILOSOPHERS weed, was repelled, but having put upon me this rich
attire, I was brought to thy presence with as great veneration and worship as
could be. Whereby is to be seen in what detestation he had the stinkinge Pride
of apparel, taking this occasion to give the King to understand the inormious
abuse thereof, and so to remove the same as a pestilent evil out of his whole
dominion and kingdom. I read of a certain other Philosopher that came before a
king, The example of a Philosopher who spat in the kings face.
who at the same time, had invited his nobles, to a feast or banquet, the
Philosopher coming in, and saying no place to spit in (for every place was
hanged with cloth of gold, cloth of silver, tinsell, arrace, tapestrie, and
what not) came to the king and spat in his face, saying, it is meet (o king)
that I spit in the fowlest place. This good Philosopher (as we may gather) went
about to withdraw the king from taking pleasure or delight, in the vain
glistering show, either of apparel or any thing else, but rather to have
consideration of his own filthynes, misery, and sin, not rising up into
pride, and spitting against heaven, as he did, by dilighting in proud attire
and gorgeouse ornaments. Thus we see the very painims, and heathen people,
have from the beginning dispysed this excess of apparel, both in them selves,
and others, whose examples heerin god grant we may follow.


Spud. But you are not able to prove that any good Christians, ever set light
by precious attire, but always esteemed it as a special ornament to the whole
man, As for these Heathen they were fools, neither is it material, what they
used, or used not?


Philo. I am able to prove, that even from the beginning of the world, the
chosen and peculiar people of God, have contemned proud Apparel, as things
(not only) not necessary, but also as very euilles themselves, Probatio^,
that the former world has contemned pompouse attire.
and have gone both meanly and poorly in their usual attire. What say you to
our Grandfather Adam, and Eua our Mother? Were they not clothed in peltes, and
skins of beasts? Was not this a mean kind of Apparel think you? Was it not
unsitting to see a woman invested all over in leather? But yet the Lord thought
it precious, and seemly enough for them.

What say you to the noble Prophet of the world Elias, Elias.
did he not walk in the solitude of this world in a simple plain mantell or
gown, girded to him with a girdle of leather? Elizeus ye Prophet, Elizeus.
Samuel.
did not he in a manner the very same. And what say you to Samuel the golden
mouthed Prophet, notwithstanding yt he was an Archprophet, and a chief seer
of that time, did he not walk so meanly, as Saul seking his fathers Asses,
could not know him from the rest, but asked him, where was the seers house?
This must needs argue that he went not richer then the common sort of people
in his time. The children of Israel.
The Children of Israel being the chosen people of God, did they not wear
their Fathers attire forty years together in the wilderness? was not John the
Baptist John Baptist.
clothed with a garment of Camels hear? girded with a thong of the skin of the
same insted of a girdle or succinctorie about his loins Peter Peter.
the dear Apostle of our Savior, was not distinct from the rest of his
Fellows, Apostles by any kind of rich apparel, for then the maid would not
have said I know thee by thy tung, but rather by thy apparel.

The Apostle Paul writing to the Hebrews says, that the persecuted Church,
both in his time, and before his days were clothed some in Sheep skins, and
some in Got skins, some in Camels hear, some in this and some in that, and
some in whatsoever they could get, for if it would hide their shameful parts,
and kept them from the cold, they thought it sufficient, they required no
more: but to speak in one word for all, did not our Savior Jesus Christ wear
the very same fashion of apparel, that his Cuntrey-men used, that is a cote
without a seame either knit or weaued? which fashions the Palestynians use
there, The humility and poverty of Christ upon earth.
yet to this day, without any alteration or change as it is thought. This his
attire, was not very hansome (one would think,) at the least it was not
curious, or new fangled, as ours is, but as the Poet well said, initimur in
vetitum ^e^per cupimusque negata, desired things forbid, and covet things are
denied us, lothing the simplicity of Christ, and abhorring the christian
poverty and godly mediocritie of our Forefathers in apparel, are never content
except we have sundry suits of apparel, one diverse from an other, so as our
Presses crack withal, our Cofers bruise, and our backs sweat with the carriage
thereof: we must have one suit for the forenoone, Superfluity of apparel With
dyuersitie of fashions.
another for ye afternoon, one for the day, another for the night, one for the
workeday, another for the holieday, one for summer, another for winter, one of
the new fashion, an other of the old, one of this color, another of that,
one cut, an other whole, one laced, another without, one of gold, and other
of silver, one of silks and veluets, and another of clothe, with more
difference and variety than I can express: god be merciful unto us and hasten
his kingdom that all imperfectious may be done away.


A peculiare Description of apparel in A^lgna by degrees
YOu have borne me in hand of many and grievous abuses reigning in Ailgna, but
now setting aparte these ambagies and superfluous vagaries) I pray you describe
unto me more particularly the sundry abuses in Apparel there used, running
over by degrees the whole state thereof, that I may see as it were the perfect
Anatomy of that Nation in Apparel, which thing I greatly desire to know.

Philo. Your request seems both intricate, and hard, considering there be
Tot tantae maeryadaes inuentionum, So many, and so fond fashions, and
inventions of Apparel every day. But yet, lest I might be judged unwilling to
show you what pleasure I can, I will assay ( pro virili mea, omnibus neruulis
vndique extensis) with all the might and force I can, to satisfy your desire.
Wherefore to begin first with their Hattes.

Sometimes they were them sharp on the crown, pearking up like a sphere, or
shafte of a steeple, The diversity of hattes in Ailgna.
standing a quarter of a yard above ye crown of their heads, some more, some
less, as please the fantasies of their minds. Othersome be flat, and broad
on the crown, like the battlements of a house. An other sort have round
crowns, sometimes with one kind of hand, sometime with an other, now
black, now white, now russet, now red, now green, now yellowe, now this, now
that, never content with one color, or fashion two days to an end. And thus
in vanity they spend the Lord his treasure, consuming their golden years,
and silver days, in wickedness and sin. And as the fashions be rare and
strange, so are the things whereof their Hattes be made diverse also: for some
are of silk, some of velvet, some of taffetie, some of sarcenet, some of
wool, The sundry things whereof hattes be made.
and which is more curious, some of a certain kind of fine hair, far fetched,
and dear bought you may be sure. And so common a thing it is, that every
Seruingman, Countreyman, and other, even all indifferently, do wear of these
hattes. For he is of no account or estimation amongst men, if he have not a
velvet, or a taffatie Hatte, and that must be pincked and cunningly carved of
the best fashion. And good profitable Hattes be they, for the longer you
wear them, the fewer holes they have. Besides this, of late there is a new
fashion of wearing their Hattes sprung up amongst the^, which they father upon
ye Frenchmen, namely, to wear them without bands, but how unseemly (I will
not say how Assy) a fashion that is, Wering of hattes without bands.
let the wise judge. Notwithstanding how ever it be, if it please them, it
shall (...) displease me. An other sort (as fantastical as the rest) are
content with no kind of Hatt, without a great bunche of feathers of diverse and
sundry colors, peaking on top of their heads, Wering of Feathers in hattes.
not unlike (I dare not say) Cockscombes, but as sternes of pride and ensigns
of vanity, and these fluttering sails and fethered flags of defiance to
virtue (for so they are) are so advanced in Ailgna that eeuery Child has
them in his hat or cap, many get good living by dying and selling of the^, and
not a few prove them selves more the^ fools in wearing of them.


Spud. These Feathers argue the lightness of their fond imaginations, and plainly
convince them of instabilitie and folly, for sure I am, hansome they cannot be,
therefore Ba^ges of pride they must needs be, which I think non^ will wear but
such as he like them selves.

But to your intended discourse.


Philo. They have great and monsterous ruffes, Great ruffes deformed and ill
favored.
made either of Cambrick, holland, lawn or else of some other the finest cloth
that can be got for money, whereof some be a quarter of a yard deep, yea some
more, very few less.

So that they stand a full quarter of a yard (and more) from their necks
hanging over their shoulder points, insted of a veil. But if Aeolus with his
blasts, or Neptune with his storms, chance to hit upon the crasie bark of
their bruised ruffes, then they go flip flap in the wind like rags flying
abroad, and lie upon their shoulders like the dishcloute of a ^lutte. But wot
you what? the devil, as in the fulness of his malice, first invented these great
ruffes, so has he now found out also two great stays to bear up and
maintain this his kingdom of great ruffes (for the devil is king and prince
over all the children of pride) the one arch or pillar whereby his kingdom of
great ruffes is underpropped Two arches or pillars to under proppe the kingdom
of greatruffes withal, videlicet supportasses, and starche.
is a certain kind of liquide matter which they call Starch, wherein the
devil has willed them to wash and diue his ruffes well, which when they be dry
will then stand stiff and inflexible about their necks.

The other pillar is a certain device made of wyers crested for ye purpose,
whipped over either with gold, thread, silver or silk, and this he calls a
supportasse or vnderpropper. This is to be supplied round about their necks
under the ruff, upon the out side of the band, to bear up the whole frame and
body of the ruff, from falling and hanging down.


Spud. This is a device passing all the devices that ever I saw or heard of.
Then I perceive the devil not only inuenteth mischief, but also ordains
isntrumental means to continue the same.

These bands are so chargeable (as I suppose that but few have of them, if
they have, they are better monyed them I am?


Philo. So few have them as almost none is without them, for every one how
mean or simple soever they be otherwise, will have of them three or four
apeece for failing. And as though Camericke, Every pesant has his stately
bands and monstrouse ruffes, how cost lie so ever they be.
Holland, Lawne, and the finest cloth that may be got any where for money,
were not good enough, they have them wrought all over with silk work, and
peradventure laced with gold, and silver, or other costly lace of no small
price. And whether they have Argente to mayntaine this gear withal or not, it
forces not much, for they will have it by one mean or other, or else they
will either sell or morgage their Lands, (as they have good store) on Suitors
hill, and Stangate hole, with loss of their lives at Tiburne in a rope.


Spud. The state and condition of that Land must needs be miserable, and in
time grow to great scarcity and dearth, where is such vain Prodigality,
and excess of all things used.


Philo. Their Shirtes, which all in a manner do wear (for if the Nobility or
Gentry only did wear them, it were somedeal more tolerable) are either of
Camericke, Holland, Lawne, The shirts used in Ailgna.
or else of the finest cloth that may be got. And of these kinds of Shirts
every one now does wear alike: so as it may be thought, our Forefathers, have
made their Bands and Ruffes (if they had any at all) of grosser cloth, and
baser stuff, than the worst of our shirtes ^re made of now a days. And these
shurts (sometimes it happens) are wrought through out with nedle work of
silk, and such like, and curiously stitched with open seame, and many other
knackes besides, mo than I can describe.


Spud. These be goodly shurts indeed, and such yet as will not chafe their
tender skins, nor vlcerat their lyllie white bodies, or if they do, it will
not be much to their greeuances I dare be bound. Is it any marvel, si Cristas
erigant and cornua attollant, if they stand upon their pantoffles, and hoyse
up their sails on high, having these dya^^ond shurts on their delicate
bodies: but how soever it is, I gather by your words, that this must needs be a
nice, and curious People, who arethus nusseled up in such dainty attire.


Philo. It is very true, Nicenes of apparel makes the body tender.
for this their curiosity, and nicenes in apparel (as it were) transnatureth
them, making them weak, tender and infirm, not able to abide such sharp
conflicts and blustering storms, as many other people, both abraode far from
them, and in their confines nie to them, do daily sustain. I have hard my
Father, with other wise Sages affirm, that in his time within the compass of
four or five score years, when men went clothed in black, or white frize
coats, in hosen of Huswyues carzie of the same color, that the sheep bore
them (the want of making and wering of which clothe, together with the
excessive wering of silks, veluets, satens, damasks, taffeties, and such like,
has and does make many a thousand in Ailgna, as poor mendica^ts to beg
their bread) whereof some wear strait to the thigh, othersome little bigger: and
when they ware shurts of hemp, or flax (but now these are to gross, Our
predecessors weringe meaner apparel were strong than we.
our tender stomachs cannot easilye digest such roughe and crude meats) men
wear stronger than we, helthfuller, fayrer complectioned, longer lyuinge, and
finallye, ten times harder than we, and able to bear out any sorrow or pains
whatsoever. For be sure this pampering of our bodies, makes them weker,
tenderer, and nesher, than otherwise they would be if they were used to
hardness and more subject to receive any kind of infection or malady. And
rather abbreuiat our days by many years than extenuate our lives one minut
of an hour.


Spud. I think no less: For how strong men were in times past* how long they
lived, and how helthfull they wear, before such Nicenes, and vain pamperinge
curiosity was invented, we may read, and many that live at this day, can
testify. But now through our fond toys and nice inventions, we have brought
our selves into such pusillanimitie, and effeminat condition, as we may seem
rather nice dames, and young gyrles, than puissante ag^nts, or manly men, as
our Forefathers have been.


Philo. Their dublettes are noe less monstrous than the rest: The monstrous
dublet^ in Ailgna.
For now the fashion is, to have them hang down to the midst of their
theighes, or at least to their privy members, being so harde-quilted, and
stuffed, bombasted and sewed, as they can very hardly either stoop down, or
decline them selves to the ground, so styffe and sturdy they stand about them.

Now what handsomnes can be in these dubblettes which stand on their bellies,
like or much bigger than a man's codpeece, (so as their bellies are thicker
than all their bodies beside) let wise men judge. For, for my part, handsomnes
in them, I see none, and much less profit.

And to be plain, I never saw any wear them: Great bellied dublets b^token
gourma^dice, gluttony and such like.
but I supposed him to be a man inclined to gourmandice, gluttony and such
like.

For what may these great bellies signify else, than that either they are
such, or else are affected that way. This is the truest signification, that I
could ever presage, or divine of them. And this may every one judge of them
that sees them, for certain I am there was never any kind of apparel ever
invented, that could more disproportion the body of man then these Dublets with
great bellies ha^ging down beneath their Pudenda, (as I have said) and stuffed
with four, five or six pound of Bombast at the least: I say nothing of what
their Dublets be made, Dublettes of diverse fashions.
some of Saten, Taffatie, silk, Grogram, Chamlet, gold silver, and what not?
slashed, iagged, cut, carved, pincked and laced with all kind of costly la^^
of diverse and sundry colors, for if I should stand upon these
particularities, rather time then matter would be wanting.


Spud. These be the strangest doublets that ever I heard of, and the furdest
from hansomnes in every respect, unless I be deceived.


Philo. Then have they Hosen, Hosen of diverse and sundry fashions.
which as they be of diverse fashions so are they of sundry names. Some be
called french-hose, some gally-hose and some Uenitians. The french-hose are of
two diverse makings, for the common french-hose (as they list to call them)
contains length, breadth, and sidenes sufficient, and is made very round. The
other contains neither length, breadth nor sidenes, (being not past a
quarter of a yard side) whereof some be paned, cut and drawn out with costly
ornaments, with Canions annexed reaching down beneath their knees*

The Gally-hosen are made very large, and wide reaching down to their knees
only, with three or four guardes a piece laid down along either hose. And the
Uenetian-hosen, they reach beneath the knee to the gartering place of the Leg,
where they are tied finely with silk points, or some such like, and laid on
also with rewes of lace, or gardes as the other before. And yet notwithstanding
all this is not sufficient, except they be made of silk, velvet, saten, damask
and other such precious things beside: yea every one, Serving man, and other
inferior to them in every condition, The (...) hosen.
will not stick to flaunte it out in these kind of hosen, with all other their
apparel suitable thereunto.

In times past, Kings (as old Historiographers in their Books yet extant do
record) would not disdain to wear a pair of hosen of a Noble, ten
Shillinges, or a Mark price, with all the rest of their apparel after the same
rate: but now it is a small matter to bestow twenty nobles, ten pound,
twenty pound, forty pound, yea a hundred pound of one pair of Breeches. (
God be merciful unto us.)


Spud. This is a wunderful excess as eu^^ I heard of, worthy with the
Swoorde (...) Justice rather to be punished, then with pap^^ and pen to be so
gently confuteed.


Philo. Then have they nether-stocks to these gay hosen, The diversity of
neither-stocks worn in Ailgna.
not of cloth (though never so fine) for that is thought to base, but of
Iarnsey worsted, silk, thread and such like, or else at the least of the finest
yarn yt can be, and so curiouslye knit with open seam down the leg, with quirks
and clocks about the ancles, and sometime (happily) interlaced with gold orsiluer
threads, as is wunderful to behold. And to such insolency and outrage it is now
grown, that every one (almost) though otherwise very poor having scarce
forty shillings of wages by the year will be sure to have two or three pair of
these silk neither-stocks, or else of the finest yarne that may be got, though
ye price of them be a Ryall or twenty shillinges, or more, as commonly it is,
for how can they be less? when as the very knitting of them is worth a noble,
or, a royal, and some much more?

The time has been, when one might have clothed all his body well, for less
then a pair of these neither-stocks will cost.


Spud. I have seldom heard the like, The mis^rie of these days
I think verily that Satan prince of darkness and Father of pride, is let loose
in y^ land, else it could never so rage as it does, for y^ like pride (I am
fully persuaded) is not used under the son, of any nation or people how
barberous so ever, wherefore woe be to this age and thrice accursed be these
days, which bring forth such sour fruits, and unhappy are that people, whom
Satan has so bewitched, and captiued in sin. The Lord hold his hand of mercy
over us.


Philo. To these their nether-stocks, they have corked shoes, pinsnets, Corked
shoes Pantoffles, and pinsnets.
and fine pantofles, which bear them up a finger or two from the ground,
whereof some be of white leather some^ of black, and some of red: some of black
velvet, some of white, some or red, some of green, raced, carved, cut and
stitched all over with silk and laid on with gold, silver, and such like: yet
notwithstanding, to what good uses serve these pantofles, except it be to wear
in a private house, or in a man's Chamber, to keep him warm? (for this is the
only use whereto they best serve in my judgment) Pantoff^es, and slippers are
a let to those that go abrod in them.
but to go abroad in them as they are now used al together, is rather a let or
hindera^ce to a man then otherwise, for shall he not be feign to knock, and
spurn at every stone, wall or post to keep* them on his feet? wherefore to
disclose even the bowels of my judgment unto you, I think they be rather worn
abroad for nicenes, the^ either for any ease which they bring, (for the
contrary is most tru^) or any hanso^nes which is in them. Pantoffles uneasy
to go in.
For how should they be easy, when as the heel hangs an inch or two over
the slipper on the ground? Insomuch ^as I have known diverse men's legs swel
with the same.

And handsome how should they be, when as with their flipping and flapping up
and down in ye dirte they exaggerate a mountain of mire ^ gather a heap of
clay and baggage together, loding the wearer with importable burden?


Spud. Those kind of pantoffles, can neither be so handsome, nor yet so warm
as other usual common shoes be, I think. Therefore the weringe of them abroad
rather imports a Nicenes (as you say) in them that wear them, than brings
any other commodytie else, unless I be deceived?


Philo. Their coats, and Ierkins, as they be diverse in colors, The varytie of
coats and Ierkins.
so be they diverse in fashions, for some be made with colors, some without,
some close to the body, some loose, covering the whole body down to the
theighe, like baggs, or sacks that wear drawn over them, hidinge the
dimensions, and proportio^s of the body: some are buttened down the breast*
some under the arm, and some down the back, some with flappes over the breast,
some without* some with great sleeves, some with small, and some with non at
all, some pleated and crested behind, and curiouslye gathered, some notso, and
how many days (I might say hours or minutes of hours in the year,) so many
sorts of apparel some one man will have, and thinks it good provision in
^aire weather, to lay up against a storm. But if they would consider that
their clothes (except those that they wear upon their backs) be non of
theirs, but the poores, they would not heap up their presses, and ward^obes as
they do. Do they think that it is lawful for them to have millions of sundry
sorts of apparel lying rotting by them, when as the poor members of Jesus
Christ die at their doors for want of clothing? The poor^ ought to be
provided for.
God commands in his law, that there be no miserable poor man nor beggar
amongst us, but that every one be provided for and maintained of that
abundance, which God has blessed us withal: Our small regard to the poor.
But we think it a great matter if we give them an old ragged coat, dublet,
or a pair of hosen, or else a penny or two, whereas not withstanding we flow in
abundance of all things. Than we think we are half way to heaven, and we need
to do no more. If we give them a peace of brown bread, a mess of porredge (nay
the stocks and prison, with whipp^^ge cheer now and than is the best portion
of alms which many Gentlemen give:) at our doors, it is counted meritorious,
and a work of supererogation when we fare full delicatelye our selves feeding
on many a danity dish. There is a certain City in Ailgna called Munidnol, where
as the poor lie in ye streats, Cold charity to the poor.
upon pallets of stra^, and well if they have that to, or else in the mire and
dirt, as commonly it is having neither house to put of their heads, covering
to keep them from the cold, nor yet to hide their shame withal, penny to buy
them sustenance, nor any thing else, but are permitted to dye in the streats
like dogs, or beasts without any mer^ie, or compassion showed to them at
all. And if any be sick of the plague (as they call it,) or any other
disease, their Masters and Maistres are so impudent (being, it should seem at
a league with Satan, a couenante with Hell, and as it were obliged them selves
by obligation to the devil never to have to do with ye works of mercy) as
straight way, they throw them out of their doors. And so being carried forth
either in carts, or otherwise, and thrown in the streats, there they end their
days most miserably. The Turkish impiety of some toward the poor diseased.
Truly Brother if I had not seen it, I would scarsly have thought, that the
like Turkish cruelty, had been used in all the World. But they say, vnus testis
occulatus plus valet, quam mill auriti: one eye witness, is better to be
bely^ed, than a thousand ear witnesses besides. But to leave these excursions,
and to return from whence I have digressed, I think it the best: For I am
persuaded they will as much respect my words (or amend their manners) as the
wicked World did at the preaching of our Savior Christ Jesus, that is, just
nothing at all.


Spud. Well then, seeing they are such a stifneckned People, leave them to the
Lord, and proceed to your former tractation.


Philo. They have clokes there also in nothing discrepante from the rest, of
diverse and sundry colors, The sundry fashions of cloks.
white, red, tawnie, black, green yellowe, russet, purple, violet, and
infynite other colors: some of cloth, silk, velvet, taffetie, and such like,
whereof some be of the Spanish, French, and Dutch fashion. Some short, scarsely
reachinge to the gyrdlestead, or wast* some to the knee, and othersome
traylinge upon the ground (almost) liker gowns, than clokes. These clokes
must be guarded, laced, and thoroughly faced: and sometimes so lyned, as the inner
side stands almost in as much as the outside: some have sleeves, othersome
have none, some have hoodes to pull over the head, some have none, some are
hanged with points and tassels of gold, silver, or silk, some without all this.
But how soever it be, the day has been, when one might have bought him two
clokes for less, tha^ now he can have one of these clokes made for, they have
such store of workmanship bestowed upon them.


Spud. I am sure they never learned this at the hands of our Proconsul and
chief Provost Christ Jesus, The cou^ting house of all evil, is man's brain.
nor of any other y^ ever lived godly in the Lord: but rather out of the
deceiptfull forge of their own brains have they drawn this cursed Anatomy to
their own destruction in the end, except the repent.


Philo. They have also bootehose, which are to be wondered at, for they be ^f
the fynest cloth, The vain excess of botehosen.
that may be got, yea fine enough to make any ba^d, ruff, or shurt needful to
be worn: yet this is bad enough to were next their gresie boots. And would God
this wear all: but (oh phy for shame) they must be wrought all over, from the
gartering place upward, with nedle work, clogged with silk of all colors, with
birds, fowls, beasts, and antiques purtrayed all over in comlie sort. So that
I have known the very nedle work of some one pair of these bootehose to
stand, some in.iiij. pound, vi. pound, and some in x. pound a piece. Besides
this, they are made so wide to draw over all, and so long, to reach up to the
waste that as little or less cl^the would make one a reasonable large shurte.
But tush, this is nothing in comparison of the rest.


Spud. I would think that bootehosen of grosser lynnen, The varitie of
fashions convince us of folly.
or else of woollen clothe, wear both warmer to ride in, as co^ly as the other,
though not so fine, and a great deal more durable. And as for those gengawes
wherewith you say they be blaunched and trimmed, they serve to no end, but to
feade y^ wanton eyes of gazing fools, and planly argue ye vertiginie, and
instability of their more than fa^tastical brains.


Phil. To these have they their Rapiers, Swoords and Daggers gilt, twice or
thrice over the hilts, Swords and daggers guilt and damasked.
with scaberds and sheathes of Ueluet or the like, for leather, though it be
more proffitable and as seemly, yet will it not carry such a port or
countenance like the other. And will not these golden swoords and daggers
almost apale a man (though otherwise never so stout a Martialist) to have any
deling with them? for either to y^ end they be worn or else other swoords,
daggers and rapiers of bare iron and steel were as hansom as they, and much
more conducible to that end, whereto swoords and rapiers should serve, namely
for a man's lawful and godly defense, against his adversary in time of
necessity. But wherefore they be so clogged with gold and silver I know not,
nor yet whereto this excess serves I see not, but certain I am, a great show
of pride it is, an infallible token of vain glory, and a^greeuous offense to
God, so prodigally, and licentiously to lavish forth his treasure, for which
we must render accou^ts at the day of Judgment, when it shall be said to
every one, Luce. 16.
Read rationem Vilicationis tuae, Come give accounts of thy Stewardship.


A particulare Description of the Abuses of Women's apparel in Ailgna.
THus having given thee a superficial view, or small taste, (but not
discovered the hundredth part) of the guyses of Ailgna in men's apparel, and of
the abuses contained in the same, now will I with like celeritie of matter
impart unto thee, the guyse and several Abuses of the apparel of women there
used also: wherefore give attentive ear.

Sp. My ears be pressed to hear, begin when you will, and truly herin you shall
pleasur me much, for I have greatly desired to know thoroughly the state of y^
La^d, even a crepundiis (as they say (from my tender years, for the great
praise I have hard thereof) Wherefore, I pray you proceed to the same, and though
I be unable with any benefit to cou^teruail your great pains, yet ye Lord I doubt
not, will supply my want.


Ph. The Lord our God is a merciful God, and a bou^tiful Rewarder of every
one, that trusts in him, but yet (such is ye magnificency and liberality of
that gentle sex The reward of the femall sex.
) that I trust I shall not be unrewarded at their hands, if to be called a
thousand knaves be a sufficient guerdo^ for my pains. But though it will be a
corrosiue to their hautie stomachs, and a nippitatu^ to their tender breasts to
hear their dirtie dregs ripped up and cast in their diamond faces, yet hopeing
that they, seeing the horror of their impieties, and tragical abuses laid
open to the world, (for now they sleep in the grave of oblivion) will at the
last like good Conuertes and Penitentiaries of Christ Jesus leave of their
wickedness, call for mercy at the hands of God, repent and amend. I will
proceed to my intended purpose.

The Women of Ailgna use to color their faces with certain oils, liquors,
unguents and waters Coloring of faces with ointments and waters.
made to that end, whereby they think their beauty is greatly decored: but who
seethe not that their souls are thereby deformed, and they brought deeper into
the displeasure and indignation of the Almighty, at whose voice the earth does
tremble and at whose presence the heavens shall liquifie, and melt away. Do
they think thus to adulterate the Lord his woorkmanship, Adulteration of the
Lord his workma^ship in his Creatures.
and to be without offense? Do they not know that he is Zelotipus a ielous
God, and cannot abide any alteration of his works, otherwise then he has
commanded?

If an Artificer, or Craftsman should make any thing belonging to his art or
science and a cobbler should presume to correct the same: would not ye other
think him self abused, and judge him worthy of reprehension?

And think thou (oh Woman) to escape the Judgment of God, who has
fashioned thee, to his glory, when thy great and more then presumptuous
audacicitie dares to alter, and change his woorkmanship in thee?

Think thou that thou can make thy self fairer then God who made us all?
These must needs be their inventions, or else they would never go about to
color their faces, with such sibbersawces. And these being their inventions
what can derogate more from the majesty of God in his creation? For in this
doing they plainly convince the Lord of untruth in his word who says he made
man glorious, after his own likeness, and the fairest of all other terrestiall
Creatures. If he be thus fair then what need they to make them fayrer?
Therefore this their coloring of their faces imports, They that color their
faces deny the Lord of glory to be true God and so no God at all.
(as by probable conjecture may be presupposed) that they think them selves not
fair enough, and then must GOD needs he untrue in his word.

And also they deny the Lord to be either merciful or almighty or both, and
so consequently no God at all: for if h^e could not have made them fair, then
is he not almighty, and if he could and would not, then is he not a
merciful God, and so every way they fall in to the finck of offense, being
ashamed of the good creation of the Lord in them, but it is to be feared least
at the day of Judgment, the Lord will be ashamed of them, and in his wrath
denounce this heavy and inevitable sentence condemnatorie against them,
Sentence condemnatory against those that color their faces.
Depart from me you cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil, and
his Angels, I know you not: (I say) depart, for you were ashamed of me, and
of my creation in you.


Spud. Whereof do they make these waters, and other unctions wherewith they
besmeare their faces, can you tell?


Philo. I am not so skilful in their matters of pride, but I hold this for a
Maxim, that they are made of many mixtures, and sundry compounded simples,
both far fetched and deer bought, cunningly couched together, and tempered
with many goodly condiments and wholesome confections, I warrant you, else you may
be sure they would not apply them to their amorous faces, Inuectiues of the
Fathers against paynting and coulouring of faces.
for fear of harming or blemishing the same.


Philo. S. Ciprian amongst all the rest, says, a Woman through painting and
dying of her face, shows her self to be more then whorish. For (says he)
she has corrupted and defaced (like a filthy strumpet or brothel) the
woorkmanship of GOD in her, what is this else, but to turn truth into
falsehood, with painting and sibbersawces, whereas the Lord says, Thou can not
make one hair white or black. In an other place he says, Qui se pinguunt in
hoc seculo, aliter quam creauit Deus, metuant ne cum dies resurrectionis
venerit, artifex creaturam suam, non recognoscat. Those which paint or color
them selves in this world otherwise then GOD has made them, let them fear
least when the day of judgment comes, the Lord will not know them for his
Creatures.

Again, Feminae crines suos inficiunt malo praesagio, capillos enim sibi
flammeos auspicari non metuunt. Whosoever do color their faces or their hair
with any unnatural color, they begin to prognosticate of what color they
shall be in hell.

S. Ambrose says that from the coullouring of faces spring the inticements to
vices, and that they which color their faces do purchase to them selves the
blot and stain of chastity.

For what a dotage is it (says he) to change thy natural face which God
has made thee, for a painted ^ace, which thou have made thy self? If thou
be fair, why paintest thou thy self to seem fairer? and if thou be not
fair, why do thou hippocrittically desire to seem fair, No painting can
make any to seem fairer but ^owler.
and art nothing less? Can those things which besides that they be filthy*
do carry the brand of God his curse upon their backs for ever, make thee to
seem fayrer? I could show you the sharp Inuections, and grounded reasons of
many (...), as of Augstine, Hierome Chrysostom, Gregory, Calvin, Peter
Martyr, Gualter, and of an infinite number mo^: yea of all generally since the
beginning of the world, against this whorish and brothellous painting and
coulouring of faces, but to avoid prolixitie, I will omit them, deferring them
to further opportunity, for pauca sapienti, To a wiseman few words are
sufficient.


Spud. It must needs be granted, that the dying and coulouring of faces with
artificial colors, Coloring of ^aces, the devils ne^
and unnatural Ointments is most offensive to God, and derogatorie to his
Majesty: for do they think that the God of all glory, and who only decketh
and adorneth the Sun, the Moon, the Stars and all the host of heaven with
unspeakable glory, and incomparable beauty, cannot make the beautiful and
fair enough (if it please him) without their sibbersawces? And what are they
else then the Devils inventions to entangle poor ^oules in the nets of
perdition?


Philo. Then follows the trimming and tricking of their heds Trimming of
their heds.
in laying out their hair to the show, which of force must be curled, frisled
and crisped, laid out (a World to see) on wreathes and borders from one ear to
an other. Simia erit simia etiam si aurea gesta^ insignia.
And least it should fall down it is under propped with forks, wyers and I ca^
not tell what, rather like grime stern monsters, then chaste christian
matrones. Then on y^ edges of their bo^stred heir (for it stands crested
round about their frontiers, Laying out of their hair
and hanging over their faces like pe^dices with glass windows an every side)
there is laid great wreathes of gold, and silver curiously wrought, and
cunningly applied to the temples of their heads. Gold wreathes circumgyring
the temples of their heads.
And for fear of lacking any thing to set forth their pride withal, at their
heir thus wreathed and crested, are hanged, bugles (I dare not say, bables)
ouches, rings, gold, silver, glasses, and such other gewgawes and trinckets
besides, which for that they be innumerable, and I unskillful in wemens terms,
I can not easily recount. But God give them grace, Gewgawes hanged about their
Frontiers.
to give over these vanities, and study to adorn their heads with the
incorruptible ornaments of virtue, and true Godliness.


Spud. The Apostle Paul (as I remember) commands w^men to cherish their
heir, saying, that it is an ornament to them, and therefore me think, this abuse
of curling and laying it out (if either were lawful) is much more tolerable
than dying their faces.


Philo. If curling, Curling and crisping, and laying out of heir.
and laying out of their own natural heir wear all (which is impious, and at
no hand lawful, notwithstanding, for it is the ensign of Pride, and the stern
of wantonness to all that behold it) it were the less matter, but they are not
simply content with their own hair, Bought heir and colored, used to be
wor^*
but buy other heir, dying it of what color they list themselves: and this
they were in the same order as you have heard, as though it wear their own
natural heir: and upon ye other side, if any have heir, which is not fair
enough, than will they dye it into diverse colors almost chaunginge the
substance into accidents, by their dyuelish and more than thrice cursed
deuyses. So, whereas their heir was given them, as a sign of subjection, and
therefore they were commanded to cherish the same, now have they made (as it
were) a Metamorphosis of it, making it an ornament of Pride, and destruction to
them selves for ever, except they repent.


Spud. This is a styfnecked People, and a ^^bellious, I see well, that thus
dares in every respect, to pervert the straight ways of the Lord, digginge
up to them selves cesterns of iniquity, and pittes of adversity, which in th,
end without the great mercy of God will be their utter confusion.


Philo. Than on tops of these stately turrets (I mean their goodly heads,
Capital ornaments for the head.
wherein is more vanity, than true Philosophy now and than) stand their other
capital ornaments, as french hood, hat, cappe, kercher, and such like, whereof
some be of velvet, some of taffatie, some (but few) of woll, some of this
fashion, some of that, and some of this color, some of that, according to the
variable fantasies of their serpe^tine minds. And to such excess is it grown,
as every artificers wise (almost) will not stick to go in her hat of Ueluet
every day, Hearts of veluets, taffaty, worn in common.
every merchants wife, and mean Gentlewomen, in her french-hood, and every
poor Cottagers Daughter, in her taffatie hat, or else of woll at least, well
lined with silk, velvet, or taffatie. But how they come by this (so they have
it) they care not, who pays for it they regard not, nor yet what hurt booth
to them selves, and others it does bring they fear not: But run daily a
malo, ad peius, Trahit sua^ quenque voluptas.
(as they say) from one mischief t^ an other, until they have filled up the
mesure of their evil to their own perdition at that day.

They have also other ornaments besides these to furnish forth their ingenious
heads, which they call (as I remember) cawles, made Netwyse, Cawles made Netwyse.
to the end, as I think that the clothe of gold, cloth of silver, or else
tinsell (for that is the worst) wherewith their heads are covered and attyred
withal underneath their cawles may appear, and show it self in the brauest
manner. So that a man that seethe them (there heads glister and shine in such
sort) would think them to have golden heads.

Thus lauishe they forth the goods of the Lord, Golden heads fraught with
leaden wit.
which are none of their own (but lent them for a time) upon Pride and
naughtiness, delighting (as it seems) in nothing so much, as in the
stinking puddle of vanity and sin, which will be their own decay at the
last. Another sort of dissolute minions, and wanto^ Sempronians (for I can
term the^ no better) are so far bewitched, Making of holes in their ears, to
hang rings and Jewels by.
as they are not ashamed to make holes in their ears, whereat they hang rings,
and other Jewels of gold and precious stones. But what this signifies in them,
I will hold my peace, for the thing it self speaks sufficiently. There is a
certain kind of People in the Oriental part of the World (as Writers affirm)
that are such Philauto^ lovers of them selves and so proud with all, that
having plenty of precious Stones, and Margarits amongst them, A people who
cut their skin to set precious stones in them selves.
they cut and lance their skins, and flesh, setting therein these precious
Stones, to the end they may glister and shine to the eye.

So, except these Women wear minded to tread their paths and follow their
direful ways in this cursed kind of unhard of Pride, I wonder what they mean.

But because this is not so much frequented, amongst Women as Men, I will say
noe more thereof, until further occasion be offered.


Spud. Except it wear a People wedde^ to the devils eldest Daughter Pride,
for I think, chastity amongst them may dwell a Uirgin for any that will
marry her) and given over of God, I never heard the like.

I am persuaded, neither the Libertines, the Epicures nor yet the vile Atheists
ever exceeded this people in pride, nor the wickedness of them might ever
counterpease, with the wickedness of these people. God be merciful unto them.


Philo. You hear not the tenth part, for no pen is able so well to discribe
it, as the eye is to discry it. The Women there use great ruffes, Great ruffes
Neckerchers and partlets used of Women.
and neckerchers of holland, lawne, camerick, and such cloth, as the greatest
thread shall not be so big as the least hair that is, then least they should
fall down, they are smeared and starched in the devils liquore, I mean Starch:
after that dried with great diligence, streaked, patted and rubbed very nicely,
and so applied to their goodly necks, Supportasses ^^he* pillars of ^ride.
and withal, underpropped with supportasses (as I told you before) the
stately arches of pride: beyond all this, they have a further fetch nothing
inferior to the rest, as namely three or four degrees of minor ruffes, placed
gradatim, step by step one beneath another, and all under y^ Master devil
ruff, ^inor ruffs*
the skyrts then of these great ruffes are long and side every way pleted and
cre^ted full curiously, God wot. Then last of all, they are either clogged with
gold, silver, or silk lace of stately price, wrought all over with needle
woork, speckled and sparkled here and there with the son, the moon, the
stars and many other antiquities strange to behold. The great curiosity of
rufs and neck^rchers.
Some are wrought with open woork down to the midst of the ruff and further,
some with purled lace so cloyd and other gewgawes so pestred, as the ruff is
the least part of it self. Sometimes, they are pinned up to their ears,
sometimes they are suffered to hang over their shoulders, like windmil sails
fluttering in the wind, and thus every one pleases her self with her foolish
devices, for suus cuiusque crepitus sibi been olet, as ye proverb says: every
one thi^keth his own ways best, though they lead to destruction of body and
soul, which I wish them to take heed of.


Spud. As in a Camelion are said to be ^all colors, save white, so I think,
in these people are all things else save Virtue and christi an sobriety. Proteus
Proteus that Monster could never change him self into so many fourmes and
shapes as these women do, belike they have made an obligation with hell and are
at agreement with the devil, else they would never outrage thus, without either
fear of God or respect to their weak Brethren, whom heerin they offend.


Philo. The Women also there have dublets and Ierkins Women wering dublets and
Ierkins.
as men have here, buttoned up the breast, and made with wings, welts and
pinions on the shoulder points, as man's apparel is, for all the world, and
though this be a kind of attire appropriate only to man, yet they blush not
to wear it, and if they could as well change their sex, and put on the kind of
man, as they can wear apparel assigned only to man, I think they would as
verily become men indeed as now they degenerat from godly sober women, A curse
to them that wear contrary apparel to their sex.
in wearing this wanton lewd kind of attire, proper only to man.

It is written in the 22. of Deuteronomie, that what man so ever wears woman's
appare^^ is accursed, and what woman wears man's apparel is accursed also.
Now, whether they be within the hands and lymits of that curse, let them see
to it them selves. Our Apparel was given us as a sign distinctiue to discern
betwixt sex and sex, and therefore one to wear the Apparel of another sex, is
to participate with the same, and to adulterate the verity of his own kind.
Wherefore these Women may not improperly be called Hermaphroditi, Hermaphroditi.
that is, Monsters of both kinds, half women, half men.


Spud. I never read nor heard of any people except drunke^ with Cyrces cups, or
poisoned with the exorcisins of Medea that famous and renoumed Sorceresse, that
ever would wear such kind of attire as is not only stinking before the
face of God, offensive to man, but also painteth out to the whole world, the
venereous inclination of their corrupt conversation. The diversity of Go^^es.



Philo. There Gowns be no less famous also, for some are of silk, some of
velvet, some of grogran, some of taffetie, Simiae in purpuris.
some of scarlet, and some of fine cloth, of ten, twenty or forty shillings a
yard. But if the whole gown be not silk or velvet, then the same shall be
laid with lace, two or three fingers broad, all over the gown of else the
most part.

Or if not so, (as lace is not fine enough sometimes) then it must be guarded
with great gardes of velvet, Costly gowns,
four or six fingers broad at the least, and edged with costly lace, and as
these gowns be of diverse and sundry colors so are they of diverse fashions
changing with the Moon, for so^e be of the new fashion, some of the old, some
of this fashion, and some of that, Diverse fashions of Gounes.
some with sleeves hanging down to their skirts trayling on the ground, and
cast over their shoulders, like Cow-tayles.

Some have sleeves much shorter, cut up the arm and pointed with silk-ribons
very gallantly, tied with true-looues knottes, (for so they call them.)

Some have Capes reaching down to the midst of their backs, faced with
Ueluet or else with some fine wrought silk Taffatie, at the least, fringed about
very bravely* and (to shut up all in a word) some are pleated, and ryueled down
the back wonderfully, with more knacks, than I can declare. Than have they
Petticots Potticots.
of the best cloth that can be bought and of the fairest dye that can be made.
And sometimes they are not of cloth neither, for that is thought to base, but
of scarlet, grograin taffatie, silk, and such like, fringed about the skirts
with silk fringe, of chaungable color. But which is more vayn, of whatsoever
their petticots be, yet must they have kyrtles Kyrtles.
(for so they call them) either of silk, velvet, grogra^, taffatie, saten, or
scarlet, bordered with gards, lace, fringe, and I cannot tell what besides. So
that when they have all these goodly robes upon them, women seem to be the
smallest part of themselves, not natural women, but artificial Women, Women
the least part of themselves.
not Women of flesh, and blod, but rather puppits, or mawmets of rags and
clowtes compact together. So far has this cancker of pride eaten into the
body of the commonwealth, that every poor Yeoma^ his Daughter, every Husband
man his daughter, Poor Men's Daughters excess.
and every Cottager his Daughter will not spare to flaunt it out, in such
gowns, petticots, and kirtles, as these. And not withstanding that their
Parents owe a brase of hu^ndred pounds more than they are worth, yet will they
have it quo iure quaue iniuria, either by hook, or crook, by right or wrong
as they say, whereby it comes to pass, that one can scarsly know, who is a
noble woman, who is an honorable, or worpshipull Woman* from them of the meaner
sort.


Spud. Their parents and Friends are much to be blamed, Parents (...) blame.
for suffering them to go in such wanton attire. They should not allow them
such large pitta^ce, nor suffer them to measure their apparel, after their own
licentious yardes of self will, and wicked desires.


Philo. Than shall they be sure, never to have good day with them. For they are
so impudent, The impude^cy of proud harlots.
that all be it, their poor Parents have but one cow, horse, or sheep, they
will never let them rest, til they be sold, to maintain them in their
braueries, past all tongue can tell.

And to say the truth, some Parents (worthy to be inaugured with the laurel
Crown of triple folly) are so buxome to their shameless desires, and so
exorable to their prostitute requests, Our remiss leuitie of Parents ^o their
Children.
y^ they grant to their too too nice daughters more than they can desire
themselves, taking a singular felicity and surmou^ting pleasure in sing them to
go plumed and decked in the Feathers of dece^ptfull vanity.


Sp. This over great lenity, and remiss liberty in the educatio^ of youth,
in respect of the event, and success in the end, may rather be counted an
extrem cruelty, than a Fatherly pity of them toward their children: For what
makes them so soon whores, strumpets, and bawdes, as that cockering of them
does?

What makes them apt and prone to all kind of naughtynesse, What makes
Whores, and strumpets.
but this? Nothing in the World so much. For give a wild horse the liberty
of the head never so little, and he will run headlonge to thine and his own
destruction also.

So long as a sprigge twist or branch, is young, it is flexible and bowable to
any thing a man can desire, but if we tarry till it be a great tree, it is
inflexible and vnbowable: If wax be taken whylest it is hot, any character
may be easily imprinted, but tarying till it be hard, it receives no printe
at all.

So, correct Children in their tender years, and you may bow them to what good
lore you will your self, but tarry till they be old, than is it to late, as
experience teaches daily.


Philo. Their neitherstockes Netherstocks of gernsey or silk.
in like manner are either of silk gearn^ey, worsted, crewell, or at least of
as fine yarn, thread, or cloth as is possible to be had cunningly knit, and
curiously indented, in every point, whereto they have korked shoes, pinsnets,
pantoffles, Corked shoes pinsnets, pa^toffles, and such like for wo^^*
and ^^ippers: some of black velvet, some of white, some of green, and some of
yellowe: some of spanish leather, and some of English lether, ^^itched with
silk and imbrodered with Gold, and silver all over the foot, with other
gewgawes innumerable: All which if I should endeavor my self to express, I
might with more facilitye number the sands of the Sea, the Stars in the sky,
or the grass upon the Earth so infinite, and innumerable The innumerable
fashions of women's attire.
be their abuses.

For wear I never so expre^e an Arithmetrician, or Mathematician, I wear
never capable of the half of them, the devil brocheth so many new fashions
every day.

Wherefore to their Author I leave them, not omitting to tell you by the way
(as an interim) of a certain kind of sweet Pride used amongst the Gentlemen
and Gentlewomen in Ailgna.


Spud. I have learned out of the Book of God, that all Pride is stinking
before the face of GOD, Pride stinking before the face of God.
wherefore I greatly desire to know what abortyue Miscreant this is, for it is
some portenteous misshapen monster, I am persuaded.


Philo. Is not this a cert^n sweet Pride, The having of ciuet, musk and other
perfumes a sweet kind of Pride.
to have cyuet, musk, sweet powders, fragrant Pomanders, odorous perfumes and
such like, whereof the smell may be felt and perceived not only all over the
house or place where they be present, but also a stones cast of, almost, yea
the bed wherein they have laid their delicate bodies, the places where they
have sa^e, the clothes and things which they have touched shall smell a week,
a month, and more after they be gone. But the Prophet Esaias Esai. Cap. 3.
tells them, instead of their Pomaunders, musks ciuets, balmes, sweet odours
and perfumes, they shall have stench and horror in the nethermost hell. Let
them take heed to it and amend their wicked lives.

And in the Sommer-time whilst flowers (...) green and fragrant, ye shall not
have any Gentlewoman almost, no nor yet any droye or pussle in the Country, but
they will carye in their hands, nosegayes and posies of flowers Nosegayes, and
posies of flowers, worn and carried abrod.
to smell at, and which is more, two or three Nosegayes sticked in their breasts
before, for what cause I cannot tell, Beware the Spanish pip.
except it be to allure their Paramours to catch at them, whereby I doubt not
but they get many a slabbering kiss, and paradeuenture more freendship
besides, they know best, what I mean.


Spud. You will be thought very straight la^ed to speak against these things,
for I have heard it said, that these sweet smells are both corroboratiue to the
senses and confortatiue to the spirits, and which do viui^^e and recreate
as well the body as the mind.


Philo. They are so far from comforting the brains, or lightning the spirits
of men, that as mystes and exhalations which euaporate from these earthly
bodies, and are drawn up by the attractiue power of the Sun, These eurious
smelles obnub^lat the spirits and darken the senses.
Moon, and stars do rather obnubilate and darken the beams of the Sun, not
suffering his radiatio^s to disparcle abroad. So these (in a manner) palpable
odors, fumes, vapors, smells of these musks, Sweet smells of musks cyuet, and
such like, do anoy the spirits.
cyuets, pomanders, perfumes balmes and such like ascending to the brain, do
rather denigrate, darken and obscure ye spirit and senses, then either lighten
them, or comfort them any manner of way. But howsoever it falls out, sure I
am, they are ensigns of pride, allurements to sin and prouocations to vice.
After all this, when they have attired the^ selves in the midst of their pride,
it is a world to consider their coyness in gestures, The vain gestures and
coins of women in the midst of their pecok feathers. Fingers clogged with
rings.
their minsednes in words and speeches, their gingerlynes in trippinge on toes
like young goats, their demure ^icitie and babishnes and withal their hawtie
stomachs and more than Cyclopicall countena^ces: their fingers are decked with
gold, silver, and precious stones, Women's trincke^s. Sweeted gloves.
their wristes with bracelets, and armlets of gold, and other preciouse Jewels,
their hands are covered with their sweet washed gloves imbrodered with gold,
silver, and what not, and to such abhominatio^ is it grown, as they must have
their looking glasses carried with the^ whersoeuer they go: Loking glasses, the
devils spectacles.
And good reason, for else how cold they see the devil in them? for no doubt,
they are the devils spectacles to allure us to pride, and consequently to
distructio^ for ever: and above al things they must have their silk scarffes
Silk skarfes.
cast about their faces and fluttering in the wind with great tassels at every
end, either of gold, silver or silk. But I know where for, they will say they
wear these scarfes, namely, to keep them from Sun-burning. But I would ask
these Nice lings one question, where in if they ca^ resolve me, the^ I will say
as they say, y^ scarffes are necessary, and not flags of pride. A question to
skar^e werers.
Can that thing which is most glorious and fair of it self, make any thing
foul or ilfauored? the sun is a most glorious and fair creature, and therefore
cannot make the^ fowler, then they are of their own nature. From whence then is
it, y^ the Sun burns them and alters their orient color into woorser hue?
The cause thereof proceeds from their own genuine corruption and natural
imperfection, for no more is their fowlenes to be ascribed to the stelliferous
beams of y^ glistering sun, then ye stench of a dead carcass, may be said to
come of y^ Sun, and not rather of it own corruption and filthiness. They busy
themselves in preserving the beauty of their bodies, which lasts but for a
time, and in time is cause of his own corruption, and which in effect is
nothing else then putrifactio^ it self, and a dunghill covered with white and
red, but for y^ beauty of ye soul they care nothing at all. When they use to
ride abrod they have inuisories or visors made of velvet, Visors, or inuisories
of velvet, to ride abroad in.
wherewith they cover all their faces, having holes made in the^ against their
eyes, whereout they look. So that if a man that knew not their guise before,
should chance to meet one of them he would think he met a monster or a
devil, for face he can see none, but two broad holes against her eyes, with
glasses in them. Sues volutabris versantur.
Thus they profane ye name of God and live in all kind of voluptuousnes, and
pleasure wursse the^ ever did the hethen.


Sp. What think you, are not the inue^tors, and first finders out of these new
toys and dyuelish devices in great danger, and partakers with them of the
evil committed.


Philo. It cannot be, The first finders, and inu^ntors of new fashions, are
culpable of all the evil that comes by them.
but the Inuentors of these new toys, are in great danger before God, as they
who shall render accou^ts to god not only for the invention of them, but also
for the evil committed by them. For whosoever, is author of any evil must needs
answer for the evil. And surely y^ authors of these newfa^gles, are not
unworthy to be canonized saints when the year of Jubilee comes (I mean
saints of satan) for there is no deed so flagicious, no fact so dangerous,
nor any thing so heinous, which with alacrity is not plausibly committed for
the maintenance of these Devilish toys and devices: And albeit that the
Persons themselves who offend this way shall dye in their sins, their own
blood being powered upon their own heads, yet the Authors of these new toys,
wherthorow they offended, shall be guilty of their deaths and surely answer for
their destruction in the day of the Lord.


Spud. But say they, if I make them not, an other will, A vain excuse.
and it is as good for me to make them, as an other, and it is my living,
wherefore I am discharged of blame, if I make them (being commanded) with sweat
of my face, and with travail and pain to get my living?


Philo. We are commaunned indeed to get our living with the sweat of our face,
We are bound to get our living in well doing, not in evil doing.
but how? Not in doing those things, which are evil of themselves, and also
draw and entice others to evil, but in things lawful and good, and which
induce to goodness. And to say, others will make them if I do not, no more
excuses them of offense, tha^ for a Murderer or Thief to say, if I had not
robbed, or killed this man another would, discharges him from the penalty of
the judicial law to be inflicted against him. Is it lawful for us to do
evil, because others do it? Or does the wickedness of an other, A (...) to
Artificers that invent new fashions.
deliver me from blame, if I commit the same offense? no, nothing less.
Wherefore, let Taylers and Artificers beware, how they either inuente or make
these new deuyces and Dyuelish fashions every day: And being requested to make
them, if they perceive them tend to vice, and allure to sin, let them refuse
them in the name of God, more tendering the salvation of many, than the private
commodytie of themselves alone: which thing, if every one would do, he should
deliver his own soul, and support an infinite number from falling into the
gulphe of sin, and so in short time these new toys, fond deuyces and
childish babelries, (new fashions I should say,) would soon vanish away, and
come to naught* which God grant may once be seen.


Spud. Did the women of the former world attire themselves in such sort, as
these women do?


Philo. The Women of the former age you may be sure never appareled themselves
like one of these: But least you should think, that ye Godly only lived thus
austerly, you shall hear how little the very hethe^ and barbarian Women have,
and do at this present esteem of apparel, as Stuperius witnesses, whose
words are these speking of the Egiptian w^men: Vestimenta sciunt nec noua
pristini^ mutare, verum semper his in cultibus gaudent perpetuo tempore
congredi, quascunque gentes hunc per orbem visitent, Which may be thus turned
into English verse.

The Egiptian Matrones never use
Their fashion of attire to change,
But ever keep one form to choose
Although they visit Nations strange.
AND as all Writers do affirm, all the Women there, indifferently to with
their hair hanging down, with a broad hat upon their heads, and other
attire as plain as the rest, so far are these People from Pride, and
hunting after strange fashions as our Women do.

The Women of Africa are witnessed by the fame Stuperius, and others, to be so
far from affecting strange fashions, or curiosity in aparel, that they cloth
themselves in a manner al over, ferinis pellibus, with beasts skins, furs,
and such like. And this they think so rich attire, as they use it altogether,
when they celebrat their festiual solemn days, or when they go abroad to be
seen.

The Brasilian Women esteem so little of apparel also as they rather chose to
go naked (their secret parts only being covered) then they would be thought to
be proud, or desirouse of such vanities.

The Cantabrian Women likewise with many others do the same. In High Germany
the Women use in effect one kind of apparel, or habit, without any difference
at all, nothing like other Nations delighting in new fangles: yea the wives
there, are so far from pride, that they will not disdain to carry all their
househould stuff and other trinckets about with them upon their backs in time
of extremity. These Mayds and Uirgins go very plain, with kerchers only on
their heads, their hair hanging down behind, in token of Uirginitie.

Thus you see, every Nation, how barbarous soever, are much inferior to ye
people of Ailgna in pride and excess of apparel: and yet these examples I
allege not to the end I would wish all others to use ye same, or ye very like
brutish kind of auster habit, but to show how far they be from Pride, and
how much the other be wedded to ye same. And as for the virtuous and godly
christian women from the beginning of the world, they have so little cared for
the vain glory of apparel, and so little (or rather nothing at al) were they a
quainted therewith, as they hunted for nothing else so much as for the ornaments
of the mind, as wisdom, continency, chastity, and true godliness, thinking
the same beauty sufficient. They counted it great shame to cloth their bodies
with sumpteous apparel, and their minds to be naked, and void of true virtue.
So, if these women would seek after ye beauty of ye mind, they would not affect
apparel so much, for if they be fair in body already, than need they not
gorgeous apparel to make them fairer: and if they be deforme in body, it is not
y^ that can make them fairer. And either their beauty consists in them, or in
their apparel: If in them, than not in the Apparel, and so it is mere foolery
to were them. And if in apparel, than not in them, and so cannot the garments
make them fair, whom God, and nature has made otherwise: wherefore, look in
what shape, form, or condition every one is created by God, let him content
himself with the same, without any alteration or change, with praise to his
Creator.


Spud. They hold (notwithstanding) that it is the pride of the heart, which God
so much hates, and detesteth.


Philo. It is very true that GOD punishes the pride of the heart Pride of the
heart.
with eternal damnation (if they repent not) for he will be served, and obyed
either with the whole man, or else with none. Than if he punish the pride of
heart with everlasting damnation, he must needs (in justice) punish the pride
of Apparel with the like, Pride of apparel equiuale^t with Pride of the heart.
being booth joined in one predicame^t of sin, and the pride of apparel much
more hurting before the world, tha^ the other.

Also, it is manifest, that the pride of apparel, rises first from the
corruption of the heart, as the effects from the cause, the fruit from the
root of the tree* than if the pride of ye heart, which, notwithstanding, it
hurts not outwardly, but is secret betwixt God, and himself, be damnable in
it own nature before God, than must it needs be, that the Pride of apparel,
(which shows it self to the world, both offensive to GOD, and hurtful to
man, and which also is the fruit of the pride of the heart, and throws
almost as many as behold it, at least, as many as follow it, into the deep
dungion of hell) is much more pernicious and damnable than the other.


Spud. Has the Lord plagued this sin of pride, with any notable torture or
punishment, ever from the beginning of the World unto this day, or has he
omitted the revenge thereof as a thing of small force, or importance?


Philo. Most fearful plagues, and dreadful judgments of GOD have in all ages
been powered upon them that offended herein, as all Histories both holy, and
profane do bear record. For proof whereof, I will give you a taste but of a
few, whereby may appear how wonderfully the Lord in all ages, times, kinreds
and peoples has punished those that through pride (like wicked recusants, and
backslyders from God) have rebelled against his majesty. Examples of God his
punishments executed upon them that offended in Pride, in all ages.
The devil, who before was an Angel in Heaven, arrogating to himself the
imperial throane of the majesty of God, was cast down into the deepth of Hell
burning with fire and sulphur for ever.

Adam, desiring to be a God (for the serpent told him he should be as God,
knowing both good and evil) was for the sin of Pride thrown down to the
bottom of Hell, and not only he, but all his posterity to the end of the
World. The host of Core, Dathan, and Abiram for their exceeding pride, in
stirring up mutenie, rebelling against their lawful Magistrate were swallowed
up quick into hell, the earth opening her mouth, and devouring them, withal
their accomplices whatsoever. The People of Babylon inte^ding to build a tower,
whose top should tutche the Sky, thinking that if God should drown ye world
again with water, they would be sure enough on the top of their high
turr^ts, yea they intending to sit with God himself (if need wear) wear all
confounded, and a diverse language put into every man's mouth, that none knew
what an other spoke. And thus were they forced to leave there building, and
dispersed themselves abroad upon the face of the earth, whereof spra^g the
first diversity of languages in the world. Wherefore when we hear any language
spoken we know not, it may be a memorandum A memorandum.
to us to put us in mind of our Pride, which was the cause thereof.

Goliath, the great Giant, the huge Cyclops, and swor^e enemy to the Children of
Israel, for his pride against the Lord, was slain by David, the faitfull
Servant of the Lord.

Antiochus Antioch^*
intending to overthrow, and sack Jerusalem, to spoil the Sanctuary and
Temple of the Lord, and to kill the people of God, was for his pride ouerturned
in his charet ryding thetherward, his belly brust and fill thy worms crawled
out, most lothsomly, and in sine, began so to stink and swell, as neither
his Servants nor he himself cold abide his own sauoure, and thus ended his
life in great misery, and wretchedness.

Nabuchodonosor, Nabuchodonosor.
was for his pride cast out of his Kingdom and forced to eat grass with wild
beasts in the wilderness. Daniel.


King Saul, K.
for his pride and disobedience, was deposed of his principallitie and Kingly
regimente, and in the end slew him self on (...) Gelboe most desperately.

Sodoma and Gomorra, were both destroyed with fire and brimstone from heaven
for their sin of pride, and contempt of the Lord. All the world in the days of
Noah was drowned with universal deluge for pride and contumacy of heart.

King Hezekiahs for his pride in showing to the Ambassadors of the king of
Babylon, 2. Reg. Cap. 20.
all his treasure (for he sent Messengers unto him with gift and lettres
congratulatorie, for ye recovery of his health) lost al his jewels, tresures
and riches, with his own sons also, being transported captives into Babylon: K.
David* for his pride in numbering ye people contrary the will of god was
greuouslie punished, and threescore and ten thousand of his People slain with
a greenous pestilence for the same. 2. Samuel. 1. c. 24. Verse. 15.


King Pharao for his pride against the Lord, (for he thought him self a GOD
upon the Earth, and therefore asked he Moses in derision, who is the Lord) was
drowned in the read Sea with all his host. The proud Pharisey The proud
Pharisey.
justifying himself, for his pride was reproved of the Lord, and rejected.

King Herod K. Herod.
for attiring himself in sumpteous array, and not ascribing glory to the Lord,
was stricken dead, by an Angel, and worms consumed his flesh immediately. Al
these, with infinite millions more in all ages, have perished through pride, and
therefore let not this people think that they shall escape unpunished, who
drink up pride as it wear sweet wine, feed upon it, as upon delicious
meats, and wallowe in it, as a filthy swyne does in the dirtie myr^: will the
Lord punish his peculiare people, and elect vessels, and let them goo free?

Wherefore I would wyshe them to be warned, for it is a terrible thing to fall
into ye hands of GOD, God his Plagues are prepared, if we repent not.
who is a consuming fire, and a fearful God. His bow is bente, his arrows of
judgments are drawn to the head, his fire is kyndled, his wrath is gone out,
and ready to be powered upon the contemners of his laws. Tempt not the Lord
any longer, provoke not his wrath, exasperate not his judgments toward thee:
for as mercy proceeds from him, so does justice also: And be sure of it, he
pays home at the last. For as in mercy he suffers no good deed to be
unrewarded, so in his just iudgmente there is no wickedness, which he leaves
unpunished. And yet notwithstanding their wickedness and pride is such, as
stincketh before the face of God, and makes the Enemies to blaspheme and
speak evil of the ways of the Lord: For say they, the men of Ailgna are
wicked, and licentious in all their ways, which easily appears by their
apparel, and new fangled fashions every day invented. The beastly Epicures,
the Drunkards, and swilbowles upon their ale benches, when their heads are
intoxicat with new wine, will not stick to belch forth, Our new fangles and
toi^s, are occasions, why all nations mock, and flo^te us.
and say, that the inhabitants of Ailgna go brauelye in Apparel, changing
fashions every day, for no cause so much as to delight the eyes of their
harlots withal, and to inamoure the minds of their fleshly paramours. Thus be
this People a laughing stock to all the world for their pride, Our living a
slander to the truth.
a slander to the word of God and to their profession, scandalles to their
brethren, a dishonor and reproach to the Lord, and very caterpillars to
themselves, in wasting and co^suming their goods and treasures upon vanyties
and trifles.


Spud. Seeing that by divine assistance, you have now finished your ^ractation
of the Apparel of Ailgna, show me (I pray you) what other abuses be there
used, for I am persuaded, that pride the Mother of all sin, is not without
her Daughters of sin semblable to her self?


The horrible vice of Whordome in Ailgna.
Philo. THE horrible vice of Whordome also is there too too much freque^ted,
Whordome in Ailgna too too ri^e.
to ye great dishonor of God, the provoking of his judgments against them, the
stain and blemish of their profession, the evil example of all the world, any
finally to their own damnation for ^uer, except they repent.


Spud. I have heard them reason, that mutual coition betwixt man and woman, is
not so offensive before God. Vain and ungodly reasons p^etending that whordome
is no ^^nne.
For do not all Creatures (^ay they) as well reptilia terrae, as volati^a Coeli,
the creping things upon the earth, as the flying Creatures in the air, and all
other Creatures in general both small and great engender together? has not
nature and kind ordained them so? and given them members incide^t to that use?
and does not ye Lord (say they) (as it were with a stimule, or prick by his
mandat, saing crescite and multiplicamini, and replete terra^, increase,
multiply, and fill the earth,) stir the^ up to the same? Otherwise the World
would become barren, and soon fall to decay: wherefore they conclude, Oh wicked
Lybertynes.
that whordome is a badge of love, a cogniza^ce of amity, a tutch of ^ustie
youth, a friendly daliance, a redintegration of love, and an ensign of virtue,
rather meritorious than damnable: these with the like be y^ exceptio^s which I
have hard them many times to object, in defense of their carnal pollutions.


Philo. Cursed be those mouths, that thus blaspheme the mighty God of Israel,
and his sacred word* making the same clokes, to cover their sin withal,
worse are they than Lybertines who think all things lawful, or Atheistes, who
deny there is any God. The devils themselves never sinned so horribly, nor
erred so grossly, as these, (not Christians, but dogs) do, that make whordom
a virtue, and meritorious: but because you shall see their deceptio^s displayed
and their damnable abuses, more plainly discovered, I will reduce you to ye
first institution of this Godly ordena^ce of matrimony. The Lord our God having
created all things in Heaven, The first institution of matrimony.
earth, or Hell whatsoever, created of every sex, two, male and female of both
kinds, and last of al other creatures, he made man after his own likeness,
and similitude, giving him a woman, Genesis 2. Mat. 19
made of a ribbe of his own body, Marc. Luc. 16.
to be his companion, 1. Cor. 6.
and comforter, and lincking them together in the honorable state of Ephe.5.
venerable wedlock, he blessed them both, saying, crescite, multiplicamini,
and replete terra^. Increase, multiply, and replenish ye earth: whereby it is
more than apparent, that the Lord, whose name is Jehovah, the mighty GOD of
Israel, Marriage insti^uded for. 4 ca^ses.
is the Author of Godly matrimony, instituting it in the time of man's
inconcency in Paradise, and that as me seems for four All mutual
copulation, except marriage, is unlawful.
and Godly propagation of Children in the fear of the Lord, that both the
world might be increased thereby, and the ex opere operato, as some shame not to
say. All other goinges together and coitions are damnable, pestiferous, and
execrable* So, now you see, that whereas the Lord says, increase, multiply,
and fill the earth, he alludeth to those that are cheyned together in the Godly
state of matrimony and wedlock, and not otherwise: For to those that go
together after any other sort, he has denounced his curse and wrath for
evermore* as his alsauing word bears record. And whereas they say that all
cr^atures upon the Earth do engender together, ^ow all creatures do go
together in their kind^*
I grant it is true. But how? in suo genere, in their own kind. There is no
creature creeping, on the earth, or flying in the air, how irrationable soever
that does degenerate as man does, but keepethe the same state and order
wherein they were made at the first, and so if man did, he should not commit
abominable whordom and filthy sin as he does. It is said of those that
write de natura animalium, that (almost) all unreasonable beasts and flying
fowls after they have once linked and united them selves together to any one
of the same kind* and after they have once espoused them selves the one to the
other, The fidelity of unreasonable creatures in marriage one toward an other.
will never after join them selves we any other, til the one be dissolved from
the other by death. And thus they keep the knot of matrimony inviolable to
the end. And if any one chance to reuolte and go together with any other
during ye life of his first mate, at the rest of the same kind, assemble
together, as it were in a council or parliament, and either kill or grievously
punish the adulterer or adulteress whether ever it be, which law I would God
were amongst Christians established. By all which it may appeer how horrible a
sin whordome is in nature, that the very unreasonable creatures do abhor
it.

The Heathen people who know not God, so much loathe this sti^king sin of
whordome, that some burn them quick, some hang them on gibbets, some cut off
their heds, some their arms, How much the Heathen have detested whordome.
legs and hands, some put out their eyes, some burn them in the face, some cut
of their noses, some one part of their body, some another, and some with one
kind of torture, and some with another: but none leaves them unpunished:
Sundery punishments of whordome amongst the Heathen.
so that we are set to school to learn our first rudiments (like yung Nouices
or Children scarce crept out of the shel,) how to punish whordome, even by the
unreasonable creatures and by the heathen people who are ignorant of the divine
goodness.


God be merciful unto us.

Spud. I pray you rehearse some places out of the word of God, wherein this
cursed vice of whordome is forbidden, for my better instruction.


Philo. Our Savior Christ in the eight of John speaking to the woman,
Testimonies out of the word of god wherein whordome is forbid,
whom the malicion^^ Jews had apprehended in adultery, bad her go her way and
sin no more. If it had not been a most grievous sin, he would never have bid
her to sin therein no more.

In the fifth of Matthew he says, who so lusts after a woman in his heart, has
committed the fact already, and therefore is guilty of death for the same. Mat.
5.
To the Pharisees, asking him whether a man might not put away his wife for any
occasion? Christ answered, for no cause, save for whordome only, inferring
that whordome is so heinous a sin, as for the perpetration thereof it shall be
lawful for a man to sequester him self from his own wife and the wife from her
own husband. Mat. 19.
The Apostle Paul says, Mat. 10.
know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ, Luc. 16.
shall I then take the members of Christ (says he) and make them the members
of an whore? 1. Cor. ^.
God forbid, know ye not that he who coupleth him self with a harlot is
become one body with her? flee fornication (says he) therefore, for every sin
that a man commits is without the body, but who commits fornication
sins against his own body. And in an^other place: know you not, that your
Bodies are the temples of the holy ghost, which dwells within you? And who so
destroys the Temple of God, him shall God destory.

In an other place, he says: be not deceived, for neither Whoremonger,
Adulterer, Fornicator, incestuous person nor such like shall ever enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Again, Coni^gium honorabile est inter omnes. Marriage is
honorable amongst all men, and the bed undefiled, but whooremongers and
adulterers God shall judge. In the Revelation of Saint John it is said, that
they who were not defiled with women, do wait upon the Lamb, whether soever
he goes. The Apostle Paul wills us to be so far from fornication, that it be
not once named amongst us, as becomes Saints, with infinite such places, which
for breefnes I omit, re^erring you in the old Testament to these and such like
places, namely, the 20. of Exodus. 20. of Leuiticus. De^tronomie 22. Deutro.
27. 2. Reg. 11. Leuit. 18. Exodus. 22. Number 5. Eccle. 9. Pro. 33. Pro. 7. verse.
24.


Spud. As you have now proved by invincible testimonies of holy Scripture,
that whordome is forbidden by the Lord: so I pray you show me the greeuousnes
thereof by some severe and rare examples of Gods just judgment executed upon
the same from the beginning. Genesis 7. 8.



Philo. The whole world was destroyed with water, Punishments of whordom in all
Ages.
not any living thing left upon the earth, (save in ye Ark of Noath) for the sin
of whordo^ incest and brothelry used in those days. Sodoma and Gomorra two
famous Cities were consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven for the like
sin of whordom adultery and fornication. Genesis. 19.
The city of ye Sichemits, Genesis. 24.
man, woman and child wear put to the edge of the sword, for the rauishing
of Dina the daughter of Jacob. The Lord also told Abimelech, that if he did
not let go untouched Sara, Abraham his wife, Genesis. 20.
both he and all his household should dye the death, notwithstanding he did it
ignorauntly. Ge. 26.
The very same happened to Isaac also. Ge. 18.
Judas understanding that his daughter in law was impregnate and great with
child, and not knowing by whom, comm^nded that she should be burned without
any further delay. 2. Reg. 16.
Was not Absalon, king David his son plagued all his life for going into his
Fathers Concubines? And did not Achitophel who gave council so to do hang
himself? Was not Ruben the first borne son of Jacob, Ge. 29.
accursed for going up to his Fathers bed, and lost he not his birthright, his
dignity and primacie over his Brethren for the same? Were there not abooue
threescore and five thousand men slain for the adultery done with one Leuits
wife? Iudi. 20.
Was not king David punished all y^ days of his life for his adultery done
with Bersabe, Vrias his wife? 2. Reg 13. 12.
Was not his son Amon, for lying with Thamar, slain? Was not Solomon being
perverted with hethen women cast out of the favor of GOD, 1. Reg. 1^.
notwithstanding, being otherwise, the wisest Prince in all the world? Did not
Achab at the persuasions of Iesabel, 3. Reg. 2^.
his cursed wife, falling to Idolatry and woorshiping of Idolles and devils,
suffer most cruel punishment in this life all his days, besides what he
suffers now God only knows. Were not the Israelite, Nume. 25.
and Madianitish woman both slain by that worthy man Phinees, who ran them
both through the privy members with his Iauelin or sword? Iud. 16.
Was not Sampson brought to a miserable end, his eyes being both put out, and
he made to be a laughing stock to all men, through his too much favoring of
wanto^ women? (...). 22.
Was not king Pharao wunderfully plagued for but intending evil in his heart
toward Sara Abraham his wife? Did not the Lord slay (with a most grievous
mortality) four and twenty thousand of ye Israelites in one day, for
whordome and adultery with the women of the Moabites and Madianits?

By these and such like fearful Examples of the justice of God powered upon
these whoremongers and adultrers, we may learn to know the greeuousnes of the
same, and the punishment due to all whoremongers and fornicatours either in
this life, or in the World to come, or else in both: for if the Lord defer the
punishment of whordome in this life, he reseruet^ it for the world to come,
suffering the wicked to wallow in their sin, and to fill up the measure of
iniquity, that their damnation may be just. And if the Lord l^ft not sin
unpunished, no, not in his most deer Saints, what he will do in them who daily
crucify him a new, let the world judge?


Spud. Now am I fully persuaded by your invincible reasons, that there is no
sin greater before the face of God, then whordome, wherefore, God grant that
all his may avoid it.


Philo. You have said true, for there is no sin (almost) comparable unto it,
for besides that, it brings everlasting damnation to all that live therein to
the end, without repentance, it also brings What ^ui whordome brings to
man's body in th^s life.
these inconveniences, with many mo, vidilicet, it dimmeth the sight, it
impaireth the hearing, it infirmeth ye sinews, it weakneth the joints, it
exhausteth the marow, consumes the moisture and suppleme^t of the body, it
riueleth the face, appalleth the countenance, it dulleth ye spirits, it hurts
the memory, it weakneth y^ whole body, it brings it into a consu^ption, it
brings vlcerations, scab, scurf, blain, botch, pocks and biles, it makes
hoare hairs, and bald pates: it induces old age, and in fin^, brings death
before nature urge it, malady enforce it, or age require it.


Sp. Seeing y^ whordome brings such sour sauce with it, namely, death
everlasting after this life, and so many disco^modities besides in this life, I
wunder that men* dare commit the same so securely as they do now a days?


Philo. It is so little feared in Ailgna, that until every one has two or
three Bastardes a piece, they esteem him no man, (for that, they call a man's
deed) insomuch as every s^uruie boy of twelve, (...).
sixteen or twenty years of age will make no conscience of it, to have two or
three, peradventure half a dosen several women with child at once, and this
exploite being done, he shows them a fair pair of heels, and away goes he,
Euro volociu^, as quick as a B^e (as they say) into some strange place where he
is not known where, how he lives, let the wise judge, for coelum non animum
mut (...) qui trans mare currunt, though they ch^u^ge their place of abode,
Whormongers ^unagates.
yet their naughty dispositions they retain still.

Then having estraunged them selves thus for a small space, they return
again, not to their pristine cursed life I dare say, but unto their country,
and then no man may say, black is their eye, but all is well, and they as good
christians as those that suffer them unpunished.


Spud. The state and condition of that Country is most miserable if it be true
you report, it wear much better that every one had his lawful wife, and every
woman her lawful husband, as the Apostle commands, then thus to bedrowned in
the filthy sin of whordome.


Philo. That is the only salve and sovereign remedy, which the lord ordained
against whordome, M^riage, an antidotarie against Whordome.
that those who have not the gift of continencis might mary, and so keep their
vessels undefiled to the Lord. But notwithstanding, in Ailgna there is over
great liberty permitted therein: for little infants, Maring of infants in
swaddling cloths.
in swaddling clowts, are often married by their ambicious Parents and friends,
when they know neither good nor ^uill, and this is the origene of much
wickedness, and directly against the word of God, and examples of the
primityue age. And besides this, you shall have every saucy boy, Every Boy
snatcheth up a Woman to wife..
of x.xiiij. xvi. or xx. years of age, to catch up a woman and marie her,
without any fear of God at all, or respect had, either to her religion,
wisdom, integrity of life, or any other virtue, or which is more, without any
respect how they may live together with sufficient maintenance for their
callings and estat. No no, it makes no matter for these things, so he have his
pretty pussie to huggle withal, it forces not, for that is the only thing he
desires. Than build they up a cotage, though but of elder poals, in every lane
end, almost, where they live as beggars al their life. This fills the land
with such store of poor people, that in short time (except some caution be
provided to prevent the same) it is like to grow to great poverty and
scarsnes, which GOD forbid.


Sp. I cannot see how this gear should be helped? A restraint of marriage.



Ph. What if a restraint were made, y^ none (except upon special and vrgente
causes) should marie before they come to xx. or xxiiij. years, or at ye least,
before they be.xiiij. or xviij years old, would not this make fewer beggars,
than now there are?


Sp. But if this were established, tha^ should we have more Bastards, and of the
two, I had rather we had many legittimats, than many illegittimates.


Philo. The occasion of begetting of many^ Bastards were soon cut of, How
whordome may be suppressed.
if the punishment which either God his law does allow, or else which good
policy does constitute, were aggrauated, and executed upon the Offenders.

For the punishment appointed for whordom now is so light, The punishment for
whordome over remiss.
that they esteem not of it, they fear it not, they make but a jest of it.
For what great thing is it, to go ij. or three days in a white sheet before
the congregation, and that somtymes not past an hour or two in a day, having
their vsnall garments underneath, as commonly they have? This impunitie (i^
respect of condign punishment, which that vice requires) does rather
animate and imbolden them to the act, than fear them from it. In so much, as
I have heard so^e miscreants impudently say, that he is but a ^east, that for
such white lyuered punishment would abstain from such gallant pastyme: but
certain it is, that they who think it such sweet meat here, shall find the
sauce sour and stiptick enough in Hell.


Spud. What punishment would you have inflicted upon such as commit this
horrible kind of sin?


Philo. I would wish that the Man or Woman who are certenlye known without all
scruple or doubt, What kind of punishment whordome ought to have.
to have committed the horrible fact of whordome, adultery, incest, or
fornication, either should drink a full draught of Moses cup, that is, ^ast
of present death* or else, if y^ be thought too severe (for in evil, men will
be more merciful, than the Author of mercy him self, but in goodness, fare
well mercy,) than would GOD they might be cauterized, and seared with a hot
iron on the cheek, forehead, or some other part of their body that might be
seen, to the end the honest and chaste Christians might be discerned from the
adulterous Children of Satan: But (alas) this vice (with the rest) wants
such due punishment, as GOD his Word does command to be executed there upon.

The Magistrates wincke at it, or else as looking through their fingers, they
see it, and will not see it.

And therefore, the Lord is forced too take the sword into his own hands, and
to execute punishment him self, because the Magistrates will not.

For better proof whereof mark this strange and fearful judgment of god showed
upon two adulterous persons there, even ye last day in effect, y^ remembrance
whereof is yet green in their heds.

There was a man whose name was W. Ratsurb, being certainly known to be a
notorious vserer (and yet pretending always a singular zeal to religion, so
that he would seldom times go without a bible about him, but see the judgments
of God upon them that will take his word in their mouths, and yet live clean
contrary, making the word of God a cloak to cover their sin and naughtynesse
withal) who upon occasion of business visiting Lewedirb a place appointed for
the correction of such that be wicked lyuers, saw there a famous whore, but a
very proper Woman, who^ (as is said) he knew not, but whether he did, or not,
certain it is, that he procured her delyuery from thence, bayled her, and having
put away his own wife before, kept her in his chamber, using her at his
pleasure. Whylest these two members of ye devil were playing the vile Sodomits
together in his chamber, and having a little pan of coals before them wherein was
a very little fire, it pleased GOD even in his wrath, to strike these two
persons dead in a moment. The Woman falling over the pan of coals, was burned
that all her bowels gushed out, the man was found lying by, his cloths in some
parts being scorched and burned, and some parts of his body also. But which
is most wonderful, his arm was burned to the very boon, his shirte sleeue,
and dublet, not once perished, nor tutched with the fire. Whereby may be thought
and not without great probability of truth, that it was eue^ the fire of God
his wrath from Heaven, and not any natural fire from the earth. And in this
wonderful, and fearful manner wear these cupple found: which God grant may
be a docume^t to all ye hear or read the same, to avoyde the like offense, and
to all Magistrates, an Example to see the same punished with more severity, to
the glory of God, and their own discharge.

But so far are some, from suffering condign punishment for this horrible
sin, that they get good maintenance with practicing the same. For shall you
not have some, yea many thousands, that live upon nothing else, and yet go
clothed Gentlewomenlike, both in their silks and otherwise, with their fingers
clogged with rings, their wrists with bracelets, and Jewels, and their purses
full of gold and silver? And here of they make no conscience, so their Husbands
know it not. Or if they do, some are such peasants, and such maycocks, that
either they will not, or (which is truer) they dare not reprove them for it.
But and if the Husband once reprove them for their misdemeanour, than they
conspire his death, by some mean or other. And all this comes to pass,
because the punishment thereof is no extremer, as it ought to be. And some both
Gentlemen and others (whereof some I know) are so nusled herein, that having put
away their own wives, do keep whores openly, without any great punishment
for it, and having be^ne conuented before the magistery, and there been
deposed upon a book to put away their whores, have put them forth at one
door, and taken them in at the other.

And thus they dally in their oaths with the Lord, and stop the course of the
law, with rubrum argentum, whereof they have store to bestow upon such
wickedness, but have not a mite to give toward any good purpose.

Wherefore, in the name of GOD, let all men that have put away their honest
wives be forced to take them again, and abandon all whores, or else to taste of
the law. And let all whores, be cut of with the sword of right judgment. For,
as long as this immunitie and impunitie is permitted amongst us, let us never
look to please GOD, but rather pro^oke his heuie judgments against us. And
the reason is, for that there is not sin in all the World, but these whores,
and whoremaisters will willingly attempt, and atcheiue, for the inioying of
their whordome?

And Hell, destruction, and death everlasting is the guerdon thereof, and yet
men cannot be aware of it. The Lord remove it from all his Children, and
present them blameles before his tribunal seat, without spotte, or wrincle at
that great day of the Lord.


Spud. What memorable thing else have you seen there frequented* For seeing you
have begun, in part, I pray you describe the whole?


Gluttony and drunkenness in Ailg.
Philo. I Have seen that which greeueth me to report. The People there are
marueilously given to dainty fare, gluttonye, bellicheer, and many also to
drunkenness, and gourmandice. Dainty fare, gluttony and gourmandice used in
Ailg.



Sp. That is a manifest argument of good hospitality, which both is commended
in y^ word of God, and which* I know you will not reprehe^de.


Ph. Godly hospitality Godly hospitality to be commended.
is a thing in no wis^ worthy of reprehensio^, but rather of great
co^mendatio^, for many have received Angels into their houses, at vnawar^s, by
using y^ same, as Abraham, Lot, Tobras, and many others. Yet if hospitality
flow over into superfluity and riotous excess, it is not tolerable: for now
adays if ye table be not covered from the one end to y^ other as thick as one
dish can stand by another, with delicat meats of sundry sorts, one clean
different from an other, Variety of dishes, and meats, with their curious
sawces.
and to every dish a s^uerall sauce appropriat to his kind, it is thought
there unworthy y^ name of a dinner. Yea so many dishes shall you have
posteruing the table at once, as the insaciablest Helluo, the deuouringest
glutton, or the greediest cormorant that is, can scarce eat of every one a
little. And these many shall you have at the first course, Excess of meats.
as many at the second, and perad^entu^e, more at the third, besides other sweet
(...), and delicat (...), of spiceries, and I cannot tell what. And to these
dainties, all kind of wynes are not wanting, you may be sure. Oh what nisitie
is this? what vanity* excess, riot, and superfluity is hear? Oh* farewell
former world? For I have heard my Father say, The austerity and Godly
simplicity of the former World in meats, and drinke^.
y^ in his days, one dish, or two of good wholesome meat was thought
sufficient, for a man of great worship to dyne withal, and if they had three
or four kinds, it was reputed a sumptuous feast. A good piece of beef was
thought tha^, good meat, and able for the best, but ^ow, it is thought too
gross: for their tender stomachs are not able to digest such crude and harsh
meats: For if they should (their stomachs being so que^sie as they be, Nice,
tender stomachs.
and not able to concoct it) they should but euacuat the same again, as other
filthy excrements, their bodies receiving no noorishment thereby, or else they
should lie stinking in their stomachs, as dirte in a filthy sinck or pryuie.
If this be so, I marvel how our Forefathers lived, The faraginie or rough
fare of our Forefathers.
who eat little else, but cold meats, gross and hard of disgesture? Yea, the
most of them fead upon grain, corn, roots, pulse, herbs, we^ds, and such
other baggage, and yet lived longer then we, helthfuller then we, were of
better complexion then we, and much stronger then we in every respect:
wherefore I cannot persuade my self otherwise, but that our nicenes and
curiousnes in diet, has altered our nature, distempered our bodies, Our nice
fare has altered our bodies and changed our nature.
and made us more subject to millions of discrasies and diseases, then ever
wear our Forefathers subject unto, and consequently of shorter life then they.


Spud. They will ask you again, wherefore god made such variety of meats, but
to be eaten of men, what answer give you to that?


Philo. The Lord our God ordained indeed, the use of meat and drinks for man
to sustain the frail, caduke and brittle estate of his mortal body withal
for a time. Medietie to be observed in meats.
But he gave it him not to delight and wallow therein continually, for as the
old Adage says, Non viuendum vt edamus, sed edendum vt viuamus. We must not
live to eat, but we must eat to live, we must not swill and ingurgitate our
stomachs so full, as no more can be crammed in. The Lord willed that they should
be ordinary means to preserve the state of our bodies a time whilste we live,
and soiourne in this vaste wilderness of the world, but not that they should be
instruments of destuction to us both of body and soul. When meats and drinks
are Instruments of destruction unto us.
And truly they are no less, when they are taken immoderatly without the
fear of God. And does not the impletion and sacietie of meats and drinks
provoke lust, as, Hiero says, Venture Mero estuans, spumat in libidinem, the
belly enflamed with wine, bursteth forth into lust. Does not lust bring forth
sin, Ge. 24.
and sin bring forth death? The Children of Isr^el, giving them selves to
delicat (...) and gluttony, fell to Idolatry, (...) and (...), worshipping
stocks stones and devils in-sted of the living God.

The ^onnes of (...) the Priest, giving themselves to dainty (...) and
belly-cheere, 1. Reg. 2.
fell into such (...), as the Lord sl^w them all, and their father also, for
that he chastised them not for the same* The Children of blessed Job in midst
of all their banquetings and riot, were slain by the lord, the whole house
falling upon them, and destroying them most piti^ully. Bal^hasar, king of the
Chaldeans, Daniel. 5.
in midst of all his good cheer, Verse. 5.
saw a hand, writing upon the wall these words, mean techel upha^sin:
signifiing y^ his kingdom should be taken from him, and so it was, and he
slain the same night by the hand of y^ lord. The rich glutton in the Gospel,
for his riotous feastings and proposterous living was condemned to ye fire of
hell. Luc. 16.
Our Father Adam with all his offspring (to the end or ye world) was condemned
to hel-fire, for taking one apple to satisfy his glotonus desire withal. Mat.
4.
Gluttony was one of the chiefest canons, wherewith the devil assa^led Christ,
thinking thereby to batter his kingdom and to win the feeld for ever, yet not
withstanding, ye greeuousnes heerof, the same is thought to be a coutena^ce,
and a great credit to a man in Ailg. But true hospitality consists not in
many dishes nor in sundry sorts of meats (the substance whereof is changed
almost into accidents through their curious cookries, and which do help to rot
y^ bodies and shorten their days. but rather in giving liberally to the poor,
Wherein hospitality consists.
and indigent members of Jesus Christ, helping them to meat, drink, lodging,
clothing and such other necessaries whereof they stand in need.

But such is their hospitality y^ the poor have ye least part of it: you shall
have 20. 40. 60, yea, a C.li. spent in some one house in ba^queting and
festing, yet y^ poor shall have little or nothing, The small leef of the poor.
if they have any thing, it is but ye refuge meat, scraps and patrings, such as
a dog would scarce eat so^times, and well if they can get y^ too: insted whereof,
not a few have whipping cheerto feed the^ withal: it is counted but a small
matter for a man that can scarslie dispend forty pound by the year, to bestow
against one time, ten or twenty pound thereof in spices. And truly so long and
so grievously has this excess of gluttony and dainty fare su^ffeted in
Ailgna, as I fear me, it will sp^e out many of his Masters ou^ of doors
before it be long. But as some be over largeous, so other some are spare
enough, for when any meat is stirring Locking up of Gates whemeat is stirring.
then lock they up their gates, that no man may come in. An-other sort have so
many houses, that they visit them once in vij. year, many Chimnies, but little
smoke, fair houses, but small hospitality. And to be plain, there are three
cankers which in proc^sse of time will eat up the whole commonwealth, if speedy
reformation be not had, namely, Three devouring Cankers
dainty Fare, gorgious Buildings, and sumptuous Apparel, which three Abuses,
especially, yet not without their cousin germans do flourish there. God remove
them thence for his Christ's sake.


Spud. I had thought that dainty fare and good cheer had both noorished ye body
perfectly, and also prolo^ged life, and does it not so think you?


Philo. Experience, Who more subject to infirmit^es then they that fare best.
as my former intimations you may gather, teaches clean contrary: for who is
sicklier the^ they, that fare deliciously every day? who is corrupter? who
bel^heth more, who looks wursse, who is weaker, and feebler then they? who
has more filthy color, phlegm and putrefaction (repleat with gross humors)
then they? and to be breef, who dies sooner then they? Do we not see the
poor man that eats brown bread (whereof some is made of Rye, barlie, peason,
beans oats and such other gross grains) and drinks small drink, yea
sometimes water, feeds upon milk, butter and cheese, (I say) do we not see
such a one, helthfuller, stronger and longer living then the other, that fare
daintily every day? And how should it be otherwise? for will not the eating of
diverse and sundry kinds of meats of diverse operations and qualities (at one
meal) engender distemperance in the body? And the body distempered, (...)
will it not fall into sundry deseases? one meat is of hard disgesture, another
of light, and whilst the meat of hard disgesture is in concocti^g the other
meat of light disgesture does putrify and stink, and this is the very mother
of all diseases: one is of this quality, another of y^, one of this operation,
another of that, one kind of meat is good for this thing, another is naught for
that. Then how can all these contrarieties and discripancies agree together in
one body at one and the same time? will not one c^ntrary impugn his contrary?
one enemy resist an other; Then what wiseman is he that will receive allthese
enemies into the castle of his body at one time? Do we not se by experie^c^
that they y^ give themselves to dainty fare, The spedy ^ecay of those that give
the^ ^elues to ^aintie fare.
and sweet meats, are never in health? does not their sight wax dim, their
ears hard of hering, their teeth rot and fall out? does not their breath
stink, their stomach belch forth filthy humors, and their memory decay? do
not their spirits and senses beco^e heuie and dull by reason of exhalations and
impure vapors which rise up in their gingered breasts and spiced stomachs: and
sumyng up to ye head they mortify ye vital spirits and intellectiue powers?
does not ye whole body become pursie and corpulent, yea sometimes decrepit
therewith and full of all filthy corruption. The Lord keep his chosen from the
tasting thereof.


Sp. You spoke of dr^ke^nes, what say you of y^?


Phi. I say, ye it is a horrible vice and too too much used in Ail. Every
cu^trey, city, town, villaged and other, has abundance of alehouses, taue^ns
and I^nes, which are so fraughted with mault-wormes night and day, that you
would wunder to se them. You shal^haue them there sitting at ye wine, and
goodale all the day long, yea all the night too, peradventure a whole week
together, The beastly vice of drunknees requen^ed in Ailg
so long as any money is left, swilling, gulling and carowsing from one to an
other, til never a one can speak a ready word. Then when with the spirit of the
buttery they are thus possess^d, a world it is to consider t^eir gestures and
dem^nors, how they stut and sta^mer, stagger and reele too and fro, like
madmen, some vomiting spewing and disgorging their filthy stomachs, other some
(Honor sit auribus) piss^ng under the board as they sit, and which is most
horrible, some fall to swering, cursing and ^a^ning, The spirit of the
buttery, is drunknes, and excess.
interlacing their speeches we curious terms of blasphemy to ye great
dishonor of God and offense of the godly ears present.


Sp. But they will say y^ god ordained wines and strong drinks to cheer y^ heart,
and to sustain the body therefore it is lawful to use the^ to ye end. The
Iothsome qualities of those that be drunk.



Phi. Meats (moderatly taken) corroborate ye body, re^resh ye arteries, and
revive the spirits, making them apier every member to do his office as god
has appointed: but being immoderatly taken (as commonly they be) they are
instruments to damnation to ye abusers of ye same, and noorish not ye body but
corrupt it rather, and casts it into a world of deseases: And a man once
drunk with wine or strong drink, rather resembles a brute beast, The
transsiguration of those that (...) drunk.
then a christian man: for do not his eyes begin to stare and to be red, fiery
and blered, blubbering ^oorth seas of tears? does he not frothe and foam at
the mouth like a bore? does not his tung faulter and sta^mer in his mouth?
does not his head seem as heuie as a millstone, he not being able to bear it
up? Are not his wits and spirits as it were drowued? Is not his understanding
altogher decayed? do not his hands and all his body quiver and shake as it
were with a quotidia^ fever? Besides these, it cast^th him into adropsie or
pluresie nothing so soon, it infeebleth the sinews, it weakneth y^ natural
strength, it corrupts the blood, The discommodities of drunkenness.
it dissolueth ye whole man at ye length, and finally makes him forgetful of
him self altogether, so that what be does being drunk he remembers not being
sober. The Drunkard in his drunkenness kills his friend, reuileth his lover,
discloseth secrets and regards no man: he either expels all fear of god
out of his mind, all love of his friends and kinsfolks, all remembrance of
honesty, civility and humanity: so that I will not fear to call drunkerds
beasts, and no men, and much wursse then beasts, Drunkerds wursse then Beasts.
for beasts never exceed in such kind of excess, or superfluity, but always
modum adhibent appetitum, they measure their appetites by the rule of
necessity, which would God we would do.


Spud. Seeing it is so great an offense before God, I pray you show me some
testimonies of the holy Scripture against it, for whatsoever is evil, ye word
of God I doubt not reproves the same.


Philo. It seems you have not read ye holy fcripture very much, for if you
had, you should have found it not only spoke against, but all^ throwe^ down
even to hell, for proof whereof of infinite places, I will recite a few. The
Prophet Esaias thundereth out against it, Esais. 5.
saying, ve qui consurgitis mane ad ebrietate^ sectanda^

Woe be to them that rise early to follow drunkenness, Testimonies against
drunkenness, out of the word of GOD.
wallowing therein, from morning to night, until they be set on fire with wine
and strong drink. Therefore gapeth heil, and ^peneth her mouth wide, that the
glory, multitude, and wealth of them that delight therein, may go down into it,
says the Prophet.

The Prophet Hoseas Hoseas. c. 4.
says, fornicatio, vinu^, and mustum auferunt animum, Whordome, wine and
strong drink infatuat ye heart of man.

The Prophet Joel, Joel. 1.
bids all Drunkards awake, saying, weep and howl you winebi^bers, for the
wickedness of destruction that shall fall upon you.

The Prophet Habacuck, Habacuck. 2.
sounds a most dreadful alarm, not only to all Drunkards, but also to all
that make them drunken saying: woe be to him that gives his Neighbor drink,
till he be drunk, that thou may see his priuities. Solomon says, Proverb.
c. ^^.
wine makes a Man to be scornful, and strong drink makes a Man unquiet, who
so takes pleasure in it, shall not be wise. In an other place, keep not
company with wynebibbers, and riotous Persons, for such as be Drunkards shall
come to beggerie. In the xxiij. of his Proverbs Proverb. 23.
he says. To whom is woo? To whom is sorrow? to whom is strife? to whom is
murmuring? to whom are wounds without cause? and to whom are red eyes? Even
to the^ that tarry long at the wine, to them that go, and seek mixed wine. And
again: Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, and when it shows his
color in the cup or gooth down pleasantly, for in the end, it will bite like
a serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrise, Proverb. 31.
or Basilicock, which slay or kill men with the poison of their sight. Again,
it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes to drink strong drink.
Luc. 21.
Our Savior Christ in the gospel of of S. Luke bids us take heed that we
be not overcome with surffeting and drunknes and cares of this life, least the
day of the Lord come upon us unawares.

Paul to the Ephesians Ephe. 5.
bids beware that we be not dru^k with wine, wherein is excess, but to be
filled with ye spirit. The same apostle in an other place, says, y^ neither
whoremo^ger adulterer, Drunkard, glutton, ryotous person, nor such like, shall
ever enter into ye kingdom of Heaven. By these few places out of many, you may
see the inormitie of this vice, which is so much every where frequented.


Spud. Let me entreat you to show me some examples withal, whereby I may see,
what evil it has done in all ages?


Philo. Gene. 19.
Drunknes caused Lot to commit most shameful incest with his own two
Daughters, who got them both with Child, he not perceuing it, neither when they
lay down, nor when they rose up. See how drunkenness Examples against
drunkenness.
assotteth a man, depriving him of all sense, reason and understanding.

Drunkenness caused Noah to lie with his priuities bare in his Tabernacle, in
such beastly sort, as his wicked Son Cham iested and ^coffed at the same.

Through drunkenness, Holophernes, that great and invincible Monarche of the
Assyrians, was overcome by a Woman, having his head cut from his shoulders with
a fauchone. Through drunkenness, Luc. 16.
King Herod was brought to such ydiocie, and foolish dotage, that he caused
the head of good Ihon Baptist, to be cut of, to satis^ie the request of a
dancing strumpet. Luc. 16.
That rich Epulo of whom Luke makes mention, was for his drunkenness, and
ryotous excess condemned to the fire of Hell for ever, with many more examples,
which for shortness I omit. Now seeing than that drunke^nesse is both offensive
to GOD, and brings such euil^s in this life present, let us in the name of
GOD avoid it, as a most wicked thing, and prenicious evil. For every Dr^nkard
is so far estranged from himself, How far Drunkards are estranged from
themselves.
that as one in an ecstasy of mind, or rather in a plain Frenzy, he may not
be said to be, sui animi compos, or a man of sound wit, but rather a very
Bedlem, or much worse, no Christian, but an Antichristian, no member of Christ
Jesus, but an impe of Satan, and a lymme of the Devil. Wherefore, in the name
of God, let us avoid al excess, embrace temperancie, and sobriety, and
receive so much meats and drinks as may satisfy nature, not the insaciat
appetits of our fleshly desires. Knowing that except the Lord bless our meats
and drinks within our bodies, and give them power and strength to nourish and
feed the same, Wh^t if God bless not our meats.
and our bodies their natural powers, every member to do his office, and
duty, our meats shall lie in our stomachs stinking, smelling, and rotting
like filthy carrion in a lothsom sinck. So far of ought we to be from abusing
the good creaturs of God, by riot, drunknesse, or excess, that we ought never
to take morsel of bread, nor soap of drink, without humble thanks to ye Lord
for the same. For we never read, that our Savior Christ ever eat, Giving of
thanks before meat, and after.
or drank, but he gave thanks (or as we call it, said grace) both before the
receipt thereof, and after. This needed he not to have done in respect of
himself, but for our erudition and learning, according to this saying. omnis
Christi actio, nostra est instructio. Every action of our Savior Christ is
our example and instruction, to follow as near as we are able. And thus much
of dru^kenesse, which god grant may every where be avoided.


Spud. Show me I pray you ye state of that Country a^litle further: is it a
welthie Country with in it self, or otherwise poor and bare?


Philo. It is a most famous Yland, a fertile Country, Ailgra a famous Yland.
and abounding with all manner of store both of riches, treasure, and all things
else whatsoever, but as it is a welthie and rich Country, so are the
inhabitaunts from the highest, to the lowest, from the priest, to the populare
sort, even all in general, wonderfully inclyned to covetousness, and ambition,
which thing, whilst they follow, they ca^ never be satisfied: for, erescit
amor nummi, quantu^ ipsa pecunia crescit. The love of money, does by so much the
more increase, by how much more ye money it self does increase: and ye nature
of a covetous man is such, The nature of a couetou^ man.
that tam deest quod habet, quam quod non habet: as well that thing which he
has, as y^ which he has not, is wanting unto him. A couetouse man may well be
compared to Hell, which ever gapeth and yawneth for more, and is never content
with enough. For right as Hell ever hunteth after more, so a covetous man
drowned in the quagmire, The insaciable desire of a couetouse man.
or plash of avarice and ambition, having his summam voluptatem reposed in
momentaine riches, is never content with enough, but still thirsts for more,
much like to a man sick of the ague, who the more he drinks, the more he
thurteth: the more he thursteth, the more he drinks: the more he drinks, y^
more his disease increases: Therefore I hold it true, which is writ, bursa
auari os est diaboli the powch of a rich covetous Man, The purse of a rich Man.
is the mouth of the devil, which ever is open to receive, but always shut to
give.


Spud. But they will easily wipe away this blot, namely in saying, are we not
bound to provide for our selves, our wives, our children and famelie* Does not
the Apostle hold him for an infidel and a deneger of the faith, who prouydeth
not for his Wife and Family? Is it not good to lay vpsomthing against a stormy
day? wherefore, they will rather deem themselves good husbands, than covetous or
ambicious persons.


Philo. Every Christen Man is bound in conscience before God, How far every
Man is bound to provide for his Family.
to provide for their household and Family, but yet so as his immoderat care
surpass not the bands, nor yet transcend the limits of true Godlynes His
chiefest trust and care is to rest only in the Lord, who gives liberally to
every one y^ asks of him in verity and truth, and reprocheth no man, and
withal he is to use such ordinary means, as God has appointed* to y^
performaunce of ye same. But so far from covetousness and from immoderate care
would ye Lord have us, Immoderate care for riches reproved.
y^ we ought not this day to care for to morrow, for (says he) sufficient to ye
day, is the trauail of the same. After all these things (with a distrustful,
and inordinat care) do the heathen seek, who know not God, says our Savior
christ, but be you not like to the^. And yet I say, as we are not to distrust
the providence of God, or despair for any thing, so are we not to presume, nor
yet to tempt the Lord our God, but to use such secundary and instrumental
means, as he has commanded and appointed to y^ end and purpose, to get our
own living and maintenance withal. But this people leaving these Godly
means, do all run headlo^g to covetousness and ambition, atte^pting all
ways, and assaying al means possible to exaggerat and heap up riches, ye
thick clay of damnation to themselves for ever. So (likewise) La^d-lords make
merchandise of their pore tena^ts, Landlords rack their tenantes.
racking their rents, raising their fines and inco^mes, and setting the^ so
straitely upon ye te^ter hooks, as no man ca^ live on them. Besides y^, as
though this pillage and pollage, were not rapacious enough, they take in,
Enclosing of common^ from the Poor.
and enclose commons, moors, heaths, and other common pastures, where out the
poor commonaltie were wont to have all their forage and feeding for their
cattle, and (which is more) corn for them selves to live upon: all which are
now in most places taken from them, by these greedye Puttockes, to the great
impouerishing and utter beggering of whole towns and parishes, whose tragical
cries and incessant clamors have long since, pierced the Skies, and presented
them selves before the Majesty of God, saying: how long Lord, how long will thou defer, to revenge this villainy of thy poor Sainctts, and unworthy
members upon the earth? Take heed therefore you rich men, that poll and pill
the poor, for the blood of as many as miscarie any manner of way, through your
injurious exactions, sinister oppressions, and indirect dealings shall be
powered upon your heads at the great day of the Lord, Cursed is he (says our
Savior Christ) that offends one of these little ones, it were better that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, Injury to Christ his members, is injury
to Ch^^st.
and he cast into ye midst of the sea. Christ so entierely loves his poor
members upon earth, that he imputes the contumely which is done to any one
of them, to be done to himself, and will revenge it, as done to himself:
wherefore, GOD give them grace to lay open their enclosures again, to let fall
their rents, fines, incommes and other impositions, whereby GOD is offended,
their poor Brethren beggered, and I fear me, ye whole realm will be brought
to utter ruin and decay, if this mischief be not met withal, Inclos^res.
and inco^^tred with very shortly. For these enclosures be the causes, why
rich men, eat up poor men, as beasts do eat grass. These I say are the
Caterpillars, and devouring locustes that massacre the poor, and eat up ye
whole realm to ye destruction of the same: The Lord remove them.

Upon the other side, the Lawyers they go rufling in their silks, veluets and
chains of Gold, they build gorgeous howses, Lawyers rufling io poor Men's
riches.
sumptuous edefices, and stately turrets: they keep a port like mighty
pote^tates, they have bands and retinewes of men attendant upon them daily,
they purchase castles and towers, Lands and Lordships, and what not? And all
upon the polling and pilling of the poor commons.

They have so good consciences, that all is fish, that comes to the net, they
refuse nothing that is offered, and what they do for it in preferring their
Poor clients cause, the Lord knows, and one day they shall find it: If you
have argent, or rather rubrum vnguentum, I dare not say Gold, but red ointment,
to grease them in the fist withal, Ointment to greese lawiers in the fist
withal.
than your suit shall want no furtherance, but if this be wanting, tha^ farewell
clyent, he may go shoe the goose for any good success he is like to have of
his matter: without this, sheriffs and Officers will return writs with a tarde
venit, or with a non est inuentus, smally to the poor ma^s profit. So long as
any of this ointme^t is dropping, they will bear him in hand, his matter is
good and just, and all to keep him in ure, till all be gone, and than will they
tell him his matter is naught: and if one ask the^ why they told not their
clie^ts so in y^ beginning: they will answer, I knew not so much at the first,
The prete^sed excuse of L^wers, when their cliants have loost their plees.
ye fault is in himself, he told me ye best, but not the worst: he showed me
not this evidence and that euidente, this president, and y^ presi^ent, turning
all the fault upon ye suggester whereas ye whole fault indeed is in himself, as
his own conscience ca^ bear him witness: In presence of their clients, they
will be so earnest one with another, The slaightie practices of lawers.
as one (that knew not their slaightes, would think they would go together by
the ears) this is to draw on their clie^ts withal (but immediately after their
clients being gone, they la^gh in their sleeves, to see how pretily they fetch
in such (...) of money, and y^ under the pretense of equity, and justice. But
though they ca^ for at^^e (prestigiatorum insta^) like cunning deceivers, cast
a mist before ye blind world, yet the Lord who sees (suborned by none) y^
secrets of all hearts shall make them manifest to all the world, The fraudulent
dealing of merchant Men.
and reward them according to their (...). The marcha^t me^ by their marting,
chaffering and changing, by their counterfeit balances and untrue waights, and
by their surprising of their wares, heap up infinite treasures. The Artificer
Artificers.
and Occupyers, even all in general, will not ^ell their wares for no
reasonable price, but will swear and tear pitifully, y^ such a thing cost
the^ so much, and such a thing so much, whereas they swear as false, as the
living Lord is true: But one day let them be sure y^ the Lord (who says, thou
shall not swear at all, nor deceive thy Brother in bargaining) will revenge
this villainy done to his Majesty. Great dearth in plenty of all things.


Into such a ruinous estat has covetousness now brought that Land, that in
plenty of all things, there is great scarsitie and dearth of all things. So,
that, that which might have been bought heretofor within this twenty, or
forty Years, for twenty shillings, is now worth twenty nobles, or xx.
pound. That which tha^ was worth twenty pound, is now worth a.C. pound, and
more: Whereby the rich Men have so balaunced their chests with Gold and silver,
as they cra^ke again. And, to such excess is this covetousness grown, as
every one y^ has money will not stick to take his neighbors house, Taking of
howses over Men's head^.
over his head, long before his years be expired: Wherthorow many a poor man,
with his wife, children, and whole famelie, are forced to beg their bread all
their days after. Another sort who flow in wealth, if a poor man have either
house or Land, they will never rest until they have purchased it, giving him
not the third part, of that it is worth. Besides all this, so desperately
given are many, The desperate desire of Men to get money
that for the acquiring of silver and Gold, they will not sick to imbrew their
hands, and both their arms in y^ blood of their own Patents and Friends most
unnaturally. Other some will not make any conscience, to swear and forswear
themselves for ever to lie, dissemble and deceive the dearest friends they have
in the world. Therefore the heathen Poet Virgill said very well: O sacra auri
fames, quid non, mortalia pectora cogis: Oh cursed desire of gold, what
mischief is it, but thou forcest Man to attempt it, for y^ love of thee? This
immoderat thirst of Gold and money, Many brought to rufull end through means of
Gold and silver.
brings an infinite number to shameful end: some, as homicides, for murdering
and killing: some as latrones, for robbing and stealing: some for one thing,
some for another: So that surely I think, mayor est numerus Ho^minum, quos dira
auaritiae pestis absorpsit, quam quos gladius vel ensis per^orauit: the number
of those whom the pestilence of avarice has swallowed up, is greatter, than
the number of those whom the sword has destroid: the Lord assuage the heat
hereof with ye oil of his grace, if it be his good pleasure and will.


Spud. If I might be so bold, I would request you to show me out of the word of
god, where this so detestable a vice is reproved?


Philo. Our Savior Christ Jesus, Math. 6.
the Archdoctor of all truth in his Euangely, Testimonies out of the word of
God against covetousness.
the sixth of Matthew, says: Be not careful for to morrow day, for the morrow
shall care for it self.

Again, be not carfull for Apparel, what you shall put on, nor for meat what
you shall eat, but seek you the Kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness
thereof, and all these things shall be given unto you. He charged his Disciples
to be so far from covetousness, Luc. 6.
as not to carry two coats with them in their journeys, Math. ix.
nor yet any money in their purses. He told his Disciples another time,
stryuing which of them should be y^ greattest, that he who would be the
greattest, must condescend to be servant of all. When the people would have
aduau^ced him to have been King, he refused it, and hid him self: He tells
us, we cannot serve two Masters, God and Mammon: he bids us not to set our
minds upon covetousness, inferring that where our riches be, there will our
hearts be also. He says, it is harder for a rich Man (that is, for a Man, whose
trust is in riches) to enter into the Kingdom of God, than for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle. The Apostle bids us if we have meat and drink
and clothing, to be centent, 1. Timo. v^.
for they that will be rich (says he) fall into diverse temptations and snares
of the Devil, which drown Men in perdition. Psalm. 39.
David says, Man disquieteth him self in vain, heaping up riches, and cannot
tell who shall possess them: Proverb. ^.
Salom. co^pareth a covetous man, to him ye murthereth and sheadeth innocent
blood. Prove. xxvii.
Again, Hell and destruction are never full, so the eyes of Men can never be
satisfied. The Apostle S. Paul, says, neither Whormo^gers, Adulterers, nor
covetous persons, nor Extortioners shall ever enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
And says further, y^ the love of money is ye root of al evil. Mat. 5.
Christ, bids us be liberal, Luc. 6.
and lend to them that have need, not looking for any restitutio^ again, and
never to turn our face away from any poor man, and tha^ ye face of the Lord
shall not be turned away from us. By these few places it is manifest how far
from al covetousness ye lord would have al cristia^s to be.


Spud. Be their any examples in scriptures to show forth the punishments of
the same, inflicted upon the Offenders therein?


Philo. The Scripture is full of such fearful examples, The punishmen of
covetousness showed by examples.
of the just judgments of God powered upon the^ that have offended herein.
Whereof I will recite three or four, for the satisfying of your Godly mind.
Adam, was cast out of Paradise for coveting that fruit, which was inhibited him
to eat. Giese, the Servant of Elizeus ye Prophet, 4. Reg. 5.
was smitten with an incurable leprosy, for y^ he to satisfy his covetous
desire, exacted gold, silver, and rich garments of Naama^ ye K. of Siria his
servant. Balaam was reproved of his ass, Number. 22.
for his covetousness in going to curse ye Children of Israel, at the request of
K. Balac, who promised him abundance of gold and silver so to do. Achab y^ K.
for covetousness to have pore Naboth his viniard slew him and dyed after
himself, with all his progeny, a shameful death. The Sons of Samuel were for
their infaciable covetousness, Sa. viii.
detained from ever inioying their Fathers kingdom. Judas for covetousness of
money sold the Savior of the world, and betrayed him to the Jews, but
afterward dyed a miserable death, his bellye bursting and his bowels gushing
out. Ananias and Saphira his wi^e, Act. v.
for covetousness, in co^cealing part of y^ price of there lands from y^
apostles, were both slain, and died a fearful death. Acha^ was stoned to death
by y^ lord his commandment for his covetousness in stealing gold, silver, and
Jewels, at the sacking of Jericho, and al his goods were burned presently. Thus
you see how for covetousness of money, in all ages, Men have made shipwreck of
their consciences, and in the end by the just judgment of God have dyed
fearful deaths whose iudgmente I leave to the Lord.


Spud. S^eing that covetousness, is so wicked a sin, and so offensive both to
God and Man, and pernicious to the soul, I marvel what moves Men to follow
the same, as they do?


Ph. Two things move me^ to affect money so so much as they do: What make Men to
affect money.
y^ one, for fear least they should fall into poverty and beggary (oh
ridiculous infidelity) ye other, to be advanced, and promoted to high
dignities and honors upon earth. And they see, ye world is such, ye he who has
moni enough shall be rabbied and maistered at every word, and the vain title of
worshipful, and right worshipful, though notwithstanding he be a dunghill
Gentleman, or a Gentleman of the first head, as they use to term them. And to
such outrage is it grown that now adays every Butcher, Every Beggar almost is
called Master at every word.
Shooemaker, Tailer, Cobbler, Husbandman, and other, yea every Tinker, peddler
and swinherd, every Artificer and other, gregarii ordinis, of the vilest sort
of Men that be, must be called by ye vain name of Masters at every word. But
it is certain, that no wise Man, will entitle them, with any of these names,
worshipful and master (for they are names and titles of dignity, proper to
ye Godly wise, for some special virtue inherent, either else in respect of
their birth, or calling due unto the^,) but such Titiuillers, flattering
Parasits, and glosing Gnatoes, as flatter them, expecting some pleasure or
benefit at their hands, which thing if they were not blown up with the
bellows of pride, and puffed up with the wind of vainglori they might easily
perceive. For certain it is, they do but mock and flatter them with these
titles, Refusing of ^aine Titles.
knowing that they deserve nothing less. Wherefore, like good Recusants of that
thing which is evil, they should refuse those vainglorious Names, remembering
the words of our savior Christ, saying: be not called Master, in token there
is but one only true Master and Lord in Heaven: which only true Master and
Lord: God grant all other may follow both in life and name, until they come
to perfect men in Jesus Christ.


Spud. The people being so let upon covetousness, as I gather by your speeches
they be, is it possible that they will lend mo^ey without usury, or without
some hostage, guage or pawn? for usury follows covetousness, as the shadow
does the body.


Great Usury in Ailgna.
Philo. IT is as impossible for any to borrowe money there (for the most part)
without usury Usury.
and loan, or with out some good hostage, guage or pledge, as it is for a dead
man to speak with audible voice.


Spud. I have heard say, that the positive, and statute laws there, The
possitiue Laws.
do permit them to take vsurye, limitting them how much to take for every
pound.


Philo. Although the civil laws (for the avoiding of further inconveniences)
do permit certain sommes of money, to be given overplus beyond or abooue the
principal, for the loan of money lent, yet are y^ usurers no more discharged
from the gilt of usury before God thereby: then the adulterous Jews were from
whordome, because Moses gave them a permissiue law for every man to put away
their wives, that would, for every light trifle. And yet the laws there give
no liberty to commit usury, The laws of Ailgna permit no usury.
but seeing how much it rages, lest it should exceed, rage further and over
flow the banks of all reason and godlynes. As covetousness is a raging sea and
a botto^lesse pit, and never satified nor contented, they have limited them
within certain meeres, and banks (to bridle the insatiable desires of covetous
men) beyond the which, it is not lawful for any to go: but this permissio^ of
ye laws argues not, that it is lawful to take usury, no more (I say) then y^
permission of Moses argued that whordome and adultery is lawful and good,
because Moses permitted them to put a way their wives, for ye auo^ding of
greater evil: for as christ said to y^ Jews from ye begi^ning it was not so,
so sa^* I to these usurers from the begi^ning it was not so, nor yet ought so
to be.


Spud. If no interest were permitted, then no man would lend, and then how
should ye poor do? wherefore the laws y^ permit some small ouer-plus therein
do very well.


Philo. Non faciendum est malum, vt inde veniat bonum, we must not do evil,
that good may come of it: yet the laws in permitting certain reasonable gain
to be received for the loan of money lent, lest otherwise the poor should
quail (for without some commodity the rich would not lend) have not done
much amiss, The laws permit some overplus, but command it
but if they had quite cut it of, and not yielded at all to any such
permission, they had done better. But heerin the intent of the law is to be
perpe^ded: which was to impale with in the Forest, or park of reasonable and
conscionable gain, men who cared not howmuch they could extorte out of
poore-mens hands, for the loan of their money lent, and not to authorize any
man to commit usury, as though it were lawful because it is permitted.

Therefore, those that say that the laws there do allow of usury, and license
men to commit it freely, do slander y^ laws, and are worthy of
reprehension: for though the laws say, thou shall not take abooue ij.s. in y^
pound, x.li. in a hundred, and so so forth. Does this prove y^ it is lawful
to take so much, or rather y^ thou shall not take more then y^? if I say to a
man, thou shall not give him abooue one or two blows, does this prove y^ I
license him to give him one or two blows, Forbidding to outrage in mircheef,
is not permission to commit mischeef.
or rather that he shall not give any at al, or if he do, he shall not exceed or
pass ye ba^ds of reasonable mesure: so this law does but mitigate ye penalty:
for it says y^ the party y^ takes but x.li. for y^ use of an C.li. loses but
y^ x.li. not his principal.


Spud. Then I perceive, if Usurie be not lawful by the laws of the Realm, then
is it not lawful by the laws of God.


Philo. You may be sure of that. For our Savior Christ wills us to be so
far from covetousness and usury, as he says: give to him that asks thee,
Math. 5. 6.
and from him that would borrow, Luc. 6.
turn not thy face away.

Again, Lend of thy goods to them who are not able to pay thee again, and thy
reward shall be great in heaven. If we must lend our goods then to them, The
word of God against usury.
who are not able to pay us again, no not so much as the bare thing lent, where
is the interest, the usury, the gain and ouer-plus, which we fish for so
much? Therefore our Savior Christ says, beatius est dare, potius quam
accipere. It is more blessed to give, then to receive. In y^ 22. of Exodus,
Exodus. 20.
Deuteronomy. 24. 23. Deuteronomy. 24. 23.
Leuit. 25. Leuit. 25.
Nehe. 5. Nehe. 5.
Eze. 22. 18. Ezech. 22. 18.
and many other places, we are forbidden to use any kind of usury or interest,
or to receive again any ouer-pluss, besides the principal, either in money,
corn, wine, oil beasts, cattle, meat, drink, cloth, or any thing else what
soever. David asks a question of the Lord saying, Psalm. 15.
Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, and who shall rest in thy holy hill?
whereto he gives the solution him self saying: even he that leads an
incorrupt life, and has not given his money unto usury, nor taken reward
against the innocent, who so does these things shall never fall. In the ^5. of
Deuteronomy. the Lord wills us not to crave again the thing we have lent to our
neighbor, for it is the Lords free year. When it is not lawful to^ ask again
our goods lent.
If it be no lawful (then) to ask again y^ which is lent, (for it is not the
law of good conscience for thee to exact it, if thou be abler to bear it, then
the other to pay it) much less is it lawful to demand any usury or ouer-plus.
And for this cause the Lord says, let there be no beggar amongst you, nor
poor person amongst the Tribes of Israel. Thus you see the word of God
abando^neth usury even to hell, and all writers both divine and profane, yea
the very heathen people, moved only by the instinct of nature and rules of
reason, have always abhord it.

Therefore Cato, Hethen men against usury and inte^est.
being demanded what usury was, asked again, what it was to kill a man?
making usury equivalent with murder: And good reason, for he that kills a a
man, riddeth him out of his pains at once, but he that takes usury is long in
butchering his pacient* suffering him by little and little to languish, and
sucking out his heart blood, never leaves him so long as he feels any vital
blood, (that is lu^re and gain) coming forth of him. usury equal with
murder.
The Usurer kills not one, but many, both Husband, Wife, Children, servants,
famelie and all, not sparing any.

And if the poor man have not wherewith to pay* as well the interest, as the
principal, when soever this greedy cormorant does demand it, then suit
shall be co^menced against him, out go butter-flies and writs, as thick as hail,
so the poor man is apprehended, and brought coram nobis, Suit co^menced
against him that is not able to pay as well the Usury as the Principal.
and being once conuented, judgment condemnatorie and diffinitiue sentence
proceeds against him, compelling him to pay, as well the usury and ye loan of
the money* as the money lent. But if he have not to satisfy as well the one as
the other, then to Bocardo goes he as round as a ball, where he shall be sure to
lie until he rotte one piece from an other, without satisfaction be made. To
prison with him that cannot pay the usury.
Oh cursed Caitiue, no man but a devil, no Christian but a cruel Tartarian, and
merciless Turck: dare thou look up toward heaven, or can thou hope to be
saved by the death of Christ, that suffer thine own flesh and blood, thine
own brethren and sisters in the Lord, and which is more, the flesh and blood
of Christ Jesus, vessels of salvation, coheirs with him of his superiall
kingdom, adoptiue sons of his grace, and finally, saints in heaven, No mercy
in imprisoning o^ poor-men for usury.
to lie and ^ot in prison for want of paym^nt of a little dross, which at the
day of dome, shall bear witness against thee, g^aw thy flesh like a canker,
and condemn thee for ever: The very s^ones of the prison walls shall rise up
against thee, and condemn thee for thy cruelty, Is this love? Is this
charity? is this to do to others as thou would wish others to do to thee?
or rather as thou wo^ldest wish the Lord to do unto thee? Art thou a good
member of the body, which not only cuttest of thy self from the vine, No
cruelty to be showed, but mercy and compasion ought to be extended.
as a rotten brau^ch and void lop, but also he west off other members from the
same true vine, Christ Jesus? No, no, thou art a member of the Devil, a limme
of Satan, and a Child of perdition.

W^e ought not to handle our brethren in such sort, for any worldly matter
whatsoever. We ought to show mercy and not cruelty to our brethren, to
remit trespasses and offenses, rather then to exact punishment, re^erring all
revenge to him, who says:

Mihi vindictam, et ego retribuam. Uengeance is mine, and I will reward (says
the LORD.)

Believe me, it greeueth me to hear (walking in the streats) the pitiful
cries, and miserable complaints of poor prisoners in dura^ce for debt, The
petiefull crying of Prisoners in prison for dept.
and like so to continue all their life, destitute of liberty, meat, drink,
(though of the meanest sort) and clothing to their backs, lying in filthy
straw, and loathsome ^^ng, wursse then any Dog, void of all charitable
consolation, and brotherly comfort in this World, wishing and thyrsting after
death, to set them ^^^^ibertie, and loose them from their shackles, gives and
iron bands:

Notwithstanding, some merciless tigers are growe^ to such barbarous cruelty,
that they blush not to say, A tygerlicke ^yrannicall saying.
tush, ^e shall either pay me the whole, or else lie the^^ till his heels ^ot
from his butt^^^s, and before I will release him, I will make d^ce of his
bones. But take heed thou Devil (for I dare not call thee a Man) le^t the Lord
say to thee, as he said to that wicked Servant (who having great sommes
forgiven him, Math xviii. Marc. xi.
would not forgive his Brother his small debte, but catching him by the throat,
said: pay that thou owe) ^ind him hands and feet, and ^ast him into utter
Darkness, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth.

An Usurer is worse tha^ a Thief, for the one steals, An Usurer worse than a
Thief.
but for need, the other for coueitousnes and excess: the one steals, but in
the night commonly, the other daily and hourly, night and day at all times
indifferently.

An Usurer is worse than a Jew, An Usurer worser than a Jew.
for they ^o this day, will not take any usury of their Brethren, according
to the law of GOD.

They are worse than Judas, for he betrayed Christ, An Usurer worser than Judas.
but once, made restitution, and repented for it (though his repentance sprang
not of faith, but of despair) but these Usurers betray Christ in his members
daily and hourly without any remorse or restitution at all.

They are wursse then hell it self, usurers wurss^ then ^el.
for it punishes but only the wicked and reprobate, but the Usurer makes no
difference of any, but punishes all alike. They are crueller then death, An
Usurer wursse then Death.
for it destroys but the body, and goes no further, but the usurer
destroys both body and soul for ever. And to be breef, the Usurer is wursse
then the Devil himself, An usurer wurse then the Devil.
for the Devil plagueth but only those that are in his hands, or else those
whom God permits him, the Usurer plagueth not only those that are within
his jurisdiction already, but even all other without permission of any. Therefore
says Ambrose, if any man commit usury, The sayings of Godly Fathers and
Writers against usury.
it is extortion, rauin and pillage, and he ought to dye. Alphonsus called
usury nothing else then a life of death. Lycurgus banished all kind of usury out
of his lands. Cato did the same. Agessilaus, General of the Lacedaemonians,
burned the Usurers books in the open market places. Claudius Vaspatiannus, and
after him Alexander Seuerus, made sharp laws against usury, Usurers punished
with sundry tortures.
and utterly extirped the same. Aristotle, Plato, Pythagoras, and generally,
all writers both holy and profane, have sharply inueighed against this
devouring canker of usury, and yet cannot we, that fain would be called
christians avoid it. And if it be true, that I hear say, the^e be no men so
great doers in this noble faculty and famous science, Scriuiners the Devils
agents to set forward Usury.
as the Scriueners be: For it is said (and I fear me too true) that there are
some, to whom is committed a hundred or two of pounds, of some more, of some
less, they puttinge in good sureties to the owners for the repayment of the
same again, with certain allowance for the loan thereof, then come there
poor men to them, desiring them to lend them such a some of money, and they
will recompense them at their own desires, who making refusal at the first,
as though they had it not (to acuat^ the minds of the poor petitioners
withal) at last they lend them how much they desire, receiving of the poor
men what interest and assurance they lust themselves, and binding them, their
lands, Goods, and all, with forfaiture thereof, if they fail of paym^nt:
where note by the way, the Scriuener is the Instrument whereby the Diue^l
works the frame of this wicked work of Usurie, he being rewarded with a
good fleece for his labor: The Scriuiners fleece, or pittaunce for his pains.
F^r, first he has a certain allowance of the Archdiuel who owes the money,
for helping him to such vent for his coin: Secondly, he has a great deal
more usury to himself, of him who boroweth the money, than he allows y^
owner of the money: And thirdly, ^e has not the least part for making the
writings between them. And thus the poor man is so implicate and wrapped in on
every side, as it is impossible for him ever to get out of the briers, without
loss of all that ever he has to the very skin. Thus the rich are enriched,
the poor beggered, and Christ Jesus dishonored every way, God be merciful
unto us. De his hactenus.


Spud. Having (by the grace of Christ) hitherto spoken of sundry Abuses of
that country, let us proceed a little further, how do they sancti^ie and
keep the Sabbath day? In godly Christian exercises, or else in prophan^
pastimes and pleasures?


The Manner of sanctifiyng the Sabbath in Ailgna.
Philo. THE Sabbath day, of some is well santified, namely in hearing the Word
of GOD read, preached and interpreted, in private and public Prayers, in
singing of Godly Psalms, in celebrating the sacraments, and in collecting for
y^ poor and indigent, which are the true uses and ends whereto the Sabbath was
ordained. But other some spend the Sabbath day (for the most part) in
frequenting of baudie Stage Plays and enterludes, in maintaining Lords of
mis-rule (for so they call a certain kind of play which they use) May-games,
Church-ales, feasts and wakeesses: in pyping, dancing, dicing, carding,
bowling, tennisse playing: in Beare-bayting, cock-fighting, Profane exercises
upon the Sabbath day.
hawking, hunting, and such like. In keeping of Faires, and markets on the
sabbath. In keeping Courts and Leets: In football playing, and such other
deuilish pastimes: reading of laciuious and wanton books, and an infinite
number of such like practices and profane exercises used upon that day,
whereby the Lord God is dishonored, his Sabbath violated, his word neglected,
his sacraments contemned and his People meruelously corrupted, and carried away
from true virtue and godlynes. Lord remove these exercises from thy Sabbath.


Spud. You will be deemed too too Stoicall, if you should restrain men from
these exercises upon the Sabbath, for they suppose, that, that day was ordained
and consecrate to that end and purpose, only to use what kind of exercises
they think good themselves, and was it not so?


Phi. After that the Lord our God had created the world, and all things therein
contained, in six days, in the seventh day he rested from all his woorks,
(that is from creating them, not from governing them) and therefore he
commanded y^ the seventh day should be kept holy in all ages to the end of the
world: When the Sabbath wa^ ordained.
then after that in effect 2000. years, he iterated this Commandment, when he
gave the law i^ mount Horeb to Moses, and in him to all the Children of
Israel, saying, remember (forget it not) that thou keep holy the seventh day
etc. If we must keep it holy, then must we not spend it in such vain exercises,
as please our selves, but in such godly exercises as he in his holy word has
commanded. And (in my judgment) the Lord our God ordained the seventh day to
be kept holy, for four causes especially. First to put us in mind of his
wunderful woorkmanship, and creation of the world and creatures besides.
Secondly, y^ his word (the Church asse^bling together) might be preached,
Wherefore the Sabbath wa^ instituted.
interpreted and expounded, his sacraments ministered sinceerly according to the
prescript of his word, and that suffrages and prayers both private and
public might be offered to his excellent Majesty. Thirdly, for that every
christian man might repose himself from corporal labor, to the end they might
y^ better sustain the travails of the week to ensue, and also to ye and, y^
all beasts and cattle, which the Lord has made for man's use, as helps and
adiuments unto him in ^his daily affairs and business, might rest and
refresh them selves, the better to go through in their traueiles afterward. For,
as the hethen Man knew very well, sine alterna requie, non est durabile
quicquam. Without some rest or repose, there is not any thing durable, or able
to continue long. Fourthly, to the end it might be a typical figure, or signitor
to point (as it were) with the finger, and to cipher forth and shadow unto us
that blessed rest and thryse happy joy* which the faithful shall possess
after the day of judgment in the Kingdom of Heaven. Wherfor^, seeing the
Sabbath was instituted for these causes, it is manifest, that it was not
appointed for the maintenance of wicked and ungodly pastymes and vain
pleasures of the flesh, which GOD abhors, and all good men from their hearts
do loath and deteste.

The Man of whom we read in the law, Punishment for violating the sabbath.
for gathering of a few small sticks upon the Sabbath, was stoned to death, by
the commandment of God from the Theator of Heaven.

Than if he were stoned for gathering a few sticks upon the Sabbath day, which
in some cases might be, for necessities sake, and did it, but once, Violaters
of the saboth.
what shall they be, who all the Sabbath days of their life give them selves
to nothing else, but to wallow in all kind of wickedness and sin* to the
great contempt both of y^ Lord, and his Sabbath? And though they have played
the lazy lurdens all the weke before, yet that day of set purpose, they will
toil and labor, in contempt of the Lord and his Sabbath. But let them be
sure, as he that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath, was stoned for his contempt
of the same, so shall they be stoned, yea grinded to pieces for their contempt
of the Lord in his Sabbath.

The Jews, are very strict in keeping their Sabaoths, The Jews very precise
in keeping sabbath.
in so much, as they will not dress there meats and drinks upon the same day,
but set it on the tables ye day before. They go not above ij. miles upon y^
sabbath day, they suffer not the body of any Malefactor to hang upon the
gallows upon the Sabbath day, with legions of such like supersticio^s.
Wherein, as I do acknowledge they are but too scrupelous, and ouershoot the
mark, so we are therein plain contempteous, and negligent, shooting short of
the mark altogether. No work to be done upon the sabbath, except necessite
enforce it.
Yet I am not so strait laced, that I would have no kind of work done upon
that day, if present necessity of the thing require it (for Christ has
taught us, the Sabbath was made for Man, not Man for the Sabbath) but not for
every light trifle which may as well be done other days as upon that day. And
although ye day it self in respect of ye very nature and original thereof be no
better tha^ another day, for there is no difference of days except we become
temporizers, all being alike good^ yet because the Lord our God has
commanded it to be sanctified and kept holy to him self, let us (like obedient
and obsequious Children) submit our selves to so loouing a Father, for else we
spit against heaven, we strive against the stream, and we contemn him in his
ordinances. But (perchance) you will ask me, whither the true use of the
Sabbath consist in outward abstaining from bodilye labor and travail? I
answer no: the true use of the Sabbath (for Christians are not bound only to
the Ceremony of the day) consists as I have said, Wherein the true use of the
Sabbath consists.
in hearing the word of God truly preached, thereby to learn and to do his
will, in receiving the sacraments (as seals of his grace toward us) rightly
administered, in using public and private prayer, in thanksgiving to God for
all his benefits, in singing of godly Psalms and other spiritual exercises
and meditations, in collecting for the poor, in doing of good works: and
breefly in the true obedience of the inward man. And yet notwithstanding, we
must abstain from the one, to attend upon the other: that is, we must refrain
all bodily labors, to the end that we may the better be restant at these
spiritual exercises upon the Sabbath day.

This is the true use and end of the Lord his Saboth, who grant that we may
rest in him for ever.


Spud. Having showed the true use of the Saboth, let us go forward to speak of
those Abuses particularlye, whereby the Saboth of the Lord is profaned. And
first to begin with stage plays and enterluds: What is your opinion of them?
Are they not good examples to youth to fray them from sin?


Of Stage Plays and Enterluds, with their wickedness.
Philo. ALL Stage Plays, Enterluds and Commedies, are either of divine, or
profane matter: If they be of divine matter, than are they most intolerable,
or rather Sacrilegious, for that the blessed word of GOD, is to be handled,
reverently, gravely, and sagely, with veneration to the glorious Majesty of
God, which shines therein, and not scoffingly, flowtingly, and iybingly, as it
is upon stages in Plays and Enterluds, without any reverence, worship, or
veneration to ye same: the word of our Salvation, the price of Christ his
blood, and the merits of his passion, were not given, to be derided, and iested
at as they be in these filthy plays and enterluds on stages and scaffolds,
The deriding of the word of God in stage plays.
or to be mixed and interlaced with bawdry, wanton shows and uncomely gestures,
as is used (every Man knows) in these plays and enterludes. In the first of
Ihon we are taught, that the word is GOD, and God is the word. Wherefore, who so
ever abuses this word of our God on stages in plays and enterluds, abuses
the Majesty of GOD in the same, makes a mocking stock of him, and purchases
to himself, eternal damnation. And no marueil, for the sacred word of GOD, and
God himself, Reverence to the majesty of God du^.
is never to be thought of, or once named, but with great fear, reverence and
obedience to the same. All the holy company of Heaven, Angels, Archangels,
Cherubins, Seraphins, and all other powers whatsoever, yea the Devils
themselves (as James says) do tremble and quake, at the naming of God, and at
the presence of his wrath, and do these Mockers and Flowters of his Majesty,
these dissembling Hipocrites, and flattering Gnatoes, think to escape
unpunished? beware therefore you masking Players, you painted sepulchers, you
doble dealing ambodexters, be warned betymes, A warming to Players.
and lik good computi^tes cast your accounts before what will be the reward
thereof in the end, least God destroy you in his wrath: abuse God no more,
corrupt his people no longer with your dregs, and intermingle not his blessed
word with such profane vanities. For, at no hand, it is not lawful, to mixed
scurrilitie with divinity, Not lawful to intermixed diuynitie, with scurrilitie
nor divinity with scurrilitie.

Theopompus, mingled Moses law with his writings, and therefore the LORD
stroke him madd. Theodictes began the same practice, but the Lord stroke him
blind for it. With many others who attempting the like deuyses, were al
overthrown, and died miserably: besides, what is their judgment in the other
World the Lord only knows. Upon the other side, if their plays be of
profane matters, tha^ tend they to y^ dishonor of God and norishing of vice,
What if plays be of profane matter.
both which are damnable. So that whither they be the one or the other, they
are quite contrary to the Word of grace, and sucked out of the Devils teates,
to nourish us in ydolatrie hethenrie, and sin.

And therefore, they cariyng the note, or brand of GOD his curse upon their
backs, which way soever they go, are to be hissed out of all Christian
Kingdoms, if they will have Christ to dwell amongst them.


Spud. Are you able to show, that ever any good Men from the beginning, have
resisted Plays and Enterluds?


Philo. Not only the word of GOD does overthrow the^, addiudging them, and the
maintainers of them, to Hell, but also all holy counsels, and sinodes, both
general, national and provincial, The word of God, al Writers, counsels and
Fathers have writ against plays, and e^terluds.
together, with all Writers both divine and profane, ever since y^ beginning
have disalowed them, and writ (almost) whole volumes against them.

The learned Father Tertullian in his book de Speculo, says, that plays,
were consecrat to that false ydoll Becchus, for that he is said to have found
out, and invented strong drink.

Augustinus de ciuit. Dei, says, Wherfo^e plays (...) ordained.
that plays were ordained by the Devil, and consecrat to heathen Gods, to
draw us from Christianity to ydolatrie, and gentilisme. And in an other place:
Pecunias Histrionibus dare, vitium est innane, non virtus. To give money to
Players, is a grievous sin.

Chrysostom, calls those plays, festa Sathani, feasts of the Devil.
Lactantius, an ancient learned Father, says, Histrionum impudissimi gestus,
nihil aliud nisi Libidinem mouent: The shameless gestures of Plaiers, serve to
nothing so much, as to move the flesh to lust, Concilium. 3.
and uncleanness. And therefore, in the.30. Carth^. Cap* 11
Counsel of Carthage, and Synod of Laodicea, Synod* Laodicea.
it was decreed, that no Christen Man, Cap. 54.
or Woman, should resort to plays and enterludes, where is nothing but
blasphemy, scurrilitie and whordome maintained. Scipio, seeing the Romans
bente to erect Theaters, and places for plays, dehorted them from it, Write^s
both divine and profane against playe^ and Enterluds.
with most prudent reasons and forcible arguments. Valerius Maximus says,
plays were never brought up, sine regni rubore, without shame to the Country.


Arist. debarreth youth access to Plays and Enterluds, least they seeking to
quench the thirst of Venus, do quench it with a potle of fire. Augustus,
banished Ovid, for making Books of love, Enterluds and such other amorous
trumperie.

Constantius, ordained that no Player should be admitted to the table of the
Lord. Than seeing, that Plays were first invented by the Devil, The ends of
plays and Enterluds.
practiced by the heathen gentiles, and dedicat to their false ydols, Gods
and Goddesse^: as the house, stage and apparel, to Venus: the music, to
Appollo: the penning, to Minerua, and the Muses: the action and pronuntiation
to Mercury and ye rest, it is more than manifest, that they are no fit
exercyses for a Christen Man to follow. But if there were no evil in them,
save this, namely, that the arguments of tragedies, The arguments of tragedies.
is anger, wrath, immunitie, cruelty, injury, incest, murder and such like:
the Persons or Actors, are Gods, Goddesses, Furies, Fyends, Hagges, Kings,
Queens, or Potentates. Of Commedies, the matter and ground is love, The ground
of Commedies.
bawdrie, cosenage, flattery, whordome, adultery: the Persons or age^ts,
whores, queanes, bawdes, scul^lions, Knaves, Curtezans, lecherous old men^
amorous young men, with such like of infinite variety: If I say there were
nothing else, but this, it were sufficient to withdraw a good christian from the
using of them. For so often, as they go to those howses where Players
frequent* they go to Venus palace and satha^s synagogue to worship devils, and
betray Christ Jesus.


Spud. But notwithstanding, Theaters and curtains Venus palaces.
I have hard some hold opinion that they be as good as sermons, and that many a
good Example may be learned out of them?


Philo. Oh blasphemy intolerable: No plays co^parable to the word of God
Are filthy plays and bawdy enterluds comparable to the word of God, y^ food
of life, and life it self? It is all one, as if they had said, bawdrie,
hethenrie, paga^rie, scurrilitie, and diuelrie it self, is equal with the word
of God. Or that the Devil, is equipolent with the Lord.

The Lord our God has ordained his blessed word, and made it the ordenarie
mean of our Salvation, the Deui^l has inferred the other, as, the ordenarie
mean of our destruction, and will they yet compare the one with y^ other? If
he be accursed, He is cursed that says plays and enterluds are comparable to
sermons.
y^ calls light darkness, and darkness light, truth, falsehood, and falsehood
truth, sweet, sour, and sour sweet, than a fortiori is he accur^^d that says
that plays and enterluds be equivalent with Sermons, Be^ids this, there is no
mischief which these plays, maintain not. For, do they not norish ydlenes? and
otia dant vitia, ydlenes is the Mother of vice. Do they not draw the people
from hering the word of God, from godly Lectures, and sermons? for you shall
have them flock thither thick and threefould, when ye church of God shall be
bare and empty. And those y^ will never come at sermons will flow thither
apace. The reason is, Wherefore so many ^flock to see playe^ and enterluds.
for that the number of Christ his elect is but few, and the number of the
reprobat is many, the way y^ leads to life is narow, and few tread y^ path,
y^ way that leads to death, is brod, and many find it. This shows, they are
not of God, who refuse to here his word (for he that is of God, hereth God his
word says our Savior Christ) but of the devil, whose exercyses they go to
visit. Do they not maintain bawdrie, The fruits o^ theathers, and plays.
insinuat folery, and renew ye remembrance of hethen ydolatrie? Do they not
induce whordome and uncleanness? nay, are they not rather plain deuourers of
maydenly virginity and chastity? For proof whereof, but mark the flocking
and running to Theaters and curtens, daily and hourly, night and day, time
and tide to see Plays and Enterludes, The Godly demeanoures used at plays and
enterluds
where such wanton gestures, such bawdie speeches: such laughing and fleering:
such kissing and bussing: such clipping and culling: Such winckinge and
glancinge of wanton eyes, and the like is used, as is wonderful to behold.
Than these goodly pageants being done, every mate sorts to his mate, every one
bringes another homeward of their way very freendly, and in their secret
conclaues (covertly) they play ye Sodomits, or worse. And these be the fruits
of Plays and Enterluds, for the most part. And whereas, you say, there are good
Examples to be learned in them:

Truly, The goodly examples of Plays and Enterluds.
so there are: if you will learn falsehood, if you will learn cosenage: if you
will learn to deceive: if you will learn to play the Hipocrit: to cogge, lie
and falsify: if you will learn to jest, laugh and fleer, to grin, to nodd, and
mow: if you will learn to play the vice, to swear, tear, and blaspleme, both
Heaven and Earth: What things are to be learned at plays.
If you will learn to become abawde, unclean, and to deuerginat Mayds, to
deflour honest Wives: if you will learn to murder, s^aie, kill, pick, steal,
rob and roue: If you will learn to rebel against Princes, to commit treasons,
to comsume treasurs, to practice ydlenes, to sing and talk of bawdie love and
venery: if you will learn to deride, scoff, mock and flowt, to flatter and
smooth: If you will learn to play the whore-maister, the glutton, Drunkard, or
incestuous person: if you will learn to become proud, hawtie and arrogant: and
finally, if you will learn to comtemne GOD and al his laws, to ^are neither
for heaven nor hell, and to commit al kind of sin and mischeef you need to
go to no other school, Theater^ (...) Seminaries of pseudo christianit
for all these good Examples, may you see painted before your eyes in
enterludes and plays: wherefore, that man who gives money for the maintenance
of them, must needs incur the damage of praemunire, that is, eternal
damnation except they repent. For the Apostle bids us beware, A dyuine
praemunire.
least we communica^ with other men's sins, and this their doing, is not
only to communicate with other men's sins, and maintain evil, to the
destruction of the^ selves and many others, but also a maintaining of a great
sort of idle lubbers and buzzing dronets to suck up and devour the good
honey, What it is to communicate with other men's sins.
whereupon the poor bees should live.

Therefore I beseech all players and Founders of plays and enterludes, in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, as they tender the salvation of their souls, and
others, to leave of that cursed kind of life, An Exhotation to plaiers.
and gi^e them selves to such honest exercises, and godly mysteries, as God
has commanded them in his word to get their livings wtall: for who will call
him a wiseman that plaieth the part of a fool and a vice? who can call him a
Christian, who plays ye part of a devil, The (...) due to Play^ers.
the sworn enemy of Christ? who can call him a just man, that plays the
part of a dissembling hipocrite? And to be breef, who can call him a straight
deling man, who plays a Cosoners trick? And so of all ye rest. Away therefore
with this so infamous an art, for go they never so brave, Players live upon
begging.
yet are they counted and taken but for beggars. And is it not true? live they
not upon begging of every one that comes? Are they not taken by the laws of
the Realm, Players counted Rogues by the laws of the Realm
for roagues and vacabounds? I speak of such as travail the Cuntries, with
plays and enterludes, making an occupation of it, and ought so to be punished,
if they had their deserts. But hoping that they will be warned now at the last,
I will say no more of them, beseeching them to consider what a fearful thing it
is to fall into the hands of God, and to provoke his wrath and heavy
displeasure against them selves and others, which the Lord of his mercy turn
from us.


Spud. Of that sort he the other kind of plays, which you call Lords of
Mis-rule? for me think, the very name it self caryeth a taste of some
notorious evil.


Lords of Mis-rule in Ailgna.
Philo. THE name indeed is odious both to God and good men, Lords of Mis-rule
in Ailgna.
and such as the very heathen people would have blushed at, once to have named
amongst them. And if the name imports some e^il, then what may ye thing it
self be, judge you. But because you desire to know the manner of them, I will
show you as I have seen them practiced my self. First, all the wilde-heds of
the Parish, conuenting together, choose them a Graund-Captain (of all mischief)
whom they innoble with the title of my Lord of Mis-rule, The manner how Lords
o^ Mis-rule are used to be played.
and him they crown with great solemnity, and adopt for their king. This king
anointed, chooses forth twenty, forty, threescore or a hundred lusty Guts
like to him self to waighte upon his lordly Majesty, and to guarde his noble
person. Then every one of these his men, he inuesteth with his liueries, of
green, yellow or some other light wanton color. And as though that were not
(baudie) gaudie enough I should say, they bedecke them selves with scarfs,
ribons and laces hanged all over with gold rings, precious stones and other
jewels: this done, The monsterous attyring of my Lord of Misrules Men.
they tie about either leg xx. or xl. bells, with rich handkercheifs in their
hands, and sometimes laid a cross over their shoulders and necks, borrowed for
the most part of their pretty Mopsies and loouing Besses, for bussing them in
ye dark. Thus all things set in order, then have they their Hobby-horses,
dragons and other Antiques, The rablee^^ (...) devils guard^
together with their baudie Pipers and thundering Drummers to strike up the
devils dance withal, then march these heathen company toward the Church and
Churchyard, their pipers pipeing, their drummers thundering, their stumps
dau^cing, their bells iyngling, The beha^iour of the Devils band in the temple
of God.
their handkerche^s swinging about their heds like madmen, their hobbie horses
and other monsters skirmishing amongst the route: and in this sort they go to
the Church (I say) and into the Church (though the Minister be at prayer or
preaching) dancing and swinging heir ha^dkercheifs over their heds, in the
Church, like devils incarnate with such a co^fuse noise, y^ no man can hear his
own voice. Then the foolish people, they look, they stare, they laugh, they
fleer, and mount upon ^ourmes and pewes to see these goodly pageants solemzed
in this sort. Receptacles. in the Cemiteries or church yards for the devils
agents
Then after this, about the Church they go again and again, and so forth
into ye churchyard, where they have commonly their So^mer-haules, their
bowers, arbors, and banqueting houses set up, wherein they feast, ba^quet and
dance all that day, and (peradventure) all the night too. And thus these
terrestrial furies spend the Sabbath day.

They have also certain papers, wherein is painted some babblerie or other, of
Imagery woork, and these they call my Lord of mis^rules badges, My Lord of
mis-rules cognizances.
these they give to every one, that will give money for them, to maintain them
in their hethenrie, diuelrie, whordome, drunkenness, pride, and what not. And
who will not be buxo^ to them, and give them money for these their deuilsh
cognizances, they are mocked, and flouted at, Wearing m^ Lord of mis-rules
badges
not a little. And so assoted are some, that they not only give them money, to
maintain their abomination withal, but also wear their badges and
cognizances in their hats or caps openly. But let them take heed, for these
are badges, seals, brands and cognizances of the devil, whereby he knows his
Servants and Clyents, from the Children of God. And so long as they wear them:

Sub vexillo diaboli militant contra Dominum et legem suam. They fight under ye
ba^ner and standerd of ye devil against Christ Jesus, and all his laws,
Another sort of fantastical fools bring to these hel-hounds (the Lord of
mis-rule and his accomplices) some bread, some good-ale, some new-cheese, some
old, some custards and fine cakes, some one thing, some another: Sacrifice
brought to this filthy Ydol, my L. of mis-rule.
but if they knew that as often as they bring any thing to the maintenance of
these execrable pastimes, they offer sacrifice to the devil and sathanas, they
would repent and withdraw their hands, which God grant they may.


Spud. This is a horrible profanation of the sabbath (the Lord knows) and
more pestilent then pestilence it self, but what? be there any abuses in their
May-ga^es like unto these.


Philo. As many as in the other. The order of them is thus, Against May,
Whitsonday or other time, all the yung men and maids, old men and wives run
godding over night to the woods* The order of their May-games.
groves* hills and mountains, where they spend all the night in pleasant
pastimes, and in the morning they return bringing with them birch and branches of
trees, to deck their assemblies withal, and no marvel, for there is a great
Lord present amongst them, as superintendent and Lord over their pastimes and
sportes, namely, Satan prince of hell: But the chiefest jewel they bring from
thence is their May Pole, A great Lord present in May games, as superintendent
thereof.
which they bring home with great veneration, as thus. They have twenty or
forty yoke of Oxen, every Ox having a sweet nose-gay of flowers placed on the
tip of his horns, and these Oxen draw home this May Pole (this stinking Ydol
rather) which is covered all over with flowers, and herbs bound round about
with strings from the top to the bottom, and sometime painted with variable
colors, with two or three hundred men, The manner of bringing home their
May-poles.
women and children following it with great devotion. And thus being rea^ed
up, with handkercheefs and flags houering on the top, they straw the ground
round about, bind green boughs about it, set up summer haules, bowers and
arbors hard by it. And then fall they to ^aunce* about it like as the heathen
people did at the dedication of the Idols, whereof this is a perfect pattern, or
rather the thing it self. May-poles a pattern of the hethen* Ydols
I have heard it credibly reported (and that, viua voce) by men of great
gravity and reputation, that of forty, threescore, or a hundred maids going
to the wood over night, there have scaresly the third part of them returned
home again undefiled

These be the fruits which these cursed pastimes bring forth. The fruit of
May-games.
Neither the Jews, the Turcks, Sarasins, nor Pagans, nor any other nations how
wicked, orbarbarous soever, have ever used such deuilish exercises as these,
nay they would have been ashamed once to have named them, much less, have used
them. Yet we that would^^ Christians, think them not amiss. The Lord forgive
us, and remove them from us.


Spud, What is the manner of their church ales, which you say they use, for
they seem uncouth and strange to mine ears?


The Manner of Church-ales in Ailgna.
Philoponus. THE manner of them is thus, The manner of Church-^les in Ailg.
In certain Towns where drunken Bachus bears all the sway, against a
Christmas, an Easter, Whitsonday, or some other time, the Churchwardens (for
so they call them) of every parish, with the consent of the whole Parish,
provide half a score or twenty quarters of malt, whereof some they buy of the
Church-stock, and some is given them of the Parishioners them selves, every one
conferring somewhat, according to his ability, which malt being made into
very strongale or beer, it is set to sale, either in the Church or some other
place assigned to that purpose.

Then when the Nippitatum, this Huf-cap (as they call it) and this Nectar of
life, is set abroche, well is he that can get the soonest to it, and spend the
most at it, for he that sits the closest to it, and spends the most at it,
he is coun^ed the godliest man of all the rest, The filthiest beast, the
godlyest man.
but who, either cannot for pinching poverty, or otherwise will not stick to
it, he is counted one destitute both of virtue and godlynes. In so much, as
you shall have many poormen make hard shift for money to spend thereat, for it,
being put into this Corban, they are persuaded it is meritorious and a good
service to God. In this kind of practice, they continue six weeks, a quarter
of a year, yea half a year together, swilling and gulling, night and day, till
they be as drunk as Apes, and as blockish as beasts.


Spud. Seeing they have so good utterance, it should seem they have good
gains. But I pray you how do they bestow that money, which is got thereby?


Philo. Oh, well I warent you, if all be true which they say: For they repair
their Churches and Chapels with it, How the money is spent which is got by
Churchales.
they buy books for service, cups for the celebration of the Sacrament,
surplesses for Sir Ihon, and such other necessaries: And they maintain other
extraordinary charges in the parishes besides. These be their exceptions,
these be their excuses, and these be their pretensed allegations, whereby they
blind the world, and conueigh themselves away inuisibly in a clowd. But if they
dance thus in a net, no doubt they will be espied.

For if it were so, y^ they bestowed it as they say, Will the Lord have his house
build with maintenance of evil.
do they think that the Lord will have his house build with drunkenness,
gluttony and such like abhominatio^? Must we do evil, that good may come of
it? must we build this house of lyme and stone, with the desolation, and utter
overthrow of his spiritual house, cleansed and washed in the preciouse blood of
our Savior Jesus Christ? But, who sees not that they bestow this money upon
nothing less, than* in building and repayring of Churches and Oratories? For,
in most places, lie they not like swyn coats? their windows rent, their doors
broken, The decay of Churches, which are lacerat, rent and torn.
their walls fall down, the roof all bare, and what not, out of order? Who
sees not the book of GOD, rent ragged and all betorn, covered in dust, so as
this Epitaphe may be writ with ones finger upon it, ecce nunc in puluere
dormio: (Alas) behold I sleep in dust, and oblyuion, not once scarce looked
upon, which less red upon, and the least of all preached upon. And on the
other side, who sees not, (for this I speak but in way of parenthesis) in ye
mean time, their own howses and mansion places, Su^pteousnes of their own
mansions.
are curiously build, and sumpteously adorned: which plainly argues, that they
rather bestow this drunken got-money, upon profane uses and their own private
affairs, than upon the house of prayer, or the temple of God: And yet this
their doing is well liked of, and no man may say, black is their eye. For why?
They do all things well, and according to good order, as the say. And when time
comes, like good accoumptantes they make there accoumptes, as please
themselves.


Sp. Were it not better, and more consonant to y^ truth, that every one
contributed somewhat according to his ability to y^ maintenance of templaries
and oratories, tha^ thus to maintain the^, by drunke^ churchales? as you say,
they do?


Philo. It wear much better: And so we read, the Fathers of the old
Testament, Churges are to be maintained by mutual contribution of every one
after his power.
every one after his ability did impart some what, to the building and
restoration of the Tabernacle, which Moses erected to the Lord. So, as in the
end, there was such abundance of all things, as y^ Artificers, consulting with
Moses were glad to request the People, to stay their liberality, for they had
more, than they knew what to do withal. These People made no drunken
Church-ales to build their edefice withal: notwithstanding, their importable
charges and intolerable costs. But as their zeel was fervent, and very
commendable in bringing to the Church, so our zeal is more than frosen and
blame worthy in detracting from the Church: and bestowing it upon whordom
drunkenness, Our zeal waxen cold and frosen, in respect of the zeal of the
former world
gluttony, pride, and such like abominations: God amend it*


Spud. How do they solemnise their feasts and wakesses there, and what order
do they observe in them?


The manner of keeping of Wakesses, and feasts in Ailgna.
Philoponus. THis is their order therein: every town, parish and Uillage,
some at one time of the Year, some at another (but so that every town, parish
and village keep his proper day assigned and appropriat to it self, (which they
call their Wak day) use to make great preparation, and ordenaunce for good
cheer. To the which all their Friends and kyns-folks far and near are
invited, where is such gluttony: such drunkenness: such saturitie and impletion
used, as the like was never seen. In so much, as the poor men that bear y^
charges of these feasts and wakesses, Saturitie in feasts and wakesses.
are the poorer, and keep the Worser howses a long time after. And no marueil,
for many spend more at one of these wakesses, than in all the whole year
besides. The great charges of Wakesses.
This makes many a one to thripple and pinch, to run into debte and danger,
and finally, brings many a one to utter ruin and decay.


Spud. Would you not have one friend to visit another at certain times of the
year?


Philo. I disalowe it not, but much comme^d it. But why at one determinat day,
more than at another (except business urged it) why should one and ye same day
continue for ever, Against wakes and feasts.
or be distinct from other days, by the name of a wake day? why should there
be more excess of meats and drinks at that day, than at another? why should
they abstain from bodily labor. ij. or three days after, peradventure, the
whole week, spending it in drunkenness, whordome, gluttony, and other filthy
Sodomiticall exercyses.


Spud. Seeing you allow of one Friend to ^isite another, would you not have
the^ to congratulat their coming with some good cheer?


Philo. Yes truly, but I allow not of such excess of riot and superfluity
as is there used. I think, it convenient for one Friend to visit another (at
sometimes) as opportunity and occasion shall offer it self, Whereto wakesses
and feasts do very aptly tend.
but wherefore should the whole town, parish, village and country, keep one and
the same day, and make such gluttonous feasts as they do? And therefore, to
conclude, they are to no end, except it be to draw a great frequencie of
whores, drabbes, theiues and verlets together, to maintai^e whordome, bawdrie,
gluttony, drunkenness, thiefte, murder, swearing and all kind of mischief and
abomination. For, these be the ends whereto these feasts, and wakesses do
tend.


Spud. From whence sprang these feasts and wakesses first of all, can you tell?


Philo. I cannot tell, From whence these annual feasts and stacionarie
wakesses had their beginning.
except from the Paganes and heathen People, who when they were assembled
together, and had offered Sacrifices to their wodden Gods and blokish ydols,
made feasts and banquets together before them, in honor and reverence of them,
so appointed the same yearly to be obscrued in memorial of the same, for ever:
But whence soever they had their exordium, certain it is, the devil was ye
Father of them, of drown us in perdition and destruction of body and soul:
which GOD forefend.


Sp. As I remember, you spoke of dancing before, inferring y^ the ^abaoth is
greatly profaned thereby: whereof I pray you show me your judgment.


The horrible Vice of pestiferous dancing, used in Ailgna.
Philoponus. Dancing, as it is used (or rather abused) in these days, is an
introductio^ to whordom, a preparatiue to wantonness, a prouocatiue to
uncleanness, and an introite to al kind of lewdenes, rather than a pleasant
exercise to y^ mind, or a wholesome practice for ye body: yet notwithstanding, in
Ailg. both men, women and children, are so skilful in this laudable science, as
they may be thought nothing inferior to Cynoedus, y^ prostitut ribauld, nor
yet to Sardanapalus that effeminat varlet. Yea they are not ashamed to erect
schools of dau^cing, ^choles of d^uncing e^ected.
thinking it an ornament to their children, to be expert in this noble science
of heathen diuelrie: and yet this people glory of their christianity and
integrity of life: Indead, verbo tenus Christiani boni vocitentur: But vita
and moribus Ethnicis, and paganis peiores reperie^tur. From y^ mouth outward,
they may be said to be good Christians, but in life and manners, far worser
than the heathen, or Paganes: Whereof, if they repent not, and amend, it shall be
easier for that Land of Sodoma and Gomorra at the day of judgment then for
them.


Sp. I have heard it said, y^ dancing is both a recreation for the mind, and
also an exercise for the body, very wholesome, and not only that, but also, a
mean whereby love is acquired.


Ph. I will not much deny, Dancing a pleasure to them that delight in
vanities.
but being used in a mean, in time and place conueniente, it is a certain
solace to the minds of such as take pleasure in such vanities, but it is not
good reason to say, some me^ take pleasur in a thing ergo, it is good, but the
contrary is true rather: For this is ( basis veritatis) a ground of truth, y^
whatsoever a carnal man with uncircumcised heart, either desires, or takes
pleasure in, is most abominable and wicked before god: As on the other side,
what the spiritual man regenerat, and borne anew in Christ, by the direction
of God his spirit desires or takes delight in, is good, and according to the
will of God. And seeing ma^s nature is too procli^e of it self to sin, it
has no need of allureme^ts and allections to sin (as dancing is) but rather
of restraints and inhibitio^s from the same* What a ^urements to sin, be in
dancing.
which are not there to be found. For what clipping, what culling, what kissing
and bussing, what smouching and s^abbering one of another, what filthy groping
and unclean handling is not practiced every where in these dauncings? yea the
very deed and action it self, which I will not name for offending chaste ears,
shall be purtrayed and showed forth in their bawdye gestures of one to
another. All which, whither they blow up Venus cole, or not, who is so blind
that sees not? wherefore, let them not think that it is any recreation (which
word is abusiuely used to express the joys, or delights of y^ mind, Dancing
no recreation, but a corrosiue to a good Christian.
which signifies a making again of that, which before was made) to the mind
of a good Christian, but rather a corrosiue most sharp and nipping. For seeing
that it is evil in it self, it is not a thing wherein a Christian Man's heart
may take any comfort.

The ^nely, The only thing, wherein a good christian does delight.
summum bonum, wherein a true Christians heart is recreated and comforted, is
the meditation of y^ passion of Jesus Christ, the effusion of his blood, the
remission of sins, and the contemplation of the ineffable joys and beatituds
after this life, prepared for the faithful, in the blood of Jesus Christ. This
is the only thing, wherein a Christian man ought to rejoice, and take delight
in, all other pleasures and delights of this life set a part, as amarulent and
bitter, bringing forth fruit to eternal destruction, but the other, to
eternal life: And whereas they conclude, it is a wholesome exercise for the
body, the contrary is most true, for I have known diverse by the immoderate
use thereof, have in short time become decrepit and lame, so remaining to their
dying day. Some have broke their legs with skipping, Dancing no holsom exercise
for the Body.
leaping, turning and vawting, and some have come by one hurt, some by another
but never any came from thence without so^e part of his mind broken and lame,
such a wholesome exercise it is. But say they it induces love, so I say also,
but what love?

Truly a lustful love, a venereous love, a concupiscencious, baudie and
beastiall love, such as proceeds from the stinking pump and loathsome sink of
carnal affection, and fleshly appetite, What love dancing procures.
and not such as distilleth from the bowels of the heart ingenerat by the spirit
of God.

Wherefore, I exhort them in the bowels of Jesus Christ to eschew not only from
evil, but also from all apperance of evil, as the Apostle wills them,
proceeding from one virtue to another, until they grow to perfect men in
Christ Jesus, knowing that we must give accou^ts at y^ day of judgment of
every minut and jot of time, from the day of our birth to the time of our
death: for there is nothing more precious, We must render accounts for time
here lent us.
then time, which is given us to glorify God in good-woorks, and not to spend
in luxurious exercises after our own fantasies and delights.


Spud. But I have heard then: affirm that dau^cing is prouable by the word of
God: for (say they) did not the women come forth of all the Cities of Israel
to meet king Saul? 1 Sa. 18.
and David returning from the slaughter of Goliath, with psalteries, flutes,
tabrets, Cymbals and other musical Instruments, dancing and leaping before
them? Exo. 15.
Did not the Israelites having passed over the red sea bring forth their
Instruments and danced for joy of their deliverance? Exo. 32.


Againe^, did they not dance before the golden Calf, which they had made, in
Horeb or Sinai? Did not king David dance before the Ark of the Lord? 2. Sa. 6.
Did not the Daughter of Iephtah dance with tabret and harp at the return of
her Father from the Feeld? Iudic, 11.
Did not the women of the Israelits dance coming to visit^ good Judith? Iudic.
15,
Did not the Damsel dance before King Herod? Mat. 14,
Did not Christ blame ye people for their not dancing, when he said, Luc. 7.
we have pyped unto you, but you have Eccle. 3.
not daunced?

Says not Solomon, there is a tune to weep and a time to laughe, a time to
mourn and a time to dance?

And does not the Prophet David in many places of his Psalms commend and
command dancing and playing upon Instruments of Music.

Wherefore (for thus they conclude) seeing these holy Fathers (whereof some were
guided by the instinction of God his Spirit) have not only taught it in
doctrine, but also expressed it by their Examples of life, No man wit^out
errors both in lyfe^ and doctrine
who may open his mouth once to speak against it.


Philo. The Fathers as they were men had their errors and erred as men, for
Hominis est errare, decipi et labi: it is natural for man to err, to be
deceived and to slide from the truth. Therefore the Apostle says: follow me
in all things as I follow Christ: but to ye intent that they who perpend the
Examples of the Fathers, and Scripture falsely wrested, to maintain their^
deuilish dauncings withal, may see their own impiety and gross ignorance
discovered, I will co^pendiously set down the true sense and meaning of every
place, as they have cyted them perticulerly. For the first: whereas they say
that the Women came forth in daunces with timbrels and Instruments of Joy to
meet David and Saul, 1. Sa. 18.
I ask them for what cause they did so? The first pillare of dancing
overthrown.


Was it for wantonness or for very joy of heart, for their Uictorie gotten over
the Philistines their sworn Enemies? Was it in praise of GOD? or to stir up
filthy lust in them selves, or for nicenes only, as our daunces be?

Did men and women dance together, as is now used to be done: or rather was it
not done amongst women only? for so says the text, the women came forth etc.
But admit it were neither so, (...) good co^^uent to say ^ers did so, ^o it is
^od, or we ^y do the ^e.
nor so, will they conclude a general rule, of a particular example? it is no
good reason to say such and such did so, therefore it is good, or we may do so,
but all things are to be poysed in ye balance of holy scripture and thereby to
be allowed or disalowed, according to the meaning of the holy Ghost, who is
only to be heard and obeyed in his word.

The Israelitish women hearing of the fame of David, and how he had killed
their deadly enemy Goliath, came forth to meet him playing upon instruments,
dancing and singing songs of joy and thanksgiving to the Lord who had given
them victory and delivered them, from the deadly hostility of him, who sought
their destruction every way. Now what makes this, for our le^d, wanton, nice
and vbiquitarie dauncings, for so, I may call them because they be used every
where, let the godly judge: ^he difference ^etween the ^ances of our
^orefathers, and ours.
who sees not rather y^ this example, (let Cerberus the dog of hell alatrate
what he list to the contrary) clean overthrows them. Theirs was a godly kind
of da^cing in praise of God: ours a lustful, baudie kind of deame^our, in
praise of our selves: the^rs to show their inward joy of mind for the
blessings of God bestowed upon them, ours to show our actiuitie, agilitie and
curious nicitie and to procure lustful love and such like wickedness infinite:
But to their second allegation: Their s^co^ Pillar shak^
ye Children (say they) of Israel danced being delivered out of the servitude
of Pharo and having passed over the red sea: I grant they did so, and good
cause they had so to do: For were they not emancipate and set free from three
great calamities and extreme miseries? First from the serui^e bondage of
Egypt, from the sword of Pharo, who pursued the rereward of their host, and
from the danger of the red sea, their enemies being overwhelmed in the same.

For these great and inestimable benefits and blessings received at the hands
of God, they played upon Instruments of music, leaped, daunced, and sung godly
songs unto ye Lord, showing by these outward gestures ye inward joy of their
hearts and minds. Now what conduces this, for the allowance of our luxurious
dauncings? How the Isr^^^lits danced^
Is it not directly against them? They danced for joy in thanks to god, we for
vainglorie^: they for love to God, we for love of our selves: they to show
the interior joy of the mind for God his blessing, heaped upon them: we to
show our concinitie, dexterity, and vain curiosity in the same: they to stir
up and to make them selves the apter to praise God, we to stir up carnal
appetites and fleshly motions: they to show their humility before God, and
we to show our pride both before God and ye world. But how so ever it be, sure
I am, their dancing was not like ^ures, consisting in measures, capers,
quauers, and I cannot tell what, for they had no such leas^re in Egigt to learn
such vain curiosity in that lustful bawdie school, for making of brick and
tyles. The dau^cing of our Forfa^hers may not ^e called a (...), but (...)
Godly (...). for joy
And notwithstanding, it is ambiguous whether this may be called a dau^cing or
not, at lest not like ours, but rather a cer^^^ kind of modest leaping,
skipping, or moving of the body to express the joy of ye mind in praise of
God, as the Man did, who being (...) by the power of our S^uiour Christ,
^^alked in the Temple, leapping, skipping, and praising God.

We never read, that they ever daunced, but at some wonderful por^ent, or
strange judgment of God, and therefore, made not a common practice of it, or a
daily occupation as it were, much less set up schools of it, and frequenting
nothing else night and day, Sabbath day, Their.3. Reason* ^examined.
and other, as we do. But to their third Reason: The Israelits dau^ced before
the Calf in Horeb. And what than? They made a Golden Calf, and adored it, may
we therefore do the like? They committed ydolatrie there, therefore is ydolatrie
good, because they committed it?

Adam, disobyed GOD, and obeyed the devil: is obedience therefore to the devil
good, because he did so?

Therefore we must not take heed what man has done heertofore, but what God
has commanded in his word to be done, and that follow, even to the death.
But to be short, as it is a friuilous thing to say, because they committed
Idolatry, therefore may we do the like, so it is no less ridiculous, to say,
because they daunced, therefore we may do the same: for as it is not lawful to
commit Idolatry, because they did so, so is it not lawful to dance, because
they daun^ed.

So that if this place infer any thing for dancing, it infers that we
must never dance but before a golden Calf, as they did: but I think by this
time, they are ashamed of their dances: therefore, of this place I need to sayn^
more, giving the^ to note, that this their dancing in respect of the end
thereof, was far dissonant from ours: for they daunced in honor of their
Idol, we clean contrary though neither the one nor the other be at any hand
tolerable.

Their fourth reason, Their.4. Reason.
Did not David dance before the Ark, say they? very true: and this place (as
the rest before) refelleth their customarie dauncings of men and women together
most excellently. For David danced him self alone, without either woman, or
musical Instrument to effeminate the mind. And this dancing of David was no
usual thing, nor freque^ted every day but that one time, and that in praise of
God, for the delivery of the Ark of God his testament out of the hands of the
Infidels and hethen people: the joy of this holy Prophet was so vehement, for
this great blessing of GOD (such a fervent zeal he bore to the truth) that it
burst forth into exterior action, y^ more to induce others to praise God also.
Would God we would dance as David daunced here, for the delivery of his
alsauing word out of the hands of that Italian Philistin and archenemy of all
truth, the Pope of Room, for in this respect I would make one to dance, to
leap, to skip, to triumph, and rejoice as David did before the Ark. Why David
d^unced before the Ark.
By this I trust any indifferent man sees, that by this place, they gain as
much for the maintenance of their* leude dancings, and baudie chorusses, as
they did by citing the former places, that is just nothing at all, which they
may put in their eyes and see never the w^rsse?

Their fifth reason. Their fifth Reason examined.
Did not Ieptath his daughter meet her Father when he came from war dancing
before him, and playing upon Instruments of Joy. Ieptath going forth to war
against the Amonites promised the Lord (making a rash vow) that if it would
please his Majesty to give him victory over his Ennemies, he would sacrifice
the first living thing that should meet him from his house: It pleased GOD that
his sole daughter and heir hearing of her Fathers prosperous return (as the
manner of the Country was) ran forth to meet her Father playing upon
instruments, in praise of GOD, and dancing before him for joy. Now what
proves this for their daunces? Truly, it overthrows them if it be well
considered: for first, we read that she did this but once, we daily: She in
praise of God, we in praises* of our selves: Wherefore and how the Daughters of
Iepthath dau^ced.
she for joy of her Fathers good success, we to stere up filthy and unclean
motions: She with a virginal gravity, we with a babish leuitie: she in comely
manner, we in bawdie gesture. And moreover, this shows, that women are to
dance by themselves (if they will needs dance*) and men by themselves, for so
imports the Tert, making no mention of any other her colleagues, There. 6.
Reason. Judith. Ca. 15.
or Companions dancing with her.

Their.vi. Reason: Did not y^ Israelitish women dance before Judith, coming
to visit her? I grant they did s^: the story is thus.

Holofernes, opposing himself, against the Israelits, the chosen people of
GOD, and intending to overthrow them, and to blot out* their remembrance for
ever from under heaven, assembled a huge power, and besieged them on every side.

The Israelits, seeing themselves circumvalled and in great danger on
eachside, suborned good Judith, Judith cutteth of the head of holofernes.
a vertous Godly Woman (for without some stratagem, or policy wrought, it
was impossible for them in the eyes of ye world, to have escaped) to repair to
Holofernes, and by some means or other to work his destruction: who guided by
the hand of God, attempted the thing and brought it happily to pass. For she
cut of his head with his own fauchine, wrapping his body in the canopie,
wherein he lay sleepingly possessed as he was with ye spirit of drunkenness: this
done, the Women of Israel came together, and went to visit this worthy Woman,
and to co^gratulat her prosperous success, with instruments of music, singing
of Godly songs, and dancing for joy, in h^nor and praise to God, for this
great victory obtained. Now who s^eth not, that these women sang, dau^ced, and
played upon instruments in praise of God, The vnlawfullnes of dancing of men
and women together
and not for any other lewdnes, or wantonness, as commonly the world does now
adays? This also overthrows the dauncinges of Men and Women together in one
company: for though there was an infinite number of People by, yet the Text
says, there daunced none, but only Women, which plainly argues the
unlawfulness of it in respect of Man. And this being but a particular fact of
a sort of imprudent Women, shall we draw it into example of life, and think it
lawful, or good, because they did practife it?

It was a custom in those days, when God had powered forth and notable
blessing upon his People from his Heavenly Palace, A customet dance in praise
of God.
the People in honor, praise and thanksgiving to God for them* would, play
upon their instruments, sing Godly Songs, dance, leap, skip and triumph,
showing forth the joy of their minds, with their thankfulness to GOD, by
all exterior gestures, that they could deuyse. Which kind of thankful
dancing, or spiritual rejoicing, would God, we did follow, leaving all other
wanton dancing to their Father the Devil.

Their.vij. Reason: There. 7. Reason.
Did not (quothe they) the Damsel dance before King Herod, when the head
of John Baptist was cut of? She daunced indeed: And herein they may see the
fruit of dancing, what goodness it brings: For, was not this the cause of
the beheading of John the Baptist? See whether dancing, Dancing styrreth up
lust.
styreth not up lust and inflameth the mind.

For, if Herod with seeing her dance, was so inflamed in her love, and
ravished in her behavior, that he promised her, to give her whatsoever she
would desire, though it were half of his Emperie, or Kingdom: what would he have
been, if he had daunced with her? and what are those that dance with them,
hand in hand, cheek by cheek, with bussing and kissing, slabbering and
smearing, most beastly to behold? in so much, as I have heard many impudently
say, that they have chosen their Wives, and wives their Husbands by dancing:
Which plainly proves the wickedness of it. Their.viij. reason: Their. 8.
Reason. Luc. 7.
Did not Christ rebuke the People, for not dancing, saying: we have pyped unto
you, but you have not daunced. They may as well conclude that Christ in this
place, was a Pyper, or a Minstrell, as that he allowed of dancing, or reproved
them, for not excercysing the same.

This is a Metaphorical, or Allegorical kind of speech, wherein our Savior
Christ, goes about to reprove and check the styfneckednes, the rebellion and
pertinacious co^tumacy of y^ Scribes and Phariseis, who were neither moved to
receive the glad tidings of the Gospel by the austeritie of John the Baptiste,
The more than obdu^at hardness of the Jews.
who came preaching unto them the doctrine of repentance, in mourning sort:
neither yet at the preaching of our Savior him self, breaking unto them the
pure Ambrosia, the Celestial Manna, the word of life in joyful, and gladsome
manner.

Ihon the Baptist he piped unto them, that is, he preached unto them,
austeritie of life, to mourn for their sins, to repent, to fast, pray and
such like. Our Savior Christ he pyped (that is) preached unto them, the glad
and comfortable tidyngs of ye Gospel, yet at neither of these kind of
concions, they were any whit moved, either to embrace Christ, or his gospel:
Wherefore he, sharply rebukes them, by a similitude of foolish Children
sitting in the market place, and piping unto them that would not dance. This is
the true undoubted sense of this place, which, whether it overthrow not all
kind of lewd dancing (at lest makes nothing for them) allowing a certain king
of spiritual dancing, and rejoicing of the heart unto God (that I may suspend
my own judgment) let wise men determine. Eccle. 3. Their. 9. Reason.


Their.ix. Reason: Says not Solomon, there is a time to weep, and a time to
laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to dance? This place is directly against
their usual kind of dancing. For, says not the Text, there is a time,
meaning, sometime, now and than, as the Israelites did in praise to GOD, when
any notable thing happened unto them, and not every day and hour as we do,
making an occupatio^ of it, never leaving it, until it leave us. But what, and
if Solomon Salomo^ means a certain kind of a spituall dau^cing or reioying of
the heart.
speaks here of a certain kind of spiritual dancing, and rejoicing of ye
heart in praise to GOD? This is easily gathered by the circumstances of the
place, but specially by the sentence precedent ( vz. there is a time to mourn,
and a time to da^ce etc.) that is, a time to mourn for our sins, and a time
to dau^ce or rejoice, for the unspeakable treasures purchased unto us by ye
death and passion of Jesus christ. How much this place makes for defense of
their nocturnall, diuturnall, wanton, lewd and lascivious dauncings (if it be
censured in the imparciall balance of true judgment) all ye world may see and
judge. And now to draw to an end, I will come unto their vltimum refugium.
Their vltimu^ refugium.
That is: Does not David both commend, and also command dancing and playing
upon instruments in diverse of his Psalm. In all those places, ye Prophet
speaks of a certain kind of spiritual dancing and rejoicing of the heart to
y^ Lord for his graces and benefits in mercy bestowed upon us. This is the
true kind of dancing, which the word of God does allow of in any place, and
not that we should trippe like rams, Why our feet were given us.
skip like goats, and leap like mad men. For, to y^ end our feet were not given
us, but rather to represent yeimage of God in us, to keep Company with the
Angels, and to glorify our heavenly Father through good works.


Spud. Do you condemn al kind of dancing, as wicked and profane?


Ph. All lewd, wanton, and lascivious dancing in public assemblies and
conuenticles, without respect either of sex, kind, time, place, Person, or any
thing else, I by the warrant of the word of God, do utterly condemn: But that
kind of dancing which is used to praise and laud the name of God withal (as
wear What dancing is condemned by the word of God.
the dau^ces of the people of the former world) either privately or publicly
is at no hand to be dysallowed, but rather to be greatly commended. Or if it be
used for man's comfort, recreation, and Godly pleasure* privately (every sex
distincted by themselves) whether with music, or otherwise, it cannot be but a
very tolerable exercise, being used moderatly, and in ye fear of God. And
thus, though, I condemn all filthy, luxurious and unclean dancing, yet I
condemn not al kind of dancing generally. For certain it is, the exercise it
self, in it own nature, quality and propriety, though to some it is lawful,
to othersome unlawful in diverse respects, is both ancient and general, having
been used ever in all ages, as well of ye Godly, as of ye wicked, almost from
the beginning. Wherefore, when I condemn the same in some, my meaning is, in
respect of the manifold abuses thereof. And in my judgment as it is used now a
days, an occupatio^ being made of it, and a continual exercise, without any
difference or respect had either to time, Person, sex or place in public
assemblies and frequencies of People, with such beastly slabberings, bussings
and smouchings and other filthy gestures and misdeameanors therein accustomed,
it is as impossible to be used without doing of inf^nit hurt, as it is for a
naked Man to lie in the midst of a hot burning fire, and not to consume. But
these abuses with other y^ like (as there be legions more in it) being cut of
from the ex^ercyse it self, the thing remains very commendable in some
respects. Or else, if our daunces tended, as I have said, to the setting forth
of GOD his glory (as the daunces used in preter time did) to draw others to
piety and sanctity of life, and to praise and rejoice in God, to recreat y^
mind oppressed with some great toil, or labor taken in true virtue and
godlynes, I would not (being don in the fear of GOD, men by them selves, and
Women by the^ selves, for else it is not possible to be without sin) much
gainstand it. But I see the contrary is every where used to ye great dishonor
of God, Why men ^^old dance ^y themselfes and women by themselfs.
and corruption of good manners, which God amend.


Spud. And wherefore, would you have Men to dance by them selves, and Women by
them selves?


Philo. Because it is without all doubt* a provocation to lust and venery, and
the fire of lust once conceived, Why men should dance by the^ selves and Women
by the^ selves.
(by some irruption or other) bursteth forth into open action of whoredom
and fornication. And therefore a certain godly Father saidwel, Omnis saltus in
chorea, est saltus in profundum inferni, Every leap or skip in dance, is a leap
toward hell. Yet notwithstanding in Ailgna it is counted a virtue, and an
ornament to a man, yea, and the only way to attain to promotion and
advancement, as experience teaches.


Spud, Notwithstanding, for my further instruction, I pray you show me what
Fathers and Councels have judged of it, and what they have writ and decreed
against it.


Philo. If I should go forth to show all the inuectiues of Fathers, all the
decrees of councels, and all the places of holy Scripture against the same,
Testimonies of Fathers councels, and Writers against dancing.
I should never make an end: wherefore, of many I will select a few, hoping that
they will suffice any reasonable man.

Syrach says, frequent not the company of a woman, that is a singer or a
dauncer, neither hear her, Eccle. 131
least thou be intrapped in her craftines. Chrysostom, dylating upon Matthew
says: In every dance, the devil daunceth by, for company, though not visible
to ye eye, yet palpable to ye mind. Mat. ^^.
Theophilus, writing upon Mark y^ sixth Chapter says, Mira collusio saltat per
puellam Diabolus This is a wunderful deceit, for the devil danceth amongst the^
for company. Augustine Augustine.
writing upon the 32. Psalm, says, Erasmus.
it is better to dig all the Sabbath day, then to dance. Erasmus, in his
Book, de contemptu Mundi, says, Whose mind is so well disposed, so stable,
or well settled, which these wanton dances, with swinging of arms, kicking of
legs, playing upon instruments, and such like would not overcome and corrupt:
Wherefore says he, as thou desire thine own credit, and welfare, Lodouicus
viues.
eschew these scabbed and scuruy company of dauncers.

Ludouicus Viues says, amongst all pleasures, dancing and voluptuousnes is
the kingdom of Venus, and the empire of Cupid: wherefore, says he, it were
better for thee to stay at home, and to break either a leg, or an arm of thy
body, then to break the legs and arms of thy mind and soul, as thou do
in filthy scuruy dauncings. And as in all Feasts and pastimes, dancing is the
last, so it is the extreme of all other vice: Dauncers thought to be madmen.
And again, there were (says he) from far cuntries, certain men brought into
our parts of ye world, who when they saw men dance, ran away, meruelously
afraid: crying out and thinking the^ to have been mad. And no marvel, for
who seeing them leap, skip and trip like Goats and and hindes, if he never saw
the^ before, would not think them either mad, or else possessed with some fury?
Bullinger, Bullinger.
paraphrasting upon Matthew, 14. says, After feasting swilling and gulling
comes dancing, the root of all filthynes and uncleanness.

Master Calvin, Calvin.
writing upon Job, Ser. 8. Cap. 12. calls dancing the chief mischeef of all
mischeefs, saying there be such unchaste gestures in it, as are nothing else, but
inticements to whordome.

Marlorate, upon Matthew says, whosoever has any care either of honesty,
sobriety or gravity, have long since bad adieu to all filthy dancing.

No man (says a certain heathen Writer) if he be sober daunceth, except he
be mad.

Salustius, Salust.
commending Sempronia that renowned whore, for many goodly gifts, condemns
her for her over great skill in dancing: concluding, that dancing is the
Instrument of lechery.

Cicero, says, Cicero.
a good man would not dance in open assembles, though he might by it get
infinite treasure.

The Council of Laodecea decreed that it should not be lawful for any Christian
to dance at marriages or at any sollemne feast.

It an other Council it was enacted, that no man should dance at any marriage,
nor yet at any other time.

The Emperor Justinian decreed, that for no respect in feasts or assemblies,
there should be any dancing, for fear of corrupting the Beholders, and
enticing men to sin.

Thus you may see, both Scripture, councels and Fathers, holy and profane,
All Writers both holy and profane against dancing.
heathen and other, even all ingenerall, have detested and abhorred this
^ilthie dancing, as the quauemire or plash of all abomination: and therefore,
it is no exercise for any Christians to follow: for it stirs up the motions
of ye flesh, it induces lust, it infers ^a^drie, affoordeth ribaldrie,
maintains wantonness, and ministers oil to y^ stinking lamp of deceitful
pride: and in summa, nourishes a world of wickedness and sin. Dancing a
World of sin



Spud Now that the wickedness of it, is so manifestly showed, that no man can
deny it, I pray you who invented this noble science, or from whence sprang it?


Philo. Hereof, Who invented dancing and from whom it sprang,
there be sundry and diverse opinions: for some hold and opinion (and very
likely) that it sprang from the heathen idolatrous Pagans and Infidels, who
having offered up their sacrifices victimats and holocaustes to their false
Gods, in reverence of them, and for joy of their so doing, used to dance,
leap, and skip before them.

And this may be proved by the Israelits themselves, who having seen and
learned the same practice in Egypt, feared not to imitate the like in the
wilderness of Horeb: some again, suppose that Pyrrhus one of Sibils Priests
deuise^ it in Creet. Others hold that the Priests of Mars, who in Room were
had in great estimation for their dexterity in dau^cing, invented it: A
Supposall who inverted dancing.
Others think y^ one Hiero a truculent and bloody Tirant in Sicilia, who to set
up his tyranny the more, inhibited the people to speak one to an other, for
fear of insurrections and commotions in his kingdom was the occasion of y^
inuenting thereof: for when the Sicilians, saw that they might not under pain
of death one speak to another, they inverted dancing to express the inward
meaning and intentio^s of the mind by outward ^ecks and exterior gestures of
the body, which use afterward grew into custom, and now into nature. But what
so^uer men say of it, or from whence soever it sprang, S. Chrisostom says
plainly (to whom I willingly subscribe) Impossible that dancing should be good.
that it sprang from the t^ates of the Devils breast, from whence all mischeef
else does flow: Therefore to conclude, if of the eggs of a Cokatrice, may be
made good meat for man to eat, and if of the web of a spider, can be made good
cloth for man's body, then may it be proved that dancing is good and an
exercise fit for a christian man to follow, but not before:

Wherefore God of his mercy take it away from us.


Spud, What say you of Music, is it not a laudable science?


Of Music in Ailgna, and how it allureth to vanity.
Philo. I Say of Music, as Plato, Aristotle, Galen and many others have said
of it, that it is very il for yung heds, for a certain kind of nice, smoothe
sweetness in alluring the auditorie to nicenes, effeminacie, pusilla^mitie, A
comparison betwixt honey and dancing.
and lothso^nes of life, so as it may not improperly be compared to a sweet
electuarie of honey, or rather to honey it self, for as honey and such like
sweet things received into y^ stomach, does delight at the first, but
afterward they make the stomach so quasie, nice and weak, that it is not able
to admit meat of hard digesture. So sweet Music, at the first delights the
ears, but afterward corrupts and depraueth the mind, making it weak, and
quasie, and inclined to all licenciousnes of life whatsoever. Wits dulled by
Music.


And right as good edges are not sharpened, (but obtused) by being whetted upon
soft stones, so good wits by hearing of soft music are rather dulled then
sharpened, and made apt to all wantonness and sin. And therefore Writers affirm
Sappho to have been expert in music, Authors of the bringing in of music.
and therefore whorish.

Tyrus Maximius says, the bringing in of music, was a cup of poison to all
the world.

Clytomachus, if he ever heard any talking of love, or playing upon musical
Instruments, would run his way and bid them farwell.

Plutarchus, complains of Music, and says, that it does rather femenine
the mind as pricks unto vice, then conduce to godliness as spurs unto Virtue.

Pythagoras, condemns them for fools, and bequeathes them a cloke-bag, that
measure Music by sound and ear. Thus you hear the judgment of the wise,
concerning Music, now judge thereof as y^u list your self.


Spud. I have heard it said, (and I thought it very true) that Music does
delight both man and beast, reuiueth the spirits, comfort the heart, and
makes it apter to the service of GOD.


Philo. I grant Music is a good gift of GOD, Music the good gift of God.
and that it delights both man and beast, reuiueth the spirits, comfort
y^ heart, and makes it redyer to serve GOD, and therefore did David both use
music him self, and also commend the use of it to his posterity (and being
used to that end, for man's private recreation music is very laudable.)

But being used in public assemblies and private conuenticles Of music in
public assemblies, and conuenticles.
as directories to filthy dancing, through the sweet harmony and smoothe
melody thereof, it estraungeth ye mind stireth up filthy lust, womannisheth ye
mind rauisheth the heart, enflameth concupisence, and brings in uncleanness.
But if music openly were used (as I have said) to ye prasie and glory of God
as our Fathers used it, How music were tolerable and good.
and as was intended by it at the first, or privately in a man's secret Chamber
or house for his own solace or comfort to drive away the fantasies of idle
thoughts, solicitude, care, sorrow and such other perturbations and
molestations of the mind, the only ends whereto true Music tends, it were very
commendable and tolerable. If Music were thus used it would comfort man
wunderfully, and move his heart to serve God the better, but being used as it
is, it corrupts good minds, makes them womannish and inclined to all kind
of whordome and mischeef.


Spud, What say you then of Musitions, and Minstrels who live only upon the
same art?


Philo. I think that all good minstrelles, The scarsity of good musitions and
minstrelles.
sober and chaste musicions (speking of such drunken sockets, and bawdye
parasits as ra^ge the Cuntreyes, ryming and singing of unclean, corrupt, and
filthy songs in Tauernes, Alehouses, Innes, and other public assemblies)
may dau^ce ye wild Moris through a needles eye. For how should they bear chaste
minds, seeing that their exercise is the pathway to all uncleanness. Their is no
ship, The marcha^dise of minstrelles, and musi^ions.
so balanced with massy matter, as their heads ^re fraught with all kind of
bawdie songs, filthy ballads, and scuruie rymes, serving for every purpose,
and for every Cumpanie.

Who be more bawdie than they? who vncleaner than they, who more licentious,
and loose minded? who more incontinent tha^ they? and briefly, who more
inclyned to all kind of insolency and lewdnes than they? The wickedness of
musitions and minstrels.
wherefore, if you would have your son, soft, womannish, unclean, smoth
mouthed, affected to bawdrie, scurrilitie, filthy rimes, and unseemly talking:
brifly, if you would have him, as it wear transnatured into a woman, or worse,
and inclyned to all kind of whordome and abomination, set him to dancing
school, and to learn music, and than shall you not fail of your purpose. How
to have Children le^ned in all wickedne^.
And if you would have your daughter whoorish, bawdie, and unclean, and a
filthy speaker, and such like, bring her up in music and dancing, and my
life for youres, you have wun the goal.

And yet notwithstanding it wear better (in respect of acceptance) to be a
Pyper, The scarcytie of dyuines.
or bawdye minstrell, than a deuyne, for the one is looued for his ribauldrie,
the other hated for his gravity, wisdom, and sobriety.

Every town, City and Country is full of these minstrelles to pype up a
dance to the Devil, but of dyuines, so few there be as they may hardly be
seen.

But some of them will reply and say, what Sir? we have lycenses from justices
of peace to pype, and use our minstralsie to our best commodity? Cursed be
those licenses, which lycense any man to get his living, with the destruction
of many thousands.

But have you a license from the Arch-iustice of peace Christ Jesus? If you
have so, you may be glad, Licenses granted to musitions and minstrels to
exercise their mystery or faculty of mischief.
if you have not (for the Word of GOD is against your ungodly exercyses, and
condemns them to Hell) than may you as rogues, extrauagantes, and straglers
from the Heavenly Country be arrested of the high justice of peace Christ
Jesus, and be punished with eternal death, notwithstanding your presented
lice^ces of earthly men. Who shall stand betwixt you, and the Justice of GOD at
the day of Judgment? Who shall excuse you, for drawing so many thousands to
Hell? shall the Justices of peace? shall their licenses? Oh no: For neither
ought they to grant any licencens to any to do hurt withal, No lycences to
do hurt withal are to be granted.
neither (if they would) ought any to take them.

Give over therefore your Occupations, you Pypers, you Fiddlers, you minstrelles,
and you musitions, you Drummers, you Tabretters, you Fluters, and all other of
that wicked brood, for the blood of all those, whom you draw to destruction
through your prouocations, A Cauet to musitions, minstrelles and all others of
twat stamp.
and intysing allurementes shall be powered upon your heads, at the day of
Judgment, but hereof enough, and perchance more than will like their humor.


Spud. Is it not lawful upon the Sabbath day to play at Dice, Cards,
Tables, Bowls, Tennisse, and such other pleasant exercyses, wherein Man
takes pleasure and delight?


Cards, Dice, Tables, Tennisse, Bowls, and other exercyses, used unlawfully in
Ailgna.
Philoponus. THese be no Sabaothlike exercyses for any Christian man to follow
any day at all, Exercises unlawful upon the Sabbath day.
much less upon the Sabbath day, which the Lord would have to be consecrat to
himself, and to be spent in holy and Godly exercyses according to his will. As
for cards, dice, tables, bowls, tennisse, and such like, they are furta
officiosa, a certain kind of smooth deceiptfull, Furta officiosa.
and sleightie theft, whereby many a one is spoiled of all that ever he has,
sometimes of his life withal, yea of body and soul for ever: And yet (more is
the pity) these be ye only exercyses used in every man's house, all the year
through. But specially in Christimas time there is nothing else used but cards,
dice tables masking, mumming, bowling* and such like fooleries: And the reason
is, they think they have a commission and prerogative that time, All wicked
games used in Christmas tym^.
to do what they lust, and to follow what vanity they will. But (alas) do they
think that they are privileged at that time, to do evil? the holier the
time is (if one time were holier than another, as it is not) the holier ought
their works to be. Can any time dispense with them or give them liberty to
sin. No, no: No time privileged a man to sin.
the soul which sins shall dye, at what time so ever it offe^deth. But what
will they say? Is it not Christmas? must we not be merry? truth it is: we ought
both than, and at all times besides to be merry in the Lord, but not otherwise,
not to swil and gull more that time tha^ at any other time, not to lavish
forth more at that time, than at another times.

But the true celebratio^ of the Feast of christmas is, The true keeping of
Christmas.
to meditat (and as it were to ruminat) upon the incarnation and birth of
Jesus Christ, not only that time, but all the times and days of our life, and
to show our selves thankeful to his Majesty for the same: Notwithstanding,
who is ignorant, that more mischief is that time comm^^ted than in all the
year besides? what masking and ^umming, whereby robbery, whordome, murder,
and what no, it is committed: what dicing and carding, what eating and drinking,
what ba^queting and feasting is than used more than in all the year besides?
Wickedness in Christmas.
to the great dishonor of GOD, and impouerishing of the realm.


Spud. Is it not lawful for one Christian to play with another at any kind
of game, or to win his money, if he can?


Philo. To play at tables, cards, dice, bowls or the like (though a good
Christian man will not so ydlely, Unlawful for one Christian to play with
another to win his money.
and vainly spend his golden days) one Christian with another, for their
private recreations, after some oppression of study, to druie away fantasies,
and such like, I doubt not, but they may, using it moderatly, with
interm^ssion, and in the fear of GOD? But to play for lucre of gain, and for
desire only of his Brothers substance (rather than for any other cause) it is
at no hand lawful, or to be suffered.

For as it is not lawful to rob, steal and purloine by deceit, or slaight,
so is it not lawful to get thy Brothers goods from him, by ^arding, dicing,
tabling, bowling, or any other kind of theft, for these plays are no better,
nay worser than open theft, for open theft every Man can be ware of, but this
being a crafty pollitick theft, and commonly don under pretense of Freendship,
few, or none at all can beware of it. The commandment says, thou shall not
covet, nor desire any thing that belongs to thy Neighbor. Now, it is
manifest, that those that play for money, not only covet their Brothers
money, but also use craft falsehood and deceit to wine the same.

The Apostle, forbids us to use deceit in bargaining, in buying, or
selling, much less than ought we to use deceit in gaming.

Our Savior Christ bids every man, do to an other, as he would another
should do unto him. A rule to restrain unlawful gameuing.
Which rule if it wear duly observed, wear sufficient to withraw men both
from all kind of gameing, and also from all kind of indyrect, and unjust
dealing.

For as thou would not that another man should win thy money, so thou
ought not to desire the winning of his, for thou must do as thou would be
done by.


Spud. If gameing for money be so unlawful, wherefore are there howses, and
places appointed for maintenance of the same?


Philo. That excuses not the fault, but aggrauateth it rather. And truly
great pity it is, that these brothel howses (for so I call all gaming howses
Gamiug houses with their wickedness
) are suffered as they be.

For, are they not the very seminaries, and nurseries of all kind of
abomination, whatsoever heart can think, or tongue express.

And therefore I marvel y^ those who keep and maintain these gaming howses,
can ever have light hearts, or once to look up toward Heaven, y^ not only
suffer this manifest theft in their howses (for gaming is no better) but also
maintain and nourish the same.

The Apostle says, not only they that do evil, digni sunt morte, are
worthy of death, but also, qui consentiunt facientibus, those who consent to
them that do it.

Call to mind, than what evils come of this wicked excercyse I beseech you.

For does not swearing, tearing, and blaspheminge of the Name of GOD, does not
stinkinge Whordome, Theft, Robbery, Deceit, Fraud, Cosenage, fighting
Quareling, and sometimes Murder, does not pride rapine, drunkns, beggerye, and
in fine, a shameful end follow it, as the shadow does follow the body?
Wherefore I will not doubt to call these gaming howses, the slaughter howses
the shambles or blockhowses of the Devil, wherein he butchereth Christen men's
souls infinite ways, God knows, the Lord suppress them.


Spud. Wear there ever any laws made against the inordinat abuse hereof,
Laws and sanctions di^^lgat against gaming.
or have the Godly in any age misliked it?


Philo. In all ages and times, both the godly sober Christians have detested
it, and wholesome laws have been promulgat against it.

Octauius Augustus, was greatly reproched of the Writers of his time, for his
great delight in gaming, notwithstanding, his manifold virtues besides.

Cicero, objected to Marcus Antonius, his often gaming, as a note of infamy
unto him.

The noble Lacedaemonians sent their Ambassadors to Corinth, The infamy
purchased by gaming.
to co^clud a peace, who coming thither, and finding the People playing at
dice, and cards, and unthrifty games, returned back again (infecta pace) their
peace vnconcluded, saying, it should never be reported, that they would join in
league with Dice-players and gamesters.

The same Lacedaemonians, sent to Demetrius in decision of his diceplaying, a
pair of dice of gold. Sir, Thomas Eliot (that worthy Knight) in his Book of
go^ernance, asks, who will not think him a light man of small credit,
dissolut, remise and vain, that is a Dici-player, or gamester.

Publius says. Quanto peritior est aleator in sua art, tanto nequior est, and
vita and moribus. How much co^ninger a man is in gaming and diceplaying, so
much corrupter he is both in life and manners. Justinian made a law, that none
should play at dice, Laws against gaming.
nor cards for no cause, neither privately, nor openly.

Alexander Seuerus, banished all gamesters out of his dominions. And if any
were found playing, their goods were confiscat and they counted as mad men ever
after, never trusted, nor esteemed of any.

Ludouicus, ordained y^ al gamesters should depart his la^d, for fear of
corrupting of others.

K. Richard the second, forbad all kind of gaming, and namely dice-playing.
Punishment for gaming.


K. Henry the fourth, ordained y^ every Dice-player should be imprisoned six
days for every several time he offended in gaming.

K. Edward the fourth, ordained who so kept gaming howses, should suffer
imprisonment three years, The penalty for those that keep gaming howses.
and forfait.xx.li. and the Players to be imprisoned* two years, and forfait x.
pound.

K. Henri that seventh, ordained y^ every Dice-player should be imprisoned all
a day, and the Keeper of the dicing house to forfait for every offense vi.
shil. viij.d. and to be bound by recognizance to good behavior.

K. Henry the eight, ordained that every one that kept di^ing houses, should
forfa^t.xl. shil. and the Players to forfait vi. shil. viij.d. with many good
laws and sanctio^s set forth against this raging Abuse of gaming, which to
avoid tediousnes I omit, beseching y^ Lord to root up, and supplant these, and
all other stumbling blocks in his church what so ever.


Sp. As I remember in the Catalogue of abuses before, you said, ye sabbath day
was profaned, by bearbaiting, cockfighting, hau^ing, hunting, keeping of
faires, courts, and markets upon ye said day. Is it not lawful tha^ to follow
these exercises upon the sabbath day, neither?


Bear baiting and other exercyses, used unlawfully in AILGNA.
Philoponus. THese Hethnicall exercyses upon the Sabbath day, which ye Lord
has co^secrat to holy uses, for the glory of his Name, and our spiritual
comfort, are not in any respect tolerable, or to be suffered. For, is not the
baiting of a Bear, besides that it is a ^^^thie, stinking* and loathsome game, a
dangerous, and perilous exercise? wherein a man is in danger of his life
every minut of an hour: which thing though it wear not so, yet what exercise
is this meet for any Christian? what christian heart ca^ take pleasure to see
one poor beast to rent, tear, and kill another, and all for his foolish
pleasure? And although they be bloody beasts to mankind, and seek his
destruction, No Creature to be abused.
yet we are not to abuse them, for his sake who made the^, and whose creatures
they are. For notwithstanding that they be evil to us, and thirst after our
blood, yet are they good creatures in their own nature and kind, and made to
set forth the glory and magnificence of the great God, and for our use, and
therefore for his sake not to be abused. It is a mon saying amongst all men,
borrowed from y^ french: Qui aim Iean, aim son chie^, love me, love my dog, so
love God, love his creatures.

If any should abuse, but the dog of another man's, would not ^e who owes the
dog, think y^ the abuse thereof resulteth to himself? God is abused when his
Creatures are misused.
And shall we abuse y^ creatures of God, yea take pleasure in abusing the^, and
yet think y^ the contumely don to the^, redou^deth not to him who made them?
but admit it wear granted that it wear lawful to abuse the good Creatures
of God, yet is it not lawful for us to spend our golden years in such idle and
vain exercyses daily and hourelie, as we do.

And some who take themselves for no small fools are so far assotted,
Keeping of mastyues and bandog^.
that they will not stick to keep a dosen, or a score of great mastiues and
ba^dogs, to their no small charges, for the maintenance of this goodly game
(forsooth) and will not make any bones of.xx.xl. C. pound. at once to hazard
at a bait: with feight dog, feight bear (say they) the devil part all. And to
be plain, I think the Devil is the Master of the game, beareward and all. A
goodly pastyme, forsooth, worthy of commendation, and well sitting these
Gentlemen of such reputation. But how much the Lord is offended for the
profanation of his Sabbath by such unsavory exercyses, his Heavenly Majesty
of late has reueiled, pouring forth his heavy wrath, his fearful
judgments, and dreadful vengeance upon the Beholders of these vanities.


A Fearful Example of GOD his Judgment upon the prophaners of his Sabbath.
Upon the 13. day of January last, being the Sabbath day. Anno. 1583. the
People, Men, Women and Children, both young and old, an infinite number,
^^ocking to those infamous places, where these wicked exercyses are usually
practiced (for they have their courts, gardens and yards for y^ same purpose:)
when they were all come together, and mounted aloft upon their scaffolds, and
galleries, and in midst of al their iolytie and pastime, all the whole
building (not one stick standing) fell down with a most wonderful and
fearful confusion. So, that either two or three hundred, men, weme^ and
children (by estimation) whereof seven were killed dead, some were wounded, some
lamed, and othersome bruised and crushed, almost to the death. Some had their
brains dashed out, some their heads all to squasht, some their legs broken,
some their arms, some their backs, some their shoulders, some one hurt, some
another. A woeful cry.
So, that you should have hard a woeful cry, even pearcing the skies, parents
bewayling their children, Children their loving Parents: wives their Husbands,
and Husbands their wives, marvelous to behold. This woeful spectacle and
heavy indgement, pitiful to hear of, but most ruefull to behold, did y^ Lord
send down from Heaven to show unto the whole World how grievously he is
offended with those that spend his Sabbath in such wicked exercises: In y^
mean time leaving his temple desolat and empty. God grant all men, may take
warning hereby to shun the same, for fear of like or worser Judgment, to come.

A fearful Judgment of GOD, showed at the Theaters.
THE like Judgment (almost) did the Lord show unto them a little before, being
assembled at their Theaters, to see their bawdie enterluds, and other
trumperies practiced. For, he caused ye earth mightily to shak and quauer, as
though all would have fallen down, A woeful spectacle.
whereat the People sore amazed, some leapt down (from the top of ye turrets,
pinacles, and towers, where they stood) to the ground, whereof some had their
legs broke, some their arms, some their backs, some hurt one where, some
another, and many sore crushed and bruised: but not any, but they went away store
afraid, and wounded in conscience. And yet ca^ neither ye one, nor y^ other,
fray them from these devilish exercyses, until the Lord consume them all in
his wrath: which God forbid. The Lord of his mercy, open the eyes of the
maiestrats, to pluck down these places of abuse, that god may be honored, and
their consciences disburthe^ed. Cockfeighting upon the Sabbath.


Besides these exercises, they flock thick and three fold to y^ cockf^ights an
exercise nothing inferior to y^ rest, where nothing is used, but swering,
forswering, deceit fraud, collusion, co^enage, scoulding, railing, conuitious
talking, feighting, brawling, quarreling, drinking, whooring, and which is
worst of all, robbing of one an other of their goods, and y^ not by direct, but
indirect means and atte^pts: and yet to blau^ch and set out these mischiefs
wtall (as though they were virtues) they have their appointed days and set
howrs, Appointed times for exercise of dyuelries.
when these d^uelries must be exercised. They have houses erected to y^
purpose, flags and ensigns hanged out^ to give notice of it to others, and
proclamation goes out to proclaim ye same, to th^end y^ many may come to the
dedication of this solemn feast of mischief: the Lord supplant them. And as
for hawking and hunting upon the sabbath day, Hawking and hunting upon the
sabbath.
it is an exercise upon y^ day, no less unlawful tha^ the other. For, no man
ought to spend any day of his life, much less every day in his life, as many
do, in such vain and idle pastimes: wherefore, let Gentlemen take ^eed, for be
sure accounts must be given at the day of judgment for every minut of time,
^oth how they have spent it and in what exercyses. And let them be sure no more
liberty is given the^, No more liberty given to one than another for
mispe^ding of their goods.
to mispend an hour, or one jot of the Lord his goods, than is given to the
poorest, and meanest person y^ lives upon the face of the earth. I never read
of any in y^ volume of y^ sacred scripture that was a good man, and a Hunter.

Esau, was a great hun^er, but a reprobat: Ismaell a great hunter, but a
miscreant: Nemrode a great hunter, No good hunters, scripture.
but yet a reprobat, and a vessel of wrath. Thus I speak not to condemn
hawking and hunting altogether, being used for recreation, now and than, but
against the continual use thereof daily, hourly, weekly, yearly, yea all the
time of their life, without intermissio^. And such a felicity have some in it,
as they make it all their joy, bestowing more upon hawks and hounds, and a
sort of idle lubbers to follow them in one year, than they will impart to the
poor members of Christ Jesus in vij. years, Cost bestowed in hauks and dogs.
peradventure in all the days of their life. So long as man in Paradise
persisted in innocence, all beasts what so ever, we are obedient to him, and
came and prostrated themselves before him. But ever since his ^all, When all
beasts wear obedient to man and wherefore they ^ebell.
they have fled from him, and disobeyed him, because of his sin: that seeing he
disobeyed the Lord, they again disobeied him. For, so long as man obeyed God,
so long they obeyed him: but so soon as man disobeyed God, they disobeyed him,
and becam enemies to him, as it were seeking to revenge ye injury which man
had don unto GOD, in disobeying his laws. Wherefore, the cause why all beasts
do fly from us, and are become Enemies to us, is our disobedience to the LORD,
which we are rather to sorrow for, than to hunt after their deaths by the
sheading of their blood.

^If necessity or want of other meats inforceth us to seek after their lives,
it is lawful to use them in the fear of God, with thanks to his name: but for
our pastimes and vain pleasures sake, we are not in any wise to spoil or hurt
them. For pleasure sake only no man ought to abuse any of the cretures of God.
Is he a christian man or rather a pseudo-christian, that delights in blood?
Is he a Christian that spends all his life in wanton pleasures and plesaunt
delights? Is he a Christian that buieth up the corn of y^ poor, turning it
into bread (as many do) to feed dogs for his pleasure? Is he a christian that
lives to the hurt of his Neighbor in treading and breaking down his hedges,
in casting open his gates in trampling of his corn and otherwise, H^rt by
hunting to poor Men.
in preiudicing him as hunters do? wherefore God give them grace to see to it,
and to mend it betimes ere it be to late, for they know mora trahit periculum,
delay brings danger. Let us not defer to leave the evil and to do good,
least the wrath of the Lord be kindled against us, and consume us from of the
upper face of the Earth?

Spud, What say you to keeping of Markets, of Fayres, Courts and Leetes upon
y^ Sabbath day? Not lawful to keep cou^es, Leets Markets and Fayres upon the
Sabbath day,
Think you it is not lawful to use the same upon any day?


Philo. No truly, for can you serve God and the devil together, can we carry
to God and ferrie to the devil, can we serve two Masters and neither offend
the one nor the other? can we serve God and Mammon? can we please God and the
world both at one time? The Lord will not be served by peecemeale, for either
he will have the wholeman, or else none. For says he, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy soul, withal thy mind, witha^l thy power, withal thy
strength, and so forth, orels with none at all. Then seeing that we are to
give over our selves so wholely and totally to the service of God, al ye days
of our life, but especially upon the Sabbath day, Abuse of the Sabbath by
Fayres, maske^s.
being consecrate to that end, we may not intermedle with these profane
exercised upon that day. For it is more then manifest y^ these faires, markets,
courts and leetes upon the Sabbath day, are not only a hindera^ce unto us in
the true service of God, and an abuse of y^ Sabbath, but also lead us the path
way to hell. The evil in Fayres and Markets.
For what cosonage is not there practiced? what falshod, deceit and fraud is
not there exercised? what dissimulation in bargaining? what setting forth of
fucate and deceiuable wares, is not there freque^ted? what lying swering, The
evils in Courts and Leets practiced.
forswering, drunkenness, whordom, theft, and so^etimes murder, either there or
by ye way thither, is not every where used? In courts and (...) what envy
malice and hatred is noo^rshed? what expostulation, railing, scoulding,
periuring and reperiuring is maintained? what opression of y^ poor, what
favoring the rich, what injustice and indirect dealing? what bribing,
deceiving, what poling and pilling is there practiced? it would make a
christian heart to bleed in beholding it. And yet notwithstanding we must have
these goodly pagea^ts played upon y^ sabbath day (in a wanion) because there
are no mo days in y^ week. And heerby y^ sabbath is co^taminat, Gods word
contemned, his co^mandeme^ts disanulled, his sacraments co^culcate, his
ordinances neglected, and in su^ma, his blood trod under feet and all mischeef
maintained. The Lord cut of these with all other sin, both from their souls
and thy Sabbath, that thy name may be glorified, and thy Church truly edified.


Spud. Is y^ playing at football, reding of merry books and such like
delectations, a violation or profanation of the Sabbath day?


Ph. Any exercise which wtdraweth us from godliness, either upon ye sabbath,
Playing at Football.
or any other day else, is wicked and to be forbiden. Now who is so grossly
blind, yt sees not, yt these aforesaid exercises not only wtdraw us from
godliness and virtue, but also hail and allure us to wickedness and sin: for as
concerning football playing: I protest unto you, it may rather be called a
freendly kind of fight, Football a freendly kind of fight.
then a play or recreation. A bloody and murdering practice, then a felowly
sport or pastime.

For: does not every one lie in weight for his Adversary, seeking to
overthrow him and to pick him on his nose, though it be upon hard stones, in
ditch or dale, in valley or hill, or what place soever it be, he cares not so
he have him down. And he that can serve ye most of this fashion, he is counted
the only fellow, and who but he? so that by this means, sometimes their necks
are broken, so^etimes their backs, sometime their legs, Hurt by football
playing.
sometime their arms, sometime one part thurst out of joint, sometime an
other, sometime the noses gush out with blood, sometime their eyes start out:
and sometimes hurt in one place, sometimes in another. But whosoever scapeth
away the best goes not scotfree, but is either sore wounded, craised and
bruseed, so as he dies of it, or else scapeth very hardly: and no marvel, for
they have the sleights to meet one betwixt two, to dashe him against the heart
with their elbowes, to hit him under the short ribber with their griped fists,
and with their k^ees to catch him upon the hip, and to pick him on his neck,
with a hundred such murdering devices: and hereof, Football playing a
murdering Play.
grows envy, malice, ra^cour, cholor, hatred, displeasure, enmity and what
not else? and sometimes fighting, brawling, contention, quarrel picking,
murder, homicide and great effusion of blood, as experience daily teaches.

Is this murdering play now an exercise for the Sabbath day? is this a
christian dealing for one brother to mayme and hurt another, and that upon
prepensed malice, or set purpose? is this to do to another, as we would wish
another to do to us, God make us more careful over the bodies of our Brethren.

And as for the reading of wicked Books, they are utterly unlawful, not only
to be read, but once to be named, and that not (only) upon the Sabbath day,
Reading of wicked books
but also upon any other day: as which tend to the dishonor of God,
deprauation of good manners and corruption of christian souls. For as corrupt
meats do annoy the stomach, and infect the body, so the reading of wicked and
ungodly Books (which are to the mind, as meat is to the body) infect the
soul, The evil coming by reading evil Books*
and corrupt ye mind, hailing it to destruction: if the great mercy of God be
not present.

And yet notwithstanding, whosoever will set pen to paper now a days, how
dishonest soever, or unseemly of christian ears his argument be, is permitted
to go ^orward, and his woork plausibly admitted and freendly licensed, and
gladly imprinted without any prohibition or contradiction at all: whereby it is
grown to this issue, that books and pamphlets of scurrilitie and baudrie, are
better esteemed and more vendible then the godlyest and sagest books that be:
for if it be a godly treatise, reproouing vice, and teaching virtue, away with
it, for no man (almost) though they make a floorish of virtue, and godlynes,
will buy it, nor (which is less) so much as once touch it. This makes the
Bible, the blessed Book of God, to be so little esteemed. That worthy Book
of Martyrs made by that famous Father and excellent Instrument in God his
Church, Master John Fox, so little to be accepted and all other good books
little or nothing to be reverenced: whilst other toys, fantasies and bableries
whereof the world is full, are suffered to be printed. These propha^e schedules,
sacraligious libels, and hethnical pamphlets of toys and bableries (the
Authors whereof may vendicate to them selves no small commendations, at the hands
of the devil for inuenting the same) corrupt men's minds, pervert good wits,
allure to baudrie, induce to whordome, suppress virtue and erect vice: which
thing how should it be otherwise? for are they not inverted and excogitat by
Beelzebub written by Lucifer, lice^sed by Pluto, printed by Cerberus and set a
broche to sale by the infernal furies themselves to ye poysning of the whole
world: But let the Inue^tors, the lice^sors, the printers and the sellers of
these vain toys and more then Hethnicall impieties take heed for the blood of
all those which perish or take hurt through these wicked books, shall be powered
upon their heads at the day of judgment, and be required at their hands.


Spud. I pray you how might al these inormities, and Abuses be reformed? For,
it is to small purpose to show ye abuses, except you show withal how they
might be reformed.


Philo. By putting in practice and executing those good laws, wholesome
sanctions, and Goldy statutes, which have been heretofore, and daily are set
forth and established, as GOD be thanked, they are many.

The want of the due execution whereof, is ye cause of all these mischiefs,
which both rage and reign amongst us.


Spud. What is the cause why these laws are not executed, as they ought to be?


Philo. Truly I cannot tell, except it be through the nigligence, and contempt
of the inferior Magistrates. Or else, perhaps (which thing happens now and
than) for money they are bought out, diffranchised and dispensed withal, for
as the saying is, quid non pecunia potest? what is it, but money will bring to
pass? And yet notwithstanding shall it be don inuisibly in a cloud (under
benedicite I speak it) the Prince being borne in hand, that the same are dali^
executed. This fault is the corruption of those that are put in trust to see
the^ executed, as I have told you, and (notwithstanding) do not.


Spud. This is a great corruption and Abuse, doubtless, and worthy of great
punishment.


Ph. It is so truly, for if they be good laws tending to the glory of GOD,
the public weal of the Country, and correction of vices, it is great pytie
that money should buy them out. For what is that else, but to sell virtue, for
lucre: Godlynes, for dross, yea men's souls for corruptible money? Therefore
those that sell them, are not only Traitors to GOD, to their Prince and
Country: but are also the Devils Merchants, and ferrie the bodies, and souls
of Christians, as it were in Charons boat to the Stigian flood of Hell,
burning with fire and brimstone for ever.

And those that buy them are Traitors to GOD, their Prince and Country also.

For if the laws were at the first good (as GOD he praised all the laws in
Ailgna be) why should they be suppressed for money, and if they were evil, why
were they diuulged, but had rather been buried in the womb of their Mother
before thy had ever seen ye light.

And why were laws instituted, but to be executed? Else it were as good to have
no laws at all (the People living orderly) as to have good laws, and the^ not
executed.

The Prince ordeining a law, may lawfully repeal and adnull the same again,
v^o^ special causes and considerations, but no inferior maiestrat or subject
what so ever, may stop the course of any law made by the Prince with out
danger of damnation to his own soul, as the Word of GOD bears witness.

And therefore, w^ ^e to those men, that will not execut the sentence of the
law (being so Godly, and so Christian as they be in Ailgna) upon Malefactors
and Offenders.

Uerely they are as guilty of their blood before GOD, as ever was Judas of the
death of Christ Jesus.


Spud. Seeing it is so, that al flesh has corrupted his way before the face of
God, and that there is such abomination amongst them, I am persuaded the day
of Judgment is not far of. For when iniquity shall have filled up his
measure, than shall the end of all appear, as Christ witnesses in his
Euangelie.


Philo. The day of the Lord cannot be far of, that is most certain* For what
wonderful portents, strange miracles, fearful signs, and dreadful Judgments
has he sent of late days, as Preachers and fortellers of his wrath due unto
us, for our impenite^ce and wickedness of life. Has he not caused the earth to
tremble and quake? the same Earth to remove from place to place? the seas and
waters to roar, swell and brust out, and euerflow their banks to the
destruction of many thousands? has he not caused the Elements and Skies, to
send forth flashing fire? to rain down wheat, a wonderful thing as ever was
heard, and the like? has he not caused wonderful Eclypses in the Sun and
Moon, with most dreadful conjunctions of Stars and Planets, as the like this
thousand years, have not been heard of? have not the clouds distilled down
abundance of rain and showers, with all kind of unseasonable wether, to the
destroying (almost) of al things upon the Earth? have we not seen Commets,
blasing stars, fiery Drakes, men, feighting in the air, most fearfully to
behold? Has not dame Nature her self denied unto us her operation, in sending
forth abortiues, untimely births, vgglesome monsters and fearful misshapen
Creatures both in man and beast. So, that it seems all the Creatures of God
are angry with us and threaten us with destruction, and yet we are nothing at
all amended (alas) that shall become of us? Remember we not there is a God that
shall judge us righteously? that there is a Devil, who shall torment us after
this life unspeakably, if we repent not? At that day, the wicked shall find
that there is a Material Hell, a place of all kinds of tortures, wherein they
shall be punished in fire and brimstone amongst the terrible Company of
vgglesome Devils world without end, how light so ever they make account of it
in this World.

For some such there be, that when they hear mention of Hell, or of the pains
thereof in the other World, they make a mock at it, thinking they be but
metaphorical speeches, only spoke to terrify us withal, not otherwise. But
certain it is, as there is a God, that will reward his Children, so there is a
Devil that will remunerat his Servant: And as there is a Heaven, a Material
place of perfect joy prepared for the Godly, so there is a Hell, a Material
place of punishment for the wicked and reprobat, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, or else the word of God is in no wise to be credited, which blasphemy,
once to think, God keep all his Children from.


Spud. But they will easily avoid this, for they say* it is writ, at what time
so ever a sinner does repent him of his sin, I will put all his sin out of my
remembrance says ye Lord.

So that, if they may have three words at the last, they will wish no more.
What think you of these fellows?


Philo. I think them no men, but Devils, no Christians, but worse tha^
Tartarians, and more to be avoided than ye poison of a serpent: for the one
slays but the body, but the other, both body and soul for ever. Wherefore, let
every good Christen Man take heed of them, and avoid them. For, it is truly
said, cum bonis bonus eris, and cum peruersis, peruerseris: with the good, thou
shall learn good, but with the wicked, thou shall be perverted.


Spud. Do you think than, that that cannot be a true repentance, which is
deferred to the last gasp.


Ph. No truly: For true repentance must spring out of a lyuelie faith* with an
inward lothing, hating and detesting of sinn^. But this deferred repentance
springs not of faith, but rather of the fear of death which he ^eeth
imminent before his eyes* of the grief and tediousnes of pain, of the Horror
of Hell, and fear of God his inevitable judgment, which he knows now he
must needs abide: And therefore, this can be no true repentance. For there is
two manner of repe^ta^ces, ye one a true repentance to life, the other a false
repentance to death: As we may see by Judas, who is said, to have repented,
and which is more, to have confessed his fault, and which is most of all, to
have made restitution, and yet was it a false repentance. And why? because it
sprang not out of true faith, but as before.

Peter repented, and weept bitterly, and was saved thereby, though he neither
made confession, nor satisfaction: and why? Because it sprang of a true and
lively faith. So these fellows may say they repent, but except it be a true
repentance springing of faith, it can serve the^ no more to life than the
pretensed repentance of Judas did serve him to salvation. Let them beware, for
Cain repented, yet is he condemned.

Esau, did repent, yet is he condemned.

Antiochus, did repent, yet is he condemned: Judas did repent, yet is he
condemned, with infinite more: And why so? Because their prolonged repentance
sprange not of faith, etc.

Thus they may see, that every light affection, is no true repentance: And
that it is not enough to say at the last, I repent, I repent. For, unless it be
a true repentance indeed, it is worth nothing. But indeed, if it wear so, that
man had, liberu^ arbitrium, free will of himself, to repent truly when he would,
and that God promised in his word to accept of that repentance, it wear
another matter. But repentance is, donum Dei, the gift of God, de sursum
veniens a patre luminum, coming from above from the Father of light, and
therefore it is not in our powers to repent when we will. It is the Lord yt
gives the gift, when, where and to whom it pleases him: and of him are we to
crave it incessantly by faithful prayer, and not otherwise to presume of our
own repentance, when indeed we have nothing less, than a true repentance.


Spud. Than thus much I gather by your words, that as true repentance (which is
a certain inward grief, and sorrow of the heart, conceived for our sins, with
a hatred and lothing of the same) erueth to salvation through the mercy of GOD
in Christ, so fained repentance saves not from perdition.

And therefore, we must repent daily and howrely, and not to defer our
repentance to the last gasp as many do, than which, nothing is more perilous.


Philo. True it is, for may not he be called a great Fool, that by deferring
and prolonging of repentance to the last cast (as they say) will hazard his
body and soul to eternal damnation for ever? Whereas by daily repentance he
may assure him self both of the favor of GOD, and of life everlasting (by
faith) in the mercy of GOD, through the most precious blood of his dear Son,
Jesus Christ, our alone Savior and Redemer, to whom be praise for ever.


Spud. Now must I needs say as the Wise King Solomon said, all things are vain
and transitory, All things are vain and vanity it self.
and nothing is permanent under the Son, the works of men are imperfect and
lead to destruction, their exercyses are vain, and wicked altogether.

Wherefore, I setting apart all the vanities of this life, will from henceforth
consecrate my self to the service of my GOD, and to follow him in his Word,
which only is permanent and leads unto life.

And I most hartelie thank the Lord God for your good Company this day, and
for your grave instructions, promising by the assistance of God his grace, to
follow and obey them to my possible power all the days of my life.


Philo. God give you grace so to do, and every Christen man else, The joys of
this life tread the path to death.
and to avoid all the vanities, and deceiuable pleasures of this life: for
certainly they tread the path to eternal destruction, both of body and soul for
ever, to as many as obey them.

For, it is impossible to wallowe in the delights and pleasures of this World,
and to live in joy for ever in ye Kingdom of Heaven. And thus we having spent
the day, and also co^summate our journey, we must now depart, beseaching GOD
that we may both meet again in the Kingdom of Heaven, there to reign and
live with him for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the
Father, and the holy Spirit be all honor and glory for ever more Amen.


FINIS.



