decorative border DIVINE POEMES. In seven several Classes.

Written To his most Excellent MAJESTY, CHARLES, By the Grace of God King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

BY Sr. JOHN STRADLING Knight and Baronet.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby. 1625.



TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF MY DREAD SOVEREIGN LORD THE KING.
SEe (gracious Liege) from Sabrines farthest shore,
(The semicircling bound of that dominion,
Where hardy Britains your great name adore)
A Shepherd lowly in his own opinion,
Bold on your Grace, presents you with a Song,
Whose subject rightly does to you belong.
A Theme divine, though simple be the Singer:
A feast of dainties, in a wooden platter:
As you esteem the Cates, accept the Bringer:
Deem of the Person, as you like the matter.
The Swain could not find out a fitter thing,
To show his faith, and zeal unto his King.
'Twas in the Press, living your Royal Sire^,
Saluting you with Title of The Prince:
But since the King of Kings has raised you higher,
The Frontispice is only altered since.
The Book each-where its former style observes,
And humbly begs your pardon where it swerues.
Vouchsafe it shelter under Your protection.
It guides the Reader to eternal rest,
Directs Inferiors to their due subjection,
Stored with instructions useful for the best.
May Kings and Princes from your loins descending:
Read it with comfort to the worlds ending.
Your Sacred Majesty's most humble, and faithful Subject: JOHN STRADLING.

To the Reverend Father in God, THEOPHILUS, Lord Bishop of Landaffe, my worthy
Diocesan.
Sent with the Copy, to be perused.
Lo, here a Child of mine in Sacred Font
Already dipped, repayres for Confirmation
To you (my Lord) reflect your eye upon it,
I Am suertie for his Christian education.
Then on his Head impose your hand, and bless,
If you approve the Faith he does confess.
Your Lordships very loving friend, IOH. STRADLING.

The Lord Bishops answer.
I Viewed your Child, and I dare swear it is yours,
So plain so pithy, and so like the Sire:
The Theme divine, commends your well-spont how'rs,
The Poets fury, and the Fathers fire.
I poz'd him in our vulgar Catechism,
And thus Confirm him, be is void of schism.
Your true loving friend, THEO. LANDAVENSIS.

Another of the same Lord Bishop.
THis booke's a Sustaeme Theological,
A Paraphrase upon the holy Bible:
I wish, who stand upon their Gentry, all
Such Poets were; instructed thus to scribble.
No man could write the Theorie so well,
Who did not in the Practick part excel.
THEO. LANDAVEN.

DIVINE POEMS. The first Classis.
THE ARGUMENT.
MESSIAH Promised, Figured, Prophesied.
The Theme proposed, the heavenly aid implored:
Man's fall. Messiah of the Woman's seed
Promis't, by whom Mankind should be restored
To Patriarks renewed often, here read.
Types, Sacrifices, Figures show the same,
Prophets describe his Person, Birth, and Name.
The subject of this work*
A Mayden-Mother, and a King her son,
Excite my Muse a task to undertake:
The like has not been since the world begun.
My spirits fail, my feeble hand does shake,
My heart, with highness of the theme does tremble:
The true-heart-searcher knows I naught dissemble.
2.
Invocation for divine aid.,
O thou the Source, and Subject of my song,
That caust make Babes thy praises to rehearse:
Illuminate my mind, untie my tongue,
That I may see aright, and sing in Verse,
Thy high Descent, thy Birth, thy Generation,
Life, Doctrine, Deeds, Death, strange Resussitation.
3.
That seeing, singing, I may meditate
On the Worlds new birth, lost-mans regeneration:
That, what my Muse shall in rude Rimes relate,
May sweetly work in many, soule-saluation.
(For, who here reads, believes, and lives thereafter,
Is Gods dear child beloved, son or daughter.)
4.
Genesis 2.
When God placed Man i'th'Garden of delight,
And made him Lord of all things under sky:
He gave him one precept to keep aright,
With threat, that for transgressing he should die.
Adam his sin and fail,
Man sinning had his doom, deprived of bliss:
A curse laid on the earth, himself, and his.
5.
First, amplified by the excelency of his creation.
Had he been shaped after an ugly fashion,
Or made a Mome of mean capacity.
Or shut up in some simple habitation,
Or framed the subject of infirmity:
Or destined to some drudging occupation,
So as he might have loathed his creation:
6.
Some color had been to excuse the crime,
And mitigate the rigor of his doom:
But he, of all earth-creatures had the prime,
Sat Ruler of the rest, as in Gods room:
Endew'd with reason, speech, and comely feature,
^en. 1. ^
After Gods Image, a most noble Creature.
7.
Eden his dwelling, dainty fruits his feeding,
Health, beauty, strength, not subject to decay:
He needed not to toil, nor sweat for's breeding,
But think upon his God, thank him, and pray.
Old age, diseases, death could not have harmed him,
Had he obeyed his Maker who fore-warned him.
8.
Secondly, by the facility to have observed the Precept.
Nor was the Precept so precise to hold,
(One Tree among some thousands to forbear.)
But that the retchlesse creature was so bold,
His wife to follow, more then God to fear.
Sure, to the Devil he would not have yielded,
Genesis 3. 12.
But by the Woman, simply was beguiled.
9.
That knew the subtle Serpent, who began
To tempt the weak, and likeliest to be won:
He made no offer to seduce the Man,
But gayning her, he thought the matter done.
By Adams fall, each man is taught a Lecture:
I say no more, but leave it to conjecture.
10.
Questions (...) answered.
How long he dwelt within this pleasant seat,
Whether some years, or months, or days, or leffe:
Ere he of that forbidden fruit did eat,
Presumed his Makers precept to transgress:
Are questions I Will not venture to decide.
Long in the place it is like he did not bide.
11.
"For why? The Devil certes soon began
"To play his prize; he uses not to sleep,
"But watches ever to beguile that man,
"Whom God and his good Angels does not keep.
"No sooner did this Fowler set his gin,
"But Adam, like a silly foul, flew in.
12.
If he, a creature of such rare perfection,
Such depth of reason, wisdom and foresight,
Who had to good and ill like free election,
Who knew precisely what was wrong, what right:
If such a Man, so Angell-like as he,
At first assault could yield, and conquered be.
13.
What may be hoped for in his wretched race,
Infected with the venom of his sin:
Made foes to God, deprived of his grace,
And much more apt to let temptation in?
How may we shun that subtle Serpents baits,
Who to beguile us, alloccasions waits?
14.
A Comparison.
A subject tainted with such shameful treason,
Against his sovereign Lord to him most kind:
To hope for pardon, certes has small reason,
To sue for it, how durst he cast in's mind?
What he might blush to beg, God freely gave:
Enfranchised him, who made himself a slave.
15.
Gods infinite goodneste to Angels, and Men,
In God, a mirror full of admiration,
Never enough admired we behold:
To Man and Angels in their first creation,
Such boundless bounty as cannot be told:
Divinity excepted, nothing wanted:
In other Princely gifts they were not scanted.
16.
These, waiting always in his heavenly Palace,
Blessed with his presence: (Blessing there is no greater,)
That, in earths pleasant Garden taking solace,
Sole Lord and King over each other creature.
What would? Nay more what could they have expected?
Ungrateful, that so good a God neglected.
17.
^. Lastly, by ^e obedience ^f inferior ^eatures, man's ^bellion is ^grauated.
All creatures else observed their Makers Law,
Aimed at those ends, whereto he had assigned them:
To break his Hests, it seems they stood in awe
Nature, not Reason, was the bond did bind them.
"Angels and Man, that most should have obay'd:
"Were only they, who from their duty strayed.
18.
First Lucifer presumed to rebel,
And drew with him whole millions to conspire:
These hurled down into the pit of hell,
Enraged with envy, malice, wrath and ire,
Persisted and proceeded in their sin,
Striving more rebels on their side to win.
19.
It grieved the wretch, to see Man's happy state.
Tormented was he at his blessed condition:
This moved him more, both God and Man to hate,
For holding that, whereof he lost fruition.
Failing against God, The Man he then assayl'd,
Nor left him, till against him he preuayl'd.
20.
A Simile.
Often have I heard it by my Elders told,
And noted for a thing most certain true:
That men, whom plague or pestilence does hold,
The stronger on them that infection grew:
The more they wish occasions to embrace,
For drawing others to their desperate case.
21.
So fares it with that wicked damned Fiend,
Plagued with the rancour of his foul offense:
He walks, and hunts about even to this end,
By might, or craft, or any fair pretense,
To lead mankind into his curs't condition,
And bring both soul and body to perdition.
22.
The Devil a most wilful Rebel to God, unpardonable.
He wrought with Adam just as he desired,
Made him accursed, and cheated of Gods grace,
Like to himself: (for-cause he once aspired,
Arch-traytor, to mount seated in Gods place.)
Man simply misse-lead, found favor.
Through wilful pride he fell, can rise no more:
For Man misse-lead, God kept a boon in store.
23.
A Comparison.
So have I often read, seen and observed,
Gods Vice-royes deal with Rebels of each kind:
Ringleaders dragged to death, as they deserved,
When simple souls seduced, favor find.
"Mercy and Justice ought be joined together,
"Kings that have one alone, as liefe they had neither.
24.
^ude 6.
Gods Justice seized on those sinning spirits,
That left their first estate, to clamber higher:
They were rewarded after their demerits,
Doomed to the vengeance of eternal fire.
Hence comes that proverb, daily used by all,
(Most certain is it) Pride will have a fall.
25.
Genesis 3. 12, 13.
Adam likewise and Eve (poor souls) were cited
At Iustice-barre, to answer their offense:
Each of them pleaded, how they were enticed,
And so confessed, using no more defense.
Judgment they had (Gods Justice could no less)
But Mercy found a mean for their redress.
26.
A worldly-wise Objection, or Cavil.
A wordly-minded-wizard here will look,
To know what motive moved the King of heaven,
That he lost-man into his favor took,
Who of his grace himself had clean bereauen.
Belike, God of his service should have need,
Or Man might after stand his God in steed:
27.
Or for some future good in him foreseen,
Or else for lack of Seruitors beside:
Or, 'cause his fault might a slight error seem,
Not done of malice, stubbornness, or pride.
Such poor excuses some perhaps might feign,
Mere fantasies bred in their idle brain.
28.
Answer. Psalm. 16. 2.
Fond Fools, who harbor such a gross conceit,
That Man should render God due retribution:
The matter (doubtless) is of greater weight,
Our goodness all, to him is but pollution.
The crime was treason against great heauens-King,
The streams of mercy from himself must spring.
29.
Degratia speciali, and mero metu: words ordinary with Princes in Pardons,
and Patents of grace
Of special grace, and from Gods own mere motion,
The Pardon did proceed. So use great Kings,
When Pardons they bestow. They Will take no notion
Of merit, gift, reward, or such like things.
If earth-gods deal so with such as offends them,
Much more the God of Gods, who that power lends them.
30.
Messiah promised.
It Is worth the noting to observe the way,
How that Great Judge to sentence does proceed:
The Serpent sentenced without more stay,
Genesis 3. 15.
He made the promise to the Woman's seed:
And blessed her in the very circumstance
Of that, whereby he meant t'enioyne her penance.
31.
Her punishment, first sorrows in her childing:
Then, to the Man obedience and subjection:
Io. 16. 21.
The blessing on her birth (more comfort yiedling)
Might well weigh down a greater malediction.
Thus, of the first, God eased her: from the next,
Most women free themselves. (That Is not i'th'Text.)
32.
Now was the Man out of the Garden sent,
To till the ground, and labor for his living:
His time in idleness might not be spent,
Bread had he none, but what he got by striving
In sweat and sorrow: Herbs the field gave store,
Such pittance was allowed him, and no more.
33.
Adam lived long, saw many Generations,
By him his sons were taught their Maker know:
They grew apace, began to furnish Nations,
Yet most of them, to worship God were slow.
Of godly men there waxt so great a dearth,
As only one was found on the whole earth.
34.
Noah.
Noah, of righteousness a blessed Preacher,
^. Pet. 2. ^en. 6. 18.
To him and his, Gods Covenant was made good:
The Lord himself vouchsaf't to be his Teacher,
And warning him aforehand of the Flood,
He built the Arc, preserved his Family,
And stored the Earth with his posterity.
35.
Noah's Arc.
That Arc betokened right our Christian Font,
^. Pet. 3. 21.
Where faithful souls near ready to be drowned,
In sinnes-huge-swelling Sea of Negropont,
Clean washed from filth, are saved to be crowned,
With blessed Noah and his company,
To live and reign as Kings eternally.
36.
^en 1. 28. and 1. 2.
To him the blessing which he first bestowed,
On Adam and his wife at their creation,
God once again renewed: it further flowed,
More choice of food was 'llow'd for sustentation.
Now Fish, and Foul, and beasts-flesh they might eat,
Whereas before, green herbs was all their meat.
37.
Yet God, to show how much he did detest,
The cursed sin of bloody cruelty:
^s. 4.
Forbade to eat the blood of any beast.
So, to restrain them from all gluttony,
The fat (no more then blood) might not be eaten,
Both sorts with sharp correction he does threaten.
38.
Noah dyed full of years, left issue store,
Few of them all (it seems) were like their father:
(...). 11.
They snuft, and swore, We will be drowned no more,
We Will build a Tower up to Heaven rather.
They set upon the work, yet in conclusion,
^el.
That building turned to their own confusion.
39.
Thus some went East, some West, some North and South,
Searching new Countries yet to them unknown:
A different tongue was near in each man's mouth,
Hardly they knew strange children from their own.
"Against God there is no contending: The best way
"Is first to know his will, and then obey.
40.
I wonder often casting in my mind,
Gods gifts and graces powered down on men,
His threats and plagues withal! how they wax blind,
And (pard'ned often) transgress the more again.
"Him whom nor stripes, nor gifts, can fright or gain,
"All hope of such a graceless child is vain.
41.
Among the sons of Noah, few were found,
(Much like black Swannes) that walked in his way:
They neither feared Gods judgments when he frowned,
Nor for his gentle Promises cared they:
As if there had been neither Hell, nor Heaven,
Aduent'ring soul and all on six and seven.
42.
A Simile,.
Like Birds for whom the Fowler spreads his net,
And traynes them in with whistle, and a stale:
Or fish, when bayted hooks old Anglers set,
Which bitten, brings them soon unto their bale.
So that old-Angler-for-mens-soules, some wynnes
With sweetened baytes, and some with subtle gynnes.
43.
Shem,.
Though Shem were most religious of the rest,
And Gods true worship to his children left:
Yet in few after-ages, even the best
Ios. 24. ^.
Fell back, and of that bliss themselves bereft.
Yea Terah, father of Gods faithful friend,
From the true God, to false his heart did lend.
44.
The Promise of the Messiasrenewed to Abraham. Genesis 12. 3. and 22. 17.
To Abraham God showed himself more plain,
Reclaym'd him from the Land where long he dwelt:
The Promise to him he renewed again,
Such favor none before him ever felt.
Their foe-mens gate b'his seed should be possessed,
And in his Seed, all Nations on earth blessed.
45.
What of our Grandame Eve in Paradise,
More darkely had been spoken long before:
The same to Abr'ham twice at least, or thrice
Was said, and God himself unto it swore.
^eb. 16.
That such as of the Promise should be Heirs,
Might rest most sure, without fears or dispaires.
46.
The promise thus to Abraham made good,
His faith was strong, not spic't with unbelief:
All points (perhaps) not fully understood,
He was resolved, and settled in the chief.
To God he moan'd, for wanting of a son,
T'accomplish that which he knew would be done.
47.
(...) d^fence of ^brahams ^oubts, moved (...) God touch^g the pro^ise made to
^s Seed. ^en. 15. 2. ^m. 4. 19. 20.
It seems, he feared his Steward should succeed,
Enjoy both goods and lands which he possessed:
Such doubts by him objected we do read,
But, by a sound Interpreter expressed,
We learn the question grew not of distrust:
For why? he knew God in his Word was just.
48.
Else Abraham's faith had not been so commended,
Nor he the Father of all faithful named:
Rather his doubting had been reprehended,
Himself for such mistrusting rightly blamed.
His often praises plead his innocence,
The question moved, admits a fair defense.
49.
Belike he could not well discern the way,
Of working that which passed reasons reach,
By quest'ning with his God he might assay,
Whether his Lord, that lesson would him teach.
Genesis 15. 4.
Thus much God told him, he thy Heir shall be,
Who from thy bowels draws his pedigree.
50.
Sara (good Lady) she began devise,
To help the matter by her policy:
Her daughters in this age are more precise,
At least wise they like not such charity.
Thus the old man by Hagar had a boy,
Genesis 17 11.
For him he prayed, in him he took much joy.
51.
This issue got, he dreamt not of another,
Thought him the Lad should breed the world its bliss:
Sara he knew too old to be a mother,
Yet soon was taught, how he conceau'd amiss.
From her (said God) Nations and Kings shall spring:
Verse. 17.
He worshipped, and smiled to hear the thing.
52.
Genesis 18. 12..
So did his wife, a grave, and modest Dame,
When that strange news first founded in her ear:
She stepped aside, and hid her self for shame,
To think at ninety she a child should bear.
Luke 1. 24.
(Elizabeth did likewise long time after,
To show her self that she was Saraes daughter.)
53.
Resemblance in the birth of Isaak, and Christ.
The lively branch, sprung from this withered tree:
Messiah birth, by one a Virgin pure:
These twain may rightly paralelled be,
As was that first, so was this later sure.
"The one made way, for credence to the other:
"Both jointly serve, foul unbelief to smother.
54.
Genesis 18. 14.
All men who credit give to the Creation,
And know, that no thing is for God too hard:
Ought wonder less at this strange Generation,
Nor should their faith be at such promise scared.
Whether is easier, make a thing of naught?
Or out of old, cause that a new be wrought?
55.
Now among Gods people grew this matter rife,
Isa'k once borne, and Abraham's faith made strong:
Genesis 18. 19.
He taught his household all their true belief,
To hide this point from them, had been great wrong:
"Faith in the promised Seed being the only way,
"Which leads to Heaven, all that go astray.
56.
Genesis 21. 6.
At Isa'ks birth his mother laughed apace,
Reioyc't to think her friends would be likewise:
Genesis 18. 12.
(I read she laughed once in another place,
But that was fayn'd, after a frowa^d guise.)
Well might she laugh, and sing for such a boy,
From whom was to proceed the worlds true joy.
57.
Genesis 21.
Of Ismael yet Sara stood in doubt,
Since Abr'ham to that child great favor bare:
She rested not, till she had cast him out,
Lest with her son, he should the blessing share.
"The mothers Blessing, Heritage, and Lordship,
"Long since (as now) could brook no fellowship.
58.
Soon was she eased of her womans-feare,
For, where before the promise ran at large,
To Abraham and his seed: henceforth each-where
^en. 21. 12.
To Isa'k God assigned that heritage.
^en. 24. 36. and 25. 5.
Some gifts he gave, by hand, among the rest:
Then left to Isa'k all, as to the blessed.
59.
The bond-borne-broode is styled Abraham's son,
Though dis-esteem'd compared with the other:
Genesis 22. 2. 12. 16.
God named Isa'k (thrice) the only son,
When Ishmael lived, by birth the elder brother.
He blessed them much alike in temp'ralties,
Reserved for one th'heauenly prerogatives.
60.
A Comparison.
Look how a Father nurt'reth up his child,
Whom best he loves: to breed in him more grace,
To make him humble, lowly, meek, and mild,
At all times shows him not a cheerful face:
But sometimes checks him, sometimes gives a frown,
Thereby from hateful pride to keep him down:
61.
So God with blessed Abraham did deal,
His best beloved son, and faithful friend:
He would not all his mind at first reveal,
Nor straightway bring his promise to an end:
"Long looked for, more welcome when it came,
"His faiths assurance still encreast his fame.
62.
Abraham's faith and love to God, proved. Genesis 22.
Yet once again heauens-King, and earths great Lord,
Says thus: My servant Abraham's faith I Will prove:
He worships me, by him I am adored,
I must trie-out the assurance of his love.
Give me (says God) thy son in sacrifice,
Isa'k that son so precious in thine eyes.
63.
This was indeed a trial to the quick.
A feat whereby sound friendship should be known:
It would have made the strongest heart half sick,
To spill the blood, much dearer then his own.
Excuses fair, and many might he feign,
If not t'auoid it quite, yet time to gain.
64.
Amplified by the readiness of his obedience.
My God, this is the child by thee assigned,
To bring thy faithful promise to effect:
How can I be so rash, or so unkind,
By killing him, to see that promise checked?
Give me some time to pawse upon the matter,
There is no haste, it may be done hereafter.
65.
If not by prayer, or by long persuasion,
A pardon for his life may be obtayn'd:
(As once I got for Soda^, wicked Nation,
Had ten been found from filthy lust vnstayn'd)
Be It so, when I perceive no remedy,
Thy will shall be fulfilled, the Lad shall die.
66.
Matthew. 16. 23.
(And did not once our Lords Apostle prime,
Dissuade his Master, near in such a case?
'Twas kindness to his Lord that moved him,
Yet Christ rebuk't him sharply to his face.
"(There Is no thing where with God is better paid,
"Then when his will is readily obeyed.)
67.
The Arch-Patriarke used no such glozing trick,
His heart unto his God was firmly knit:
Genesis 22. 3.
Early next mor'n he rose, bestirred him quick,
And for performance gets all that was fit.
Fire, wood, and knife he took, with full intent
To execute the deed, 'bout which he went.
68.
Abraha^s shrift o Isaak. See ^s. de Antiq. ^ud. lib. l. ^p. 14.
'Twere sin to think, that good and holy man
Ran rudely to the work without some stay:
We must conceive, he told to Isaak than,
What moved him so to do; taught him to pray,
And yield himself to Gods good will and pleasure.
Some such short shrist he used, as served his leisure.
69.
His son then bound, and on the Altar laid,
Meek as a Lamb, prepared himself to die:
The knife taken up in hand, he never staid
Till God from heaven stopped him with a cry.
God took that thing as done, which was intended,
A Ram did serve the turn, and so it ended.
70.
He prouides for his sons marriage.
Now this good Father saw his glass near run,
And taking care of his Posterity:
Bethought him of a marriage for his Son,
Willing to see him settled ere he die:
Genesis 24. 3^.
A Cananitish woman he would none,
But needs must have some cousin of his own.
71.
This bus^nesse of much weight, he recommended
To one, who served him with sidelitie:
The God of heaven so the man befriended,
As he performed it with dexterity.
The story merits often to be read,
To mark how God that Messenger did lead.
72.
These labors all, and trialls ouer-past,
Ioh. 8. 50.
Messiah days he joyfully did see:
Then ripe in age, taking his leave at last,
Exchanged this life for immortality.
The best of all that ever lived before,
And such like after him I find no more.
73.
"A godly Father (commonly it is seen)
"By nurture leaves a gracious son behind:
"Where men unto their God have faithful been,
"Their children seldom-while go out of kind.
As Isa'k stepped into his fathers state,
So in Gods favor, like to him, he sare.
74.
A Comparison.
Kings that grant Charters to their Seruitors,
Or to some Towns, of favor or desert:
Though they appoint the sons Inheritors,
And name Successors therein to have part:
Yet oftentimes those Charters are renewed,
Some-whiles with words, of farther grace endew'd.
75.
^at Magna ^harta of Gods ^romise, re^ewed to Isaak Genesis 26. 4
That Great-Free-Charter which the King of Kings,
Bestowed on Abr'ham, and his Heirs for ever:
Confirmed to Isaak of new he brings,
(His mercy to his Chosen fails never.)
To prove, that in his promise he is just,
And free us from all doubt, or sad distrust.
76.
"Yet God, of whom all men should stand in awe,
"Who owes to no man ought, but of mere grace:
"Not bound to any rules of Common Law,
"Nor ty'de to Person, Country, Time, or Place:
(...). 18. and ^om. 9. 21.
Has power on men, as Potters have on clay,
Does leave, and take whom likes him. So he may.
77.
Genesis 25.
Esau, first borne: he was a man of might,
A cunning Hunter, used to the field,
The chief and worthiest in his fathers sight,
Knew well his bow, and weapons how to weild:
Nimrod. Genesis 10. 8.
Like that great son of Cush, who first began
With hunting Beast, then after hunted Man.
78.
Genesis 25. 27.
Jacob was plain, and of demeanor mild,
Not ranging much abroad, but kept his Tent:
By nature meek, and gentle as a child,
His time in frugall exercises spent.
To him God did assign prioritie,
Even in the womb, before nativity.
79.
As God decreed, all was by means effected,
Genesis 25. 33. Heb. 12. 16.
His birthright Esau sleights, and sells for pottage:
A man profane, not fit to be respected,
That loved his belly more then is heritage.
1. King. 21.
What Naboths fathers left him by descent,
To sell, or change, against his heart it went.
80.
"And are not now some Esaues to be found,
"Who to fill bellies, and bedeck their backs,
"Sell ancient houses, implements, and ground
"For belly-cheere, and idle apish knacks?
"Then Esau-like, turn home by Weeping-crosse,
"And cry, Ill fortune caused all their loss.
81.
When painful Jacobs by their industry,
Rear up a house, where they had none before:
"God gives his blessing to frugalitie,
"And brings a little, soon to ten times more.
"It seldom fails but that a good man's pains,
"Is quit in the end with credit, and with gaynes.
82.
Genesis 25. 28.
Jacob sat nearest in his mothers breast,
She kept in mind what God to her foretold:
Assured she was that Jacob should be blessed,
This made her on his part to be more bold.
By her advise, the blessing he did gain,
Heb. 12. 17.
Which Esau weeping begged, but all in vain.
83.
Genesis 27. 6.
When to her son, the matter first she brake,
Aduising him t'aduenture on the plot,
Declares what Isa'k erst to Esau spoke,
Who with his bow went forth to seek a shot:
He feared by such a trick to speed the worse,
And draw upon himself his fathers curse.
84.
Be bold (my son) fear not at all, quoth she,
I Will take thy curse, so thou my voice obey:
Go quickly to the flock, be ruled by me.
He yields to her, and makes no longer stay,
Two Kids he brought, where with she made a mess,
Which Isa'k eating, did the Bringer bless.
85.
Thus, in the person of his elder brother,
(The story ought precisely to be noted.)
By listening to the counsel of his mother,
Like Esau, skinn'd: And with his garments, coated:
This younger son, obtayn'd the elders blessing.
Wherein I plainly read a double Lesson.
86.
To Mother Church, her Children should give ear,
In things which God instructs her must be done:
Our elder brothers raiment we must wear,
By no means else Gods blessing can be won.
To Christ our Lord, this has a full relation,
Whose Justice clothing us, we gain salvation.
87.
A Simile.
A boy that once has waded over shoes,
And for his fault has had a check, or threat:
Runs further in, cares not how deep he goes,
Since once for all, he knows he shall be beat.
Esau proceeds having ill begone,
And shows himself a more unto ward son.
88.
Genesis 26. 34.
He weds with Gentiles against his parents will,
It grieved them both unto the very heart:
Genesis 27 41.
Then makes a vow, he would his brother kill,
But wise Rebecca shunned it with her art.
"It Is good for sons, to have mothers on their side:
"Few Families where that is not verifi'de.
89.
The Sacred Story leads me next to sing,
Of Jacobs journey to a foreign Land:
Genesis 27. 46. and 28. 1.
His parents both were careful of one thing,
And strictly laid upon him this command:
Isaaks charge to his son Jacob.
A Cananitish wife thou shall not wed,
Nor take a Heathen-fellow to thy bed.
90.
Genesis 6. 2.
(Such matches long agone procured the Flood.)
Go seek a Mate among thy Mothers kin:
God make thee fruitful, bless, and do thee good.
His journey thereupon he did begin,
Genesis 32. 10.
Poore-pilgrim-like, with staff and slender store:
Himself auowes, he carried thence no more.
91.
The promise of the Messiah, renewed to Jacob. Genesis 28.
God meets him on his way, renewes again
That Great-free-Charter to his fathers given:
Assures him that all fears and doubts were vain,
Shows him a Ladder reaching up to heaven,
With Angels climbing up, and downwards walking,
Whilst God to him, of blessed news was talking.
92.
Here the holy Patriarch a vow did take,
To worship God, and him for ever fear:
This God, his sole Protector did he make,
Begged of him bread to eat, and clothes to wear.
A simple alms, sought from the King of Kings:
Court-beggers now, ask many richer things.
93.
A Comparison.
A Merchant bound upon a great aduenter,
For Countries far remote, to him unknown,
When as into the ship he first does enter,
In quest of foreign Lands, and leaves his own:
Sure of a skillful Pilot at the Helm,
Fears less, that Waves his Bark shall ouer-whelme.
94.
So, Jacob guided by the worlds-wise-Maker,
Wandering from Parents, and his native soil:
Is now become a ventrous vnder-taker,
Walks with courage bold, and fears no foil:
Lead on by him, who Abr'hams man did guide,
A happy wise for Isa'k to provide.
95.
Genesis 24. and 29.
Their meetings were much like, some ods in speeding,
The servant for his Lord, had quick dispatch:
Poor Jacob bound apprentice to sheepe-feeding,
And then by Laban cheated in his match.
Yet God, to recompense that injury,
By Leah most blessed his posterity.
96.
Genesis 49. 8.
She bare him Judah, Lord of all the rest,
Not so by birthright, but by Benediction:
From whom was to descend Messiah blessed,
To consummate that oft-foretold prediction.
The Scepter from that Tribe might not depart,
Till Shiloh came, the Gentiles to convert.
97.
In God this holy Patriarch put his trust,
Despair did never harbor in his breast:
Genesis 28. 14.
God said, his seed numbered should pass earths dust,
And that in it, all Nations should be blessed.
Yet was he not so mad, his God to tempt,
As if from Natures laws he were exempt.
98.
Genesis 32. and 33. Read over both these Chapters.
His brother Esaus wrath he greatly feared,
Strong were the motives urging him thereto:
First, on his knees (his hands to heaven up reared.)
He prays: Then wisely plots what is best to do.
His stratagems were full of policy,
God wrought by them his free delivery.
99.
A story by way of comparison amplifying Jacobs piety.
I read of one who sailing in the Deep,
Tossed with a tempest, ready to be drowned:
Vowed to a Saint (and there withal did weep)
If he might shun Seas rage which on him frowned;
To deck the shrine with costly ornaments,
And do devotions with due complements.
100.
The danger past, his foot once set on shore,
Then laughs to hear himself the story tell:
He thinks upon the holy Saint no more,
But swears, on Seas he will never after dwell.
(...). 17. 12. 18.
"In time of need most men to God can cry,
"Few yield him thanks for their delivery.
101.
This holy Father bore a better mind,
No sooner from the danger was he free:
Genesis 33. 20.
But forth with he to worship God enclin'de,
Erects an Altar to the Lord with glee.
"Thanks for good-turnes received, prepare a way,
"For getting of the like another day.
102.
Blessings pursue him still where he does go,
Genesis 35. 10.
The old confirmed, with some increase of new:
Jacob (says God) thou shall be called no more,
Israel. Genesis 32. 28.
But Prince of God, a Title to thee due.
He saw him face to face, strove and preuayl'd,
That style was to him and his seed entayl'd.
103.
A Comparison.
The Author of each good, and perfect gift,
Though full of bounty and munificence:
Like to a good householder, learnes us thrift,
Directs how we our treasure should dispense.
He gives not all to one, nor at one season,
We must confess he does it with great reason.
104.
"A filial fear in faithful men it breeds,
Heb. 6. 19.
"Sustayneth Hope, sure anchor of the soul:
"Stirs us to prayer in our greatest needs,
"Repining and Impatience does control.
"Man cloyd and glutted with prosperity,
"Declines to Pride, and gross security.
105.
From Paradise to Bethlem must I trace,
The story of the Woman's Blessed Seed:
Through Canaan my Muse has run apace,
And now makes-on for Egypt-Land with speed.
There finds she further proof and evidence,
Of Gods great goodness, and deep providence.
106.
Joseph. Genesis 37. 3.
Joseph, his fathers best beloved son,
(For that self cause his brethren did him hate)
Is taught by dreams what after should be done,
And sent before (as Moses does relate)
His Father and his Family to cherish,
Who else with famine had been sure to perish.
107.
Genesis 50. 20.
"Men often lay plots, and proiects do propose
"Of hatred, malice, pride, or avarice:
"Yet God thereof does otherwise dispose,
"Proves them mere fools, that think themselves most wise:
"Exalts him whom they seek to throw down,
"And from the Dungeon lifts him to a Crown.
108.
Now Israel into Egypt comes in have,
There finds his once-lost-sonne in Princely grace:
Genesis 45. 27. and 46. 30.
His heart reuiues, to think of dangers past,
Desires to die, when he had seen his face.
Genesis 49. 8.
Blessing his sons, he plainly prophecy'de
From Iudahs line, Messiah should proceed.
109.
Good Joseph likewise drawing near his end,
Instructed in the faith of his forefathers:
Genesis 50. 24.
To Jacobs God his soul does recommend,
From that Old-promise, strength of faith he gathers.
Heb. 11 ^.
Which caused him of his bones to have a care,
And to that purpose made his brethren swear.
110.
Lo, many hundred years were ouer-past,
And sundry changes among the sons of Eve:
Since she of the forbidden fruit did taste,
And that Soule-sauing-promise did receive.
In every age some holy men were found,
Whose faith stood fast, upon that rockie ground.
111.
The Example of such men, joined with Gods Word,
Messiah figured.
Might have sufficed for all posterity:
Yet God vouchsaft more motives to afford,
To strengthen Faith, quell Infidelity.
With types, and figures set before their eyes,
He shadowed out his hidden mysteries.
112.
To write of all the wonders wrought by God
On Mizraims Race, and their hard-hearted King:
The strange effects produced by Arons rod,
Ere they from thence the Israelites did bring,
I leave: and only trace the story on,
As I at first proposed to write upon.
113.
Moses a type of Christ.
Their riddance from the Egyptian slavish yoke,
By Moses (man of God) a type of Chirst,
Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
Of whom prophetically he plainly spoke,
Instructed by the Spirit of the Highest:
Their plein-possession of the holy Land,
Joshua.
To them delivered by Duke Iosuas hand.
114.
Heb. 4.
These taught them with the eyes of Faith to see,
From spiritual Egypt their deliverance,
By him who should the Selfe-Messias be,
Enough to give each good man full assurance,
That the only Guide to the true Land of rest,
Was Christ, in whom all Nations should be blessed.
115.
A two fold promise God did often make
To Abraham: (mark well the History.)
He ratify'de the same to Isaake,
To Jacob eke, and his posterity.
First, that their seed should numberless increase,
And Canaans Land possess in perfect peace.
116.
Genesis 25. 20.
It might have seemed a thing incredible,
To aged men, whose wives were barren both:
This, once performed at full to Israel,
Might easily confirm in them the troth
Of that most Blessed-Seede; which thing was next,
As you may clearly find in the holy Text.
117.
The Passover. Exodus 12.
The Passover, most plain and lively token,
A perfect Lamb, a Male, unblemished:
It must be slain, yet not a bone be broken:
How fully was it in Christ accomplished?
Verse. 13.
That blood kept them from Egypts plague, so this
Saues us from Hell, and gaynes us Heavens bliss.
118.
The Red Sea. ^. Cor. 10. 2.
Their passage through the Sea, and in the Clowd,
Our holy Sacrament does shadow-out:
It saved them, but soon the Waters flowed,
And choked the proud uncircumcised rout.
"What Moses did for them, Christ did the same,
"For all that trust in him, and fear his Name.
119.
A wonder most, among those wonders all,
Past Reasons reach, and Natures laws exceeding:
Exodus 14. ^
Sea-waters to stand steadie like a wall,
And leave the Deep as dry as grounds for feeding*
He only that did Earth and Waters make,
Could cause the Sea his dwelling to forsake.
120.
From Egypt to the Desert we go on.
Of Pharaos Host the fear once ouer-past,
The People fall away from God anon,
Their confidence in him, declines in have.
His Promise old, they scarce believe for true,
But that 'twas often confirmed by tokens new.
121.
Long was it not, ere that stiff-necked Nation,
Forgot what wonders God for them had wrought:
They murmured, and fell to alteration,
Exodus 16.
Grudging against Moses, bread and flesh they sought.
In Egypts fleshpots they took more content,
Then in their freedom, and souls nourishment,
122.
(Live there not now some murmurers, think ye,
At Moses and at Aron close-repining:
Who lightly touched with sword, or penury,
Psalm. 59. 14.
Run up and down the streets like dogs a-whining,
Not caring, so they have their ease, and fill;
Let Church, and State and all go which way 'twill!)
123.
God rayned Manna from his Throne above,
Manna. Psalm. 78. Exodus 26. 20. 17.
He gave them Bread, the blessed Angels food*
Yet they against his Ordinance still strove,
The use of it, few rightly understood.
Ioh. 6.
"A figure 'twas of that true Bread indeed,
"Whereon all faithful souls devoutly feed.
124.
"To some, the more you give, the more they will crave,
So did this people in the Wilderness:
When they had Bread, then Water must they have,
Yet all would not content them nethelesse.
The Rock.
There flowed store, forth gushing from the Rock,
For them, their children, cattle, and their flock.
125.
A type it was to strengthen their belief,
Of that which often promised was before:
Exodus 17. 7. 1. Cor. 10. 4.
The place took name of chiding, and of strife,
That Rock, of Christ a true resemblance bore.
From their distrust and infidelity,
God works a mean for faith to fructify.
126.
Sinai.
To Sinai holy Mauntayne are we come,
A place of terror, dreadful to behold:
Who fears not, when he reads what there was done?
Or else by true relation hears it told?
Exodus 19. 12. and 20. 18.
A man, or beast that touched the Hill, must die:
The people that beheld, began to fly.
127.
"How dares a mortal then those Laws neglect,
"By God delivered in that fearful wise?
"Why are they not observed with more respect?
"Is there no fear of God before men's eyes?
No hope of heaven, no regard of hell?
No difference put'twixt doing ill, and well?
128.
"That sweet-soule-sauing-promise made long since,
"Renewed often, and often ratify'de:
"Does not with men by any means dispense,
"But that to moral Laws they still be ty'de.
"What though we cannot all the Law fulfill?
"That Great-law-giuer does accept good will.
129.
Gel. 3. 24.
Our weakness makes us on the promise rest,
And fly to him, who all the Law obay'd:
Belecue, and fast, and pray, and do thy best,
Then need'st thou not be doubtful or dismayed.
"Faiths object to the old Jews and us, was one:
"They hoped for him, whom we believe is come.
130.
A Simile, or apt Comparison, of the Laws Moral, and Ceremonial.
There was in elder times a mighty Prince,
A son he had who' against him did rebel:
Him the old father, for that foul offense,
From Court into a Desert did expel:
Where long he lived in uncouth banishment,
Until his fathers fury began relent.
131.
That King dwelt in a spacious goodly I Will,
A Country wondrous pleasant, rich and fair:
Where Nature on her Creatures seems to smile,
The soil is fertile, healthful is the air.
It Is ever day there, all the months are Summers,
There Is room enough, and spare too, for all comers.
132.
All that live there, are in degree of Kings,
They fear no treason, nor conspiracy:
Grief, sorrow, sickness, death: why these are things
Not known, nor spoken off in that Country.
Purchase Pilgr^lib. 7.
The famous Hill Amara, to this clime,
Is but a muddie moore of dirt and slime.
133.
The way was far, the dangers manifold,
With Rocks, and sandy shelues on every shore:
Yet he cheeres-vp his son, bids him be bold,
When thou comm'st home, thou shall go thence no more.
So ships him for his passage to this Land,
Gives him a Chart, or Map in either hand.
134.
The Moral Law.
Says thus: My son, this Chart must be thy guide,
And teach thee how thy course thou ought shape:
Look well upon it, sail on neither side,
For if thou do, be sure the Seas will gape,
And suck thee up: therefore I say take heed,
For just as thou be ruled, so shall thou speed.
135.
The Ceremo^ll Law.
That Map, see in thy left hand still thou keep,
Though not of such esteem as is the other:
It Is for thy use, while thou sayl'st on the Deep,
Account of it as of a younger brother.
Mark well the sundry figures there expressed,
They Will comfort thee, the greatest and the least.
136.
These are true shadows of reallities,
Which in that happy place thou shall enjoy:
When thou behold'st these pictures with thine eyes,
Pluck up thy heart, be of good cheer my boy:
The substances thou shortly shall attain,
Then use this Map no more, 'twill be in vain.
137.
So dealt great-heauens-King with Israel,
Some Laws he gave them, never to be broken:
Some served for complement, to parallel
True things, whereof those shadows were a token:
That when they had the things, the signs might cease,
And freed from fear, possess their souls in peace.
138.
The Tabernacle.
The Tabernacle, with its implements,
And, that most holy place Sanctum Sanctorum,
The vessels, tools, and hallowed instruments,
Exodus 26. Heb.^. 7, 8, 9, and all that Epistle.
Described by Moses with divine Decorum:
Were types of better things thereby expressed,
As we are taught by one who knew it best.
139.
The holy Olle Exodus 30. and 40.
What meant the holy Oil that Moses made,
Wherewith Kings, Priests, and Prophets were anointed?
Of that Messiah ointing 'twas a shade,
At those his threefold offices it pointed.
Psalm. 45. 8. and Heb. 1. 9.
The Oil it self (free grace of the Holy Ghost)
Above the rest, was powered on him most.
140.
Sacrifices. Heb. 10. 4.
How could the blood of Bulls, and Goats, and Calves,
And such like outward rudiments as these,
Be for sinne-wounded men, soule-curing salues,
And serve the turn, Gods anger to appease?
"Souls stayn'd with sin, such things could not cleanwipe,
"But by assiance in the prototype.
141.
Doubtless the Law of formal Jewish rites,
To Christ, but chiefly to his Passion tended:
Heb. 8.
So true is it (as the great Apostle writes)
With him, and at his death they fully ended.
Till then, they guided men him to expect,
On whom all eyes of faith did still reflect.
142.
One lively type of Christ (that blessed Seed,
So often promised, and shadow'd-out,
The mayne-source of my song.) I plainly read,
And when I read, am cleared of all doubt:
As sure as I give heed to the holy Writ,
So surely I believe the use of it.
143.
The brazen Scrpent. Numb. 21. ^.
The Brasen-Serpent, lifted up on hie,
Upon a pole in all the peoples sight:
It healed those that ready were to die,
Whom fiery Serpents mortally did bite.
Job. 3. 14.
The meaning of this place himself expounded,
On whom that, and all the other types were grounded.
144.
Who feels the sting of that sly Serpent old,
Desires a salve that poison to expel:
This brazen Serpent with faiths eyes behold,
Thou have no need to doubt of doing well.
The type failed not the Isra'lites to cure,
The thing it self, brings with it help more sure.
145.
Ietusalem. Psalm. 48. Judge. 1. 8. 2. Sam. 5.
Jerusalem, earths joy, that peaceful seat,
By Iudahs Tribe (from whom Messiah came)
First won: by David next, who waxed great,
Of Jewish worthies most in power, and fame.
Gal. 4 26.
This City was the shadow of another,
Of all Gods faithful Children, the true Mother.
146.
King David. Psalm. 22. 89. 110. 118, etc. Matthew. 1. and Luc. 3.
Her King a Priest, a Prophet most divine,
True type of Christ (his Psalms so often sing)
Whose pedigree runs from that Royal line,
By Law and Nature Isreal's rightful King.
What the one did figure-out, the other fulfilled,
So teach great Clerks, in holy Writ best skilled.
147.
A man that had been present in the place,
What time our Lord his Passion did endure,
And seen things acted just before his face,
Could not have spoke more plainly, nor more sure:
Psalm. 22. and 69.
That they should give him vinegar and gall,
His garments part, take's coat as lot did fall.
148.
This Kingly-Priestly-Prophet once again,
2. Sam. 8.
Received the assurance of that promise old:
Eccles. 47. 13.
Though Solomon his honor soon did stain,
With filthy Idols: yet one may be bold
2. Sam. 7. 14.
To hope the best, that with mild chastisement,
God wrought in him a full amendment.
149.
David, Manasses. Saint Peter, Sa^nt Paul, etc. Matthew. 26. 56.
(Have not the best of men been ouer-taken,
With like offenses to their great disgrace?
The Apostles all, was not their faith sore shaken,
When they forsook Christ in his hardest case?
It proves the Church has need of Christ his aid,
Whilst with mortality she is array'de.)
150.
Solomon.
This Solomon, the most magnificent,
The richest of all Kings that reigned before,
2. Sam. 12. 24.
Beloved of the Lord Omnipotent:
As did his Sire, himself like Image bore.
Psalm. 45. and 72. and Cant. throughout.
By him and his great state, were plainly meant,
Christ and his Church; which they did represent.
151.
Hiram. 1. King. 5.
To him the Tirian Hiram, Gentile King,
For building that fair Temple of the Lord;
Of Fur and Cedar^ees great store did bring,
They made a friendly league with one accord.
A sign, that Jews and Gentiles both should meet,
To build the Church with love, and concord sweet.
152.
2. Sam. 7. 23.
Was It ever read, or heard that any Nation
Were so instructed, guided, and directed
By God himself? Sure none since the Creation:
Yet never men, so much his Laws neglected.
Were not recorded in the holy Writ,
(So strange it is) no man would credit it.
153.
Exodus 32. 10. 13.
Had it not been of Gods abundant grace,
His Cou'nant and his Promise often made:
He needs must have consumed that wicked Race,
Who of transgressing, seemed to make a Trade.
Their Faith was faulty, and their Manners worse;
Dent. 28.
Both which are threatened with a heavy curse.
154.
What though they did possess the promised Land?
Dwelt at Jerusalem, that holy City?
Had Gods fair sacred Temple near at hand?
They fell from God, to Idols: (was it not pity?)
Despised those Laws divine, most just and right,
Which Moses gane, and God himself did writ.
155.
(...). ^.
O Israelites, hard-hearted, Beetle-blinde,
That cannot see, or seeing will not see!
O Nation of all Nations most unkind,
A mirror of gross Infidelity!
The things which for your good were first devised,
By you are most, of all men else, despised.
156.
"Who now may stand upon forefathers right?
"Or boast of their descent from holiest Saints?
"Or who may plead prescription in Gods sight,
"Whom foul defection in their faith once taints?
"I find no warrant to oblige Gods grace,
"To any Country, Person, Time, or Place.
157.
That mighty Monarch, Earths and Heavens Lord,
To whom all Monarkes else are Worms, and Ants:
Vouchsaf't himself to speak that gracious word,
Not using Heraulds-helpe, nor Purseuants.
He told those Kings, and those good Patriarks,
What after wards was taught by Scribes and Clarks.
158.
M^ssias prophesied. Heb. 1.
By Messengers hence forth he tells his mind,
Often puts his people in remembrance:
Who else were most forgetful, and most blind,
Securely lived, settled with ignorance.
Amongst all their Kings, searce one of ten is found,
Whose life was godly, and his faith right sound.
159.
They thought, since they had Abr'ham to their father,
It was enough to get his heritage:
His Faith and Works they should have followed rather,
Things slighted then, as they are in this age.
Such sons, that holy Father has great plenty:
True Abrahamites, as then, so now are dainty.
160.
Now must we mark how in the times succeeding,
God taught and schooled those people so untoward:
Their state declined, Religion lay a bleeding,
The men were most stiff-necked, stubborn, sroward.
One mean would not suffice, all to amend:
He used many, tending to one end.
161.
A Comparison.
Much like a great Commander in the wars,
Who rules an Host composed of sundry Nations:
Some prone to mutines, quarrels, strise, and jarres,
Some given to sloth, and idle recreations:
Some coward-cranes, when they should march to fight,
Bethink them of the readiest way for flight.
162.
Some others, like good men at arms in deed,
Perform all duties with their utmost powers:
Still pressed to help their Captain at his need,
Stand Sentinels at pointed place, and how'rs:
By wise forecast, and warlike policy,
Deals not alike with all this company.
163.
One sort with gifts, and fair rewards he binds,
With martial rigor others does correct:
By promises to some, he sounds their minds,
Some he casseers, and wholly does reject:
And thus by skillful warlike discipline,
Effects with good success his full design.
164.
So the grent Lord of Hosts with Israel deals,
A people hard to rule, as ever any:
His will to them, by Prophets he reueales,
Some by sharp stripes, by promises winnes many:
By threatenings often he affrights the rest,
With blessings manifold rewards the best.
165.
The Prophets.
Pervse the sacred Volumes of Records,
Writ by those holy Penmen, heavenly Scribes
Abundant proof, each one of them affords,
Of Gods proceeding with the Jewish Tribes.
And all, to make them of that Promise, Heirs;
Sealed to the holy Patriarks, and theirs.
166.
Ier. 25. and 15. and 50. etc.
One Prophet daunts them with captivity,
Heart-pining famine, sword and pestilence:
Then comforts them with their delivery,
Threats to their foes a heavy recompense.
Thus with sharp pills half dead, he them reuiues,
Renewes their strength with sweet restoratiues.
167.
Esaias 47. Ez^. 30. Amo^ 1.
Another, to deter them from their sins,
And fright them by their neighbors punishment:
With threats and plagues on Heathen folk begins,
Thereby to cause the Isralites relent.
The mildest way of fatherly correction,
For drawing stubborn sons to due subjection.
168.
A Simile.
Thus deal fond mothers with their wanton boys,
Who in their hearts possess the nearest place:
Alluring them oft-times with pleasing toys,
Some whiles they will whip a slave, or vassal base,
For childrens faults: Or beat the clothes they wear,
And by such fetches, keep them in some fear.
169.
God, ever mindful of his Covenant,
And that Good promise made, eft-soones renewed
To Abraham his friend, and faithful servant,
And others in the ages that ensu'de:
By Prophets still pursues his first intent,
Assures them that Messiah shall be sent.
170.
Job. 4. 25.
All faithful Men and Women amongst the Jews,
Held constantly that groundwork of their Creed:
The Fathers told their Children this good news,
Taught them the Promise of that Blessed Seed.
Yet all points, in each age, not fully shown,
Some mysteries were by degrees made known.
171.
Great things and many are of him foretold,
Some of his Birth, his Life, his Government:
His Passion and his Sufferings manifold,
Yet all agree with uniform consent.
One vtters plainly what in darker speech,
Another in selfe-sense does elsewhere teach.
172.
Messiah birth prophesied.
His Birth, a thing that far exceedes belief,
Were faith to Natures laws, and reason bound:
It was foretold in words most plain and brief,
The speech by fact full true long after found:
That of a Virgin pure immaculate,
Es. 7. 14.
He should be borne. (Was never birth like that!)
173.
His name Immanuel.
His Name more wonderful then was his Birth,
A mystery of mysteries contayn'd:
Immanuel, as much as Heaven on Earth,
Or God with us: (The sense need not be strayn'd.)
Notes both his Natures, humane and divine,
Which one self Person strangely should combine.
174.
Isaiah.
Thou holy man of God, above all other,
Who things to come, most plainly did foresee:
How could thou say, a Maid should be a Mother,
And couple childe-birth with Virginity!
Only this child of whom thou do foretell,
Instructed thee to speak the truth so well.
175.
These secrets deep, ere thou did them reveal,
(For never do I find them told before)
It seems were not yet known in Israel:
Once published, were believed more and more.
Though long until the thing was full effected,
The prophecy no good man yet neglected.
176.
And since Messiah was by birth a King,
From Judah rightly drawing his descent:
Mal. 3. of John Baptist, the Harbinger of Messiah.
Since he to Israel great joy should bring;
An Harbinger before him must be sent,
(As Princes use) his coming to declare,
And for his Person, passage to prepare.
177.
Es. 11. 6. and 65. 25.
The manner how this Royal child should come,
Was fully seen by them who thereof write:
The manner of his coming.
Not Souldier-like, with Trumpet, Fife, and Drum,
Or armed troops, to skirmish for his right.
Then 'twas foreshow'n, that bloody waves should cease,
And Nations all securely live in peace.
178.
Not in a rich triumphall Charet set,
Nor mounted on a stately barbed Steed:
No Lordlings great, nor Captains with him met,
To guard his person (such he did not need.)
Z^h. 9. 9. 10.
In lowely wise he on an Ass must ride;
Iusti^e and Peace way^ing on either side.
179.
The Place Mic^. (...).
The Place likewise in which he should be bore,
(A circumstance amongst others to be heeded.)
Precisely named by one Prophet more,
Who told it as in aftertimes succeeded.
"(All true Relations soundly 'gree together,
"Of falsities the one jumps just right with neither.)
180.
The Time. Da^n. 7. and 9 and 12.
A scantling of the Time by some is taken,
Yet sealed up, and hid from vulgar eyes:
When Isr'els state lies waste, and all-to-shaken,
Deprived of the daily sacrifice:
Ere long must come that Ancient of days,
Messiah hight; who David's Throne shall raise.
181.
Jonah.
Yet one, to show what after should betyde,
Is swallowed by a Fish within the Deep:
Three days shut up in it he did abide,
So long our Lord, within his grave must sleep.
That, cast on Land, his errand did fulfill:
This, rising up, performed his Fathers will.
182.
Es. 9. (...).
O wondrous Child, great God, the Prince of peace,
Main subject of all holy prophecies:
Mi^. 4.
Who may relate thy Kingdoms great increase,
Thy Churches glorie' mong posterities!
^s. 54.
All Gentiles with the Jews shall thither fly,
Both join to make up one fraternity.
183.
By thee, that glorious building must be raised,
Es. 28. 16.
Thou Master Builder, and chief corner stone:
Thy Name among the Saints be ever praised,
All laud and honor be to thee alone.
Es. 34. 23.
Thou only Shephard of thy chosen flock,
And of that house, the sure-foundation-rock.
184.
Number. 23. 10.
Who may recount the dust of Jacobs seed,
Or number-vp one quarter of that train,
Whereof in sacred History we read,
Es. 60. 4. Psalm. 72. 10.
That shall resort, and thither flock amayne!
When Kings shall bring their treasure unto thee,
Es. 49. 23.
And Queens make suit, thy Nurses for to be*
185.
Es. 55. (...).
Come, come all people to this heavenly Court,
Come rest your selves upon this holy Mount:
Come drink sweet Waters and pay nothing for it,
Come take rich treasures, yiedling no account.
Why come you not, when such a King does call,
Who has enough to give content to all?
186.
Psalm. 45. 13.
Here reigns a Queen all glorious within,
With costly Robes, and Jewels richly dressed:
Her beauty each beholders heart does win,
Come wait on her, enjoy sweet ease, and rest.
Why will ye dwell in Dens, and sluttish Caves?
You may be free, why will you then be slaves?
187.
Be thou into this service once retayn'd,
Thy name within the houshold-booke enrolled:
When thou the badge and cognizance have gayn'd;
Wisd. 5
Keep the orders of the Court: And then be bold,
For, whom this King so specially selects,
Those men he never afterward reiects.
188.
Es. 49. 15.
What mother can forget her only child,
The birth conceau'd, and bred up in her womb?
And though she should against nature wax so wild,
As wish earths-bowells did her birth entombe:
Yet heavens Father deals not so with those,
Whom for adopted sons he once does chose.
189.
Ier. 31. 35.
"First shall the Sun forbear to give his light,
"And Seas forsake the bounds to them assigned:
"The Moon and Stars shall shine no more by night,
"All Creatures else, turne-head against their kind:
"Ere he his chosen heritage forsake,
"And break the Cou'nant, which he once did make.
190.
Who can instruct all this fair company,
Attendants on so great a King of state?
Teach them their points of true Nobility,
And make them meet, on such a Prince to wait?
Ier. 31. 33. 34.
No man shall need ask questions of his brother,
Nor one give rules of Courtship to another.
191.
The King himself shall show to them his will,
And print his Laws so firmly in their heart;
The youngest there, may soon attain the skill
To do his duty, and perform his part:
With due deuoire to serve his Sovereign,
And love among his fellows to maintain.
192.
A description of Envy.
"Envy, that foul disease, that fretting canker,
"That breaks the gall, and gnawes the very bones,
"Makes fat-backs soon grow slender, lean and lanker,
"Dwells mostly in the hearts of greatest Ones:
Knows not the way to come within this gate,
Each one here, as himself, so loves his Mate.
193.
Ambition, pride, self-love, the common crimes,
That in great Princes Courts too much abound:
Smooth tongues, and hollow hearts, which in these times,
In Country, Court, and City, rife are found;
Be far exiled from this blessed place,
Such persons here, are ever in disgrace.
194.
The blessedness of the old I^wes.
O happy people, seed of Israel,
To you and yours the Promise first was given:
You only in this house of God might dwell,
Act. 2. 39.
You only knew the way, that lead to Heaven.
To you those lively Oracles were sent,
No Nation but your selves, knew what they meant.
195.
Romans 9. 5.
Yours were the Fathers whence Messiah came,
A daughter of your own, must be his mother:
Yours were the Prophets that foretold the same,
Matthew. 12. 46.
You had the privilege, to call him brother.
By Sara you were Heirs to Abraham,
For you did Moses kill that Paschall Lamb.
196.
The Moral and the Ceremonial Law,
For your instruction at the first were writ:
The one to hold you in a filial awe,
Deuteronomy. 5. 33. Ezec. 20. 11. 21. and Deuteronomy. 27. 26. and 30. 18.
Of him who with his finger penned it.
"Who so fulfills the same, shall live thereby:
"Transgressors are accurs't, and doomed to die.
197.
The Other by figures, types, and ceremonies,
By sacrifices always dip't in blood:
Did represent Messiah to your eyes,
By those, his Passion might be understood.
Your Prophets all, on him did fix their hope,
To guide you unto him, was all their scope.
198.
Then, as you are the true Heirs by descent,
And have the start by Primogeniture;
Aduize what was the purpose and intent
Of Moses, and all other holy Scripture;
Be ready when he comes, him to receive:
With doting dreams, do not your selves deceive.
199.
The tokens all, that should his Birth fore-goe,
Those have you seen, in order verified:
With inward joy your hearts should ouer-flowe,
Be not with wordly scandalls scarifi'd.
He is your King (that justly is his Name)
Count not his Cross, and Sufferings for your shame.
200.
Frame not a King within your idle brain,
Such one as Moses never told you off:
Think not the holy prophecies were vain,
Of him whom they describe, make not a scoff.
The time draws near, when he himself shall show,
By that which has been said, you may him know.
201.
Here leave I now these Isra'lites awhile,
And hasten forward toward Bethlehem:
Poetic license, must your thoughts beguile:
Conceive we journey from Jerusalem.
To see that Virgin Mother, blessed Dame,
Es. 7. 14.
Her son whom she Immanuel should name.
202.
Godfrey. Ann^ 1099. hist. Tur^, A Comparison.
An Army marching under Christ his Banner,
From Infidels to win the holy City:
At first sight of the Town, in humble manner
Fell prostrate on the ground, and morn'd for pity,
To think that place by Caytiffs should be kept,
Partly for grief, partly for joy they wept.
203.
What true Believer can his passions hide;
Withold his eyes from shedding tears of mirth,
Luc. 2. 11.
When he that Town of David shall have spi'de,
Think on that Blessed Child his wondrous birth,
Which had God for his Father, and none other:
A Virgin pure and spotless to his Mother?
204.
My heart (me thinks) within my body skips,
With joy my senses near themselves have lost:
My tongue cannot be kept within the lips,
My feet are swift, to bear me there in post.
Heart, Senses, Tongue and Feet strive altogether,
Which best shall do their due, when they come thither.
205.
A Simile.
A Pilgrim iournying in a foreign Land,
Inexpert in the way where he must go:
Seeks out some Guide, to lead him by the hand,
Least in the Wilds he wander to and fro.
Thus safely comes he to his iourneyes end,
Then thanks the Guide, esteems him for his friend.
206.
Lo I poor Pilgrim dull, ignorant, halfe-blinde,
Devoutly bent upon this pilgrimage:
Met many Guides all skillful, faithful, kind,
I put my self into their patronage:
They set me near the Subvrbs of the Town,
I humbly thanked them. Then kneeling down,
207.
The Authors prayer.
Great God (quoth I) Protector of the Just,
The Guide of faithful, meek, and humble men:
Who never faylest them that in thee trust,
Who see the heart, the inward thoughts do ken:
Selfe-wise-conceited-Doctors do besot,
And cause them speak oft-times they know not what.
208.
By Babes and Infants soundest out thy praise,
Enablest them to speak of mysteries:
To sing such secrets with soule-soothing lays,
As thou have hid from worldly-wizards eyes.
Thou know what moved me to this holy task,
Thou art not blear'd with vizard, or with mask.
209.
First, pardon for my boldness I desire,
Yield humble thanks for aid already given:
A further boon, low kneeling I require,
Show me the path that leads direct and even,
To bring me safely to my iourneyes end,
And gain the Goal, whereto my Muse does tend*
210.
So here I vow, in singleness of heart,
(Since better gifts to offer I have none)
Matthew. 2. 1. and look Class. 2. Stan. 77.
With those three pious Kings to bear a part;
And, most unworthy, yet I Will make up one.
My self and all I have, I dedicate
To thee, whose sacred story I relate.
211.
Thy Blessed Mother with due reverence,
I Will honor still: (She does expect no more.)
Thee, thee I make my Patron and defense,
Thy Precepts all, because I cannot keep,
I Will rest on Grace, and for my sins I Will weep.
The end of the first Classis.
DIVINE POEMS. The second Classis.
THE ARGUMENT.
Messiah Birth fore-showne first to his Mother,
A Virgin pure both in, and after childing:
To Joseph afterward, and to some other.
Sheep-keeping praised, a life contentment yiedling.
The worth and use of noble Heraldrie
A short defense of Sacred Poesy.
A Simile, se^ting out the obscurity tha^ was of Messia^ coming, in the times
next preceding his birth.
Often have I trauail'd in a winters night,
Wherein Dame Phoebe never showed her face:
The lesser sparkling fires gave some light,
By which (with heed) my journey I might trace.
I still expected when the day would peer,
And fair Aurora show her countenance clear.
2.
As she began to raise her self from bed,
The Vshers making way for her approach:
Bright Phoebus haft'ning to thrust out his head,
And day all pressed, in sisters room t'encroach:
Beset me round, and dimmed mine eyes much more.
3.
Till Titan rowsed with that bold affront,
His Princely-palace-gates thrust open in have,
Calls for his Charret, swiftly mounts upon it,
His sight these gloomie shades full quickly chas't.
By help of whose resplendent glorious rays,
All trauailers might well discern their ways.
4.
Wisd. 5. 6. Revel. 22. 16. and Number. 24. 17.
So, near before this Sun of Righteousness,
Bright-morning-starre rose up, the worlds true light:
Egyptian darkness did men's hearts possess,
The prophecies lay hid, as with dark night.
An argument, Messiah birth drew near,
Whose coming should all doubtful scruples clear.
5.
The Authors prayer to be enlightened by the true Light of Lights.
Great Light of Lights, selfe-light, whose glorious beams,
Lend luster to all lesser lights besides,
When on their Orbs his glittering rays he streams,
Stella est densior p^rs sui Orbic.
A glimpse whereof on their thick-stuffe abides:
Whereby of borrowed light they get a share,
Which in themselves obscure, and darksome are.
6.
Refine the Orb of my gross muddie brain,
So clear it with thy all-enlightning splendour:
That thereby some small insight I may gain,
Some spark of heavenly Light it may engender:
Which set upon a candle-stick, may shine,
Guide many hearts to thee, as well as mine.
7.
The Glorious Father, Lord, and King of Kings,
Who Heaven and Earth, and all therein created:
Ere he his son into this Mansion brings,
Resolves, the matter should be first related,
To persons, and by means, as he decreed:
Of Counselors therein he had no need.
8.
The blessed Virgin. Luc. 1. 26.
With her who was to be the blessed Mother,
He first begins (so goes the sacred Story.)
She heard that happy news before all other,
Such was his will, to tender her that glory.
The Angelical salutation.
An Angel hayles her, Marie full of grace,
Blessed art thou above all Women's race.
9.
No marvel, if at first she stood amazed,
And muzed what the Salutation meant:
But when the Angel had his message blazed,
And told the errand, whereon he was sent;
She shook of fear, and doubt; full satisfied
By faith, in that which th'Angell propheci'd.
10.
Her question proceed^th not ou^ of distrust.
Think not the blessed Virgin did distrust,
In asking how that wonder might be done:
To be resolved at full she had a lust,
How she without man's help, should bear a son.
The question issued not from unbelief,
Her absolute assent, was quick and brief.
11.
A Comparison.
A mother when she hears a sure narration,
Of some great honor happened to her child:
Tickled with joy, she prays a fresh relation,
And yet when she within her self smiled,
As if she had forgotten what was said,
To hear the news once more, she is well apaid.
12.
Some, out of weak belief such questions make,
As Moses when the people cried for meat:
Number. 11. 21.
Though God himself the task did undertake,
To give them flesh, their bellies full to eat:
How may six hundred thousand men (said he)
Sufficed with flesh, here in this Desert be?
13.
Such was the fickle faith of Zachary,
Luc. 1. 18.
Who to the Angels word gave small belief
Ioh. 3. 4. 9.
And Nicodemus was as weak as he,
Albe it a Pharise among the chief.
Through weakness these cast doubts, how that might be,
The means whereof, they did not plainly see.
14.
Some others, of mere incredulity,
Much like brute beasts, lean wholly to their sense:
They Will credit naught, but what does full agree
With Natures laws, fits their intelligence.
(...) King. 7.
Such was that Prince to whom Elisha spoke,
Who of his words, a small account did make.
15.
Some others all as bad, or rather worse,
Ask questions in dirision, and scorn:
Ioh. 18. 38.
As Pilate, when with him Christ did discourse,
Made manifest the cause why he was borne,
Told him the Truth. What thing is Truth (quoth he)
As who should say, I know it as well as thee.
16.
Her divine song Magnificat. Luc. 1. 46.
The Virgin quickly fell to her devotions,
And framed a dittie hight Magnificat:
Where she expresses sundry heavenly motions,
Never sang Maid so sweet a song as that.
With heart and soul in God she did rejoice,
Who had vouchsaft, of her to make his choice.
17.
To speak of every point, would be too long,
One clause that fits my Theme, I must observe:
How, to shut-vp her soule-delighting-song,
From ancient Hebrews use, she does not swerue;
But sticks to Abr'ham, and that promise old,
Her faith in that, caused her to be more bold.
18.
Joseph. Matthew. 1. 19.
From Joseph's eyes the thing awhile was hid,
Espoused they had been, not fully wedded:
He muz'd how of his Mate he might be rid,
When big he found her, never by him bedded.
Then in a dream, God shows him what was done,
And that Worlds-Sauiour-Iesus was her son.
19.
The man obedient to this heavenly vision,
Joyous (no doubt) and with the news well pleased.
Embraced his wife, repented his misprision,
In heart and soul much comforted and eased,
He took her home, and knew her not before,
Mat^. 1. 25.
Nor, Till, her first begotten son she bore.
20.
Questions about the blessed Vir^ins perpetual Virginity.
Here busy heads some doubts and scruples raise,
Among sober Christians well to be forborne:
Yet since they often be argued in these days,
I Will say my mind: (whereto I durst be sworn)
As she our Lord did bear, a Virgin pure;
So all her life (say I) she did endure.
21.
Objections, or Cauills.
Though Jesus styled be her firstborn son,
It argues not that she should bear another:
Heb. 1. 6.
For Christ is named, Gods first begotten son,
Yet, in that sense, he never had a brother.
Ioh. 1. 14.
We are Gods children by adoption,
He only is by birth, and by conception.
22.
Until (say some) an after-time implies,
Plain pointed at, when Joseph should her know:
That word (with them) their fancy verifyes,
Then huddle-vp a few conjectures more:
Matthew. 2. 14 and Luc. 2. 51.
They dwelt together, iourney'd here and there,
In all respects, as man and wife they were.
23.
Answer to the Cauills.
Conjectures bare, the question to decide;
This word Until, a diverse sense admits:
Most times in Scripture, makes on the other side,
Never at all, with that word often fits.
When Samuel came no more to visit Saul,
1. S^m. 15. 35.
Till death: it is meant, he saw him not at all.
24.
Matthew. 5. 18. 26. and often elsewhere.
Of such like phrases holy Writ has store,
Which rather clear the case, then leave a doubt:
What though one Mansion held them? At one door
Did enter in, and at one door went out.
These were no blots to her Virginity,
Whose soul was wedded to Divinity.
25.
This may infer, she lived not in a Cell,
A Recluse mewed up from society:
Her virtues rare, had not appeared so well,
Had she refrayn'd her self from company.
Matthew. 5. 16.
"The lives of holy Christians ought to shine,
"And give a luster in their Neighbors eyne.
26.
How could it be, that one in such great grace
Luc. 1. 28. 35.
With God, o're-shadow'd by the holy Ghost,
For any carnal thought should leave a place,
Within her breast? Nay, he that loved her most,
A man just, holy, would not so abase her,
As with a fleshly thought, once to embrace her.
27.
Another Ob^ction answered.
They urge, and ask: Why was she then a wife?
(On reasons Base, these Builders ground their creed.)
Lo, Reason shall ye have to end the strife,
Though for my part, I hold it more then need.
To honor Marriage, and Virginity,
Fit was it She both Wife, and Maid should be.
28.
Matthew. 1. 19.
To shun the scandal of the common Crew,
Inclined to reproachful obloquie,
Before her spotless innocence proved true,
She had stood subject to their courtesy.
God was not pleased, all men at first should know,
What he to Joseph in a dream did show.
29.
Reflect your eyes upon our Grandame Eve,
Bethink you of her fault in Paradise:
When her the subtle Serpent did deceive,
To eat the fruit forbidden, did entice.
Ge^. 3. 15. No^e (...)
Mark punctually what in the Text ye read,
The Promise was, unto the Woman's Seed:
30.
Not to the Man. Of him there is no speech:
Now see how God, precisely kept his Word:
We must believe, as holy Scriptures teach,
Man had no part in getting Christ our Lord.
The holy Ghost supply'de the Husbands steed:
There Is no immediate mixture of man's seed.
31.
Matthew. 26. 69.
When Peter once his Master had denied,
Proceeding on, he made the matter worse:
His error with an oath he ratified,
And lastly he began to swear, and curse.
Job. 21. 15.
Thrice after, he confessed, was loved the more.
Settled in state of grace, just as before.
32.
In such like sort God with poor Eua deals,
To comfort her, and keep out sad despair:
The purpose of his grace he straight reueales,
And made a promise of that Blessed Heir,
Which he performed many Ages after,
To this pure Virgin, Eua's blessed Daughter.
33.
Elizabeth.
The next (I note) to whom it was revealed,
Who spoke distinctly of that true Messiah;
Luc. 1. 41.
Elizabeth. Had she the thing concealed,
Yet in her womb, there leapt a young Elias:
He to his Mother gave full evidence,
Of that which soon proved true b'experience.
34.
She prophesied as plain as any other,
Verse. 42.
Possessed wholly by the holy Ghost:
How is it that my blessed Saviors Mother,
Vochsafes to visit me in this hill coast?
Among our female Sex, none blessed like thee,
Yet shall thy birth it self, more blessed be.
35.
Zachary. Luc. 1. 67.
But, holy man of God, good Zachary,
More fully shows what shortly should be done
Inspired with the Spirit of prophecy,
(As all old Prophets since the world begun)
Looks back unto that ancient Covenant,
First made to Abraham Gods faithful servant
36.
His song called Benedictus. Luc. 1. 68.
He frames a most divine Propheticke song,
By name of Benedictus known to all:
Aduize and mark it well (it is not long)
Full fraught with passages Celestial,
Of Christ, that son of David often foretold,
The source and subject of all Prophets old
37.
Wherein is described out. Sa^cur Christ.
Describes him to descend of David's line,
A Prince to save them from their Enemy,
According to predictions divine,
Gods oath to Abraham, and his Progeny:
To the end they might live holily and just,
Upon this Savior, fix their only trust.
38.
And Saint John the Baptist.
And thou my Child that art so strangely bore,
The Prophet of the Highest is thy Name:
His Herault thou must be to run before,
Men's hearts unto obedience to frame:
To lead them out of darkness into light,
And guide them in the way of peace aright.
39.
What wondrous heavenly passages are these?
Who ever read such strange events before?
A fear on all the hearers hearts' began seize:
Yet listen a whiles, you shall hear more.
We hasten to the birth of Isreal's Prince,
The like was not before, nor ever since.
40.
Against profane and superstidous casting of Natiuities.
Note here, no tache of Heathenish superstition,
No calculating of Natiuities:
(A crime too rife' among men of high condition)
But free assent to sacred Prophecies,
Fast-grounded faith on Gods old Word of grace,
Which in all faithful hearts still held a place.
41.
Now seems the season fit to sing of Feasts,
Mark. 6. 21.
(At Princes births much used) and costly iunkets:
Resort of Ladies, Lords, and princely ghests,
To spend the time in sports, and sumptuous bankets:
A chamber furnished with rich chaires of state,
And all things sitting such a royal Mate.
42.
For Seruitors, a goodly spacious Hall,
To hold the household folk, and common stranger.
Lo, here the Childing chamber was a Stall,
The Cradle for this Prince, was but a Manger.
Humility attended at his birth,
It never left him whilst he lived on earth.
43.
Some Hagarens (no doubt) did laugh and scorn,
And mocked at this King of Israel,
Whom they perceau'd in such mean manner borne:
As did that base-broode fleshly Ishmael,
Genesis 21. 9.
At Sarahs happy son: So the ^shmalites
Now scorn, hate, persecute true Abramites.
44.
Herewith good Christians are not scandalized
It rather gives them cause of inward mirth:
Es. 4^.
Since in the Sacred Writ it is often comprised,
That such should be the manner of his birth.
Matthew. 18. 1.
"So, we by his example may be humbled,
"And learn, that proud men shall to hell be tumbled.
45.
Of this one Point a Volume might be writ,
My Muse cannot endure prolixitie:
She hastens to some other things more fit,
Which suit with the order of the History:
Her Theme, a world of Matter does afford,
A Dittie might be framed on every word.
46.
Though outward pomp, and majesty here wanted,
Wherewith great earthly Princes Courts do shine:
In heavenly state this Lady was not scanted,
Her ornaments, and Waiters were divine.
As was the King, such were his Courtiers all;
The eyes of Faith, see them maiesticall.
47.
2. King. (...). 16.
So then, this Queen was never left alone,
Elisha and his man were not so warded;
An Host of Angels round about her shone,
With those her Son, her Self, her Court were guarded.
No treason could be plotted or begun,
But sooner 'twas disclosed, then thought upon.
48.
A Comparison.
When Henry's Mate, of York the lawful Heir,
Her siluer-white Rose, with his red entwined,
Of English King and Queen the blessed Pair,
By whom two Royal houses were combined,
And she delivered of a goodly Boy:
Who could express the height of Englands joy?
49.
The news forthwith by Heralds skill was blazed,
The Trumpets shrill in every street did sound:
The vulgar sort with mirth were half amazed,
The Court with wreaths of Olive decked round:
Fair Albions I Will was never so much blessed,
From civil broiles, endowed with peace and rest.
50.
By this my simple-sample ('it is no more
Compared with the birth of Isreal's King)
Note in what wretched state men stood before,
Till he true peace into the world did bring.
Union of Jews and Gentiles by Christ. Ephesians. 2. 14.
Of Nations twain, united he made one:
Sole Monarch rules them both, himself alone.
51.
This joyful news 'twas meet should be made known,
Swift Messengers were soon dispatched away,
Luc. 2. 8. etc
By them we read the tidings first was shown,
Even instantly before the break of day,
To Shepherds, who by night did watch and keep,
From ravening Woolues, their tender flocks of Sheep.
52.
Here Is due decorum kept. Poor silly Swaynes,
First made pertakers of this happy news:
Verse. 13.
An Angel wayted-on with heavenly Traynes,
Tells this glad tidings, to some shepherd Jews.
Great Lordlings of the Land, as yet neglected:
And simple Shepherds, they were first selected.
53.
"Gods wisdom suites not with man's worldly wit,
"Their counsails be but shallow, his are deep:
"What ever he decrees, he acts it,
"His eye of providence does never sleep.
1. Cor. 1. 27.
"By things in nature simple, base, and weak,
"The mightiest he throws down, their power does break.
54.
Thou tyrant Pharao, swell until thou burst,
^. King. 18.
Senacherib, rail on the living Lord:
Judge. 13. 6.
Proud Holofernes vaunt thee, do thy worst,
A woman pares thy head, with thy own sword.
The other twain that trusted in their might,
Without or spear, or sword, were put to flight.
55.
Matthew. 23. 12.
"Be humble then before the King of heaven,
"That Is the only way to sit sure, and mount higher:
"Who takes the less on him, shall have more given;
"But down falls he, that proudly does aspire.
"Gods message to these men of low degree,
"Directs the highest to humility.
56.
A digression in commendation of the Shepherds life.
Come gentle Shepherds help me pen a song,
Wherein I may describe your happy life:
I fear for lack of skill to do you wrong.
Is not your trade free from debate, and strife?
From envy, pride, excess, and vain ambition?
Are ye not sweetly pleased, with your condition?
57.
Whilst on the Hills your fleesie flocks do feed,
Your trusty Dog, sure watch and ward does keep:
You play and pipe upon an oaten reed,
Then sing a Caroll, till you fall asleep.
You fear no poison mixed among your drink,
Of such infernal tricks, you never think.
58.
Whilst little Lambkins friske about and skip,
The gentle Dammes, go nibbing on the grass;
Somewhiles run to the Troughs, and fetch a sip,
Then by your side, and round about you pass:
Till at your whistles sound, both yound and old,
Prepare themselves, and hasten to the fold.
59.
Meanewhile (O happy men) you have the leisure,
To spend the time in holy Meditation:
To sing a Psalm (sweet-soule-delighting pleasure)
To note the greatest works of the Creation:
The Sun, the Moon, the Planets and the Stars.
Not sacrifi'd with broiles, or bloody wars.
60.
To mark the different seasons of the year,
In each of them, the sundry alterations:
How swift-wing'd Boreas makes the Coast all clear,
How Phoebus draws up watrie exhalations:
Whence dewes, and snowes, and hail, and rain proceed,
Which makes the herbs to grow, the cattle breed.
61.
How lovingly the Ewes entreat their Lambs,
Give them the Teat, till they have drunk their fill:
Then graze along, fore-guided by the Rams.
(Examples teaching men and women skill.)
A thousand observations more you find,
To please the eye, and to content the mind.
62.
Nor are you bound alone to contemplation,
Oft-times your calling keeps you in action:
When Bears, and Woolues, fierce rau'nous generation
Assault your fouldes: By their unjust coaction,
You play the men, and combat for your flocks,
The beasts that offer wrong, you quit with knocks.
63.
Like good Physicians, one while must you drench,
One while like Surgeons, open a vey ne for bleeding:
Then stop again, and make the issue stanch,
Turn to the fould, then drive abroad to feeding.
Thus soul and body both, are still employed:
By enterchange, there is neither of them cloyed.
64.
No state on earth, like yours, so much is blessed,
So free from vice: That leads so sure a way
To quietness on earth, and endless rest:
That is so fit to mediatate and pray.
To you was opened first Messiah birth,
The Lord and King of heaven, and of earth.
65.
Examples. Abel.
No marvel then, if men of holiest life,
Of greatest worth, with God in highest grace,
Have Shepherds been. This calling was most rife
Among Gods people, ancient Hebers Race.
Genesis 4. and Heb. 11. 4.
First Abel, he whose Offerings God respected,
When Cain and his Oblation was rejected.
66.
Jacob and Rachel.
Jacob and Rachel his best-loued wife,
Were both Sheep-keepers: (note the story well.)
Genesis 29. 9.
Had it not been a fair contented life,
Would he, by God surnamed A Prince of God.
Israel,
Betane himself to such a trade of living?
Genesis 30.
God blessed him thereby, and made it thriuing.
67.
Moses. Exodus 3. and Heb. 11.
Moses that man of God, who did refuse
To be entitled Pharaos daughters son:
A solitary shepherds life did choose,
The pomp of Egypts Court thereby to shun.
By keeping sheep, he learned to rule a Nation,
The most unruly since the worlds creation.
68.
Genesis 46. 34.
Egyptian Idolaters, they deemed
The shepherds, as a mere abomination:
What then? That should not make them dis-esteem'd,
But to be held in higher estimation.
"The thing which wicked worldlings do despise,
"Ought seem more precious in a good man's eyes.
69.
King David.
The worthiest of them all, the holiest,
David a King, a Prophet, and a Priest,
1. Sam. 16. 7.
Of Iessees sons though youngest, and the least,
Yet best and great'st, by judgment of the Highest:
Among all shepherds he may bear the bell,
Great King of Judah, and of Israel.
70.
Verse. 18.
A man in peace, wise; valiant in the war,
Who slew a ramping Lion, and a Bear:
Bold on his God aduentred on so far,
To charge Goliath armed with shield and spear:
He, furnished only with a sling, and stone,
And swordlesse, heads the Giant with his own.
71.
These rare examples among Gods people dear,
Would move a man, that were not void of sense:
Yet could I make the matter far more clear,
But here my Muse entreats you to dispense:
For long digressing, she falls in your grace,
Reserues the rest unto another place.
72.
Look back before at Sta^. 46. Luc. 2. 15.
Those happy shepherds, having seen the vision,
Consult together, what was best be done:
Without delay, or careless intermission,
They haste to see the Mother, and her Son:
They found it just even as the Angel said.
These words close in her heart, the Virgin laid.
73.
How do they then? Conceal what they had seen?
Or add new-coyn'd relations of their own?
Not so: As it to them revealed had been,
So, all abroad that coast they made it known.
While people wondered, they to God gave praise,
Rejoicing in their hearts, to see those days.
74.
Next, Gentiles from a Country more remote,
Are called to do their homage to this King:
Long had they been neglected, and forgot,
Ezech. 34. 23. 2. Esd. 2. 34.
Yet all the Prophets did foretell the thing,
That one great Shepherd should make up one flock,
And graffe both Jews, and Gentiles on one stock.
75.
They press not to this Feast, like Ghests unbidden,
Nor by adventure, stumble on the place:
That Mystery which had so long lain hidden,
God opened to them freely, of his grace:
Since they were strangers, and their Country far,
Matthew. 2. 2.
They were conducted by a special star.
76.
Not such, as fixed are in the firmament,
No Comet, nor commixed Meteor:
A star of purpose made, of purpose sent,
The like was never since, nor yet before.
By it the Gentiles first to Christ were guided,
As God in his deep wisdom had provided.
77.
The Wise men or M^gi. Matthew. 2.
These Gentiles were not of a mean condition,
Wisemen in the holy story they be named:
Some call them Kings. I like that exposition,
See Clas. 1. Stan. 210.
And say those Doctors ought not to be blamed.
For in those times, and in those Eastern parts,
Kings were well learned, and skillful in hid arts.
78.
It Is likewise held, they were in number three,
So is it by their threefold gifts imply'de:
But, by what means of Colein they should be,
Some men in no wise will be satisfy'de
It is no point of Creed, from whence they came:
Sure from the East, the Text affirms the same.
79.
^th. 2. 14.
And thither they returned back again,
Not by the way through which they past before:
The style of Colein-Kings they did attain,
By after-accident: I say no more.
"In things indifferent where faith is free.
"We should not strive against Antiquity.
80.
Entry into a discourse of the Genealogy, or Pedigree of Christ.
Th'Euangelists, who Christ his story wrote,
As they were plain, and simple without glozing:
So spoke they naught at randon, or by rote,
But all t'engender faith, their style composing.
No where more care, nor more fidelity
They showed, then setting down his pedigree.
81.
The ground and Basis of true faith, was this,
To put, in Gods old promise, sure belief:
Who therein doubted ought, or thought amiss,
Could have no faith: (first failing in the chief)
As is a house that wants it is foundation,
So faith that takes not hence her deriuation.
82.
Old Abraham received that word of grace,
His Son, and Grandchild had the same renewed:
David the King, descending of their race,
With cleerer knowledge thereof, was endew'd.
So Abraham and David were the Tree,
A Branch whereof Messiah needs must be.
83.
To give assurance to our faith herein,
And make us perfect in Christ's pedigree:
Matthew. 1. (...).
At Abraham and David does begin
The first, that cites his Genealogy:
Shows us how Joseph And legally, from the Royal line.
lineally descended,
From those good men, with God so highly friended.
84.
A question about Joseph, Christ's puta^iue father.
What need he tell of Joseph's ancestrie?
(Some man, perhaps, may ask for his instruction,
So may some do of incredulity.)
I answer both, and with one plain construction:
The Hebrews in their Genealogies,
On women's persons, seldom cast their eyes.
85.
Number. 27. and 36.
Those people It was so generally; though some particular exceptions may be
showed.
used to match within their Tribes,
(Judah therein was more precise then others.)
So, while the Fathers lineage he describes,
It is employed thereby he tells the Mothers.
Joseph by Law was Christ's reputed Sire,
To speak of him, the story did require.
86.
See yet, how in this point those Sacred Scribes,
(By God, and by his holy Spirit guided.)
Luc. 3. whereas he names Joseph, the son of Helie: He was not so by
Nature, but by Law, in that he was married to Mary, the natural daughter of
Heli.
Prevent all cause of doubt. For one describes
The Mothers side: (Gods wisdom so provided!)
The Blessed Virgins lineage he recounts,
And from her Father, up to Adam mounts.
87.
Therein (me thinks) a mystery I see,
That writing of the Mothers parentage,
He leads us up unto the highest degree,
And stops not at any middle Age:
As Matthew. 1. who there begins at Abraham, and no higher. Luke recording the
Virgins line, ascends up to Adam.
he who did with Abraham begin,
Making rehearsal of the Fathers kin.
88.
The Promise first in Paradise was given,
To our great-grandame Eve, who there transgrest:
The Virgins pedigree so high-vp-driuen,
(She Mother of that Seed so highly blessed)
Shows this was he, blessed son of Euahs daughter,
So long foretold, though coming so long after.
89.
From Patriarks for virtue most renowned,
With God in high esteem, Christ did descend:
So was his stem from Kings, and Princes crowned,
Though it became far meaner in the end.
For, as the Hebrews glory did decline,
So fell the Fathers of Messiah line.
90.
Some blemishes among his Ancestrie,
The sacred stories plainly do set forth:
The Kings (most of them) wanted piety,
Ruth a Moabi^.
Some of them Gentiles were, some of small worth.
"All Nations, and all men of each condition,
"Have partin Christ; so large is his commission.
91.
Who does not yet admire and much commend,
The care and wisdom of the Jewish Nation:
That when their state did all to ruin bend,
Kept the ancient custom without alteration?
By diligent and heedfull Heraldrie,
Noting the Lineage of their Ancestrie.
92.
Joseph was poor, and of a simple Trade,
His Wife, for wealth, no better stored then he;
And yet (it seems) a Catalogue was made
Exact and certain, of their Ancestrie.
Saint Matthe^. and Luke.
From whence those sacred Penmen had the light,
The lineage of them both, to tell aright.
93.
A digression in praise of Heraldri^ or Armo^ie.
A noble Science not to be neglected,
Of special use in each well ordered State:
To see all men in their degrees respected,
(A fair old custom, not deuiz'd of late:)
"To teach, that virtue, learning, noble deeds,
"Nobility in their Possessors breeds.
94.
Patrons of mad-brain'd popularitie,
Who Order do despise, and love Confusion;
Whose aim is all at bestiall community,
(So to bring in old Chaos in conclusion)
These only loath degrees, and civil orders,
Nor can endure this Art, within their borders.
95.
"A spur it is to every high attempt,
"To be ennobliz'd with the badge of Honor:
"From which reward, no person is exempt,
"Whom God will raise: (for he is the chiefest Donour.)
"Where causes do preceed, there will ensue
"The Effects: Since God gives every man his due.
96.
2. Sam. 17.
When great Goliath Isreal's Host defied,
Young David undertook with him to fight:
His zeal to God (that may not be denied)
Before all worldly motives, gave him spright.
Verse. 25.
Yet Saul proposed great honor for a pay,
To him who could that proud Philistim stay.
97.
2. Sam. 23.
The worthy men which under David swayed,
Are not forgotten in the holy Book:
Their names in order, Herald-like are laid,
There shall you find them, if you list to look:
Their acts rehear'st, that their posterity,
Might follow them, and win like praise thereby.
98.
Ioah amongst them all I fail to find,
Great Captain of the Host, a man of name:
He left no worthy memory behind,
By cowardice, his acts he did defame.
1. King. 2. 5.
The blood of war, in peace he foully shead:
Just vengeance therefore, lighted on his head.
99.
Two of his brothers in the list are named,
Far less then he in rank, and estimation:
Yet since he for his vices was defamed,
By law of Arms, he suffered degradation.
His coat reuers't, and he in blood bespotted,
His Honor with his Corpse together rotted.
100.
1. Chron. (...). 16.
Though he were sisters son unto the King,
And held a place of Honor with the best:
That could not safeguard to his Person bring,
Nor cause him be recorded among the rest.
"Great men if they with virtues be not furnished,
"By Heralds art, their Arms should not be burnisht.
101.
One special part of Heraldrie it is,
Among sundry others not to be despiz'd:
They teach great Titlers not to claim amiss,
Each title at his worth by them is prized.
"Where Order is observed, Confusion hated,
"There Heralds and their skill, are highly rated.
102.
The antiquity of A^morie, o^ Heraldrie. Genesis 49.
Most ancient is the use of Armorie,
I Will look no higher then the Patriarks:
Good Jacob when he was at point to die,
(As well it is observed by learned Clerks)
Bequeathed Arms among his sons by will,
Which to their Tribes are propriated still.
103.
The Lion King of Beasts, was Iudahs badge,
Consorting well with his Regalitie:
He gave the rest such as with them might fadge,
Or best accord to their Posterity.
Numb. 2.
Each man was bound, unto his own Tribes Stander,
And might not thence, unto another wander.
104.
What more should kindle love, and amity,
(Which in this Iron age begins to freeze)
Then does the bond of Consanguinitie,
Among branches sprowting from the selfsame trees?
Or men that by affinity are ti'de,
Although their dwellings be remote, and wide?
105.
The times have been (those times me thinks are past,
I doubt where erc they will return again.)
When linkes of blood, and matches bound men fast:
More hard to break, then was a brazen chain.
Now trifles to the value of a Goose,
Or break the link, or make it slip, and loose.
106.
Our British Nation herein I commend,
(How ever some elude it with a scoff)
Their kin they are most forward to befriend,
And knowledge them, though somewhat farther off.
Their Bardi Brittani. i.
Bardhs record the Genealogies,
As Well of those who fall, as them that rise.
107.
Some people after two discents, or three,
Have no regard of kiffe, nor yet of kin:
Farewell both kindred and affinity,
Unless they hope somewhat thereby to win.
If Cousins chance to rise, and grow in favor,
Then kindred with such men, begins to savor.
108.
"The Abuse, unto the Art brings no disgrace,
"Else might we cavil at the best profession.
One circumstance I Will add unto this place,
And so return from this my long digression.
The matter's such, as need not breed offense,
If with the Meeter, you vochsafe dispense.
109.
This Art contaynes some hidden mysteries,
(Those Artists treat upon them in their books)
Not subject to the view of vulgar eyes,
Shadowed they are with vailes, and lie in nookes:
Their language is by figures, signs, and marks,
To Herehalts only known, and to their Clerks.
110.
With metalls, colors, stars, and precious stones,
In number nine, ingeniously disposed:
All coats of Arms in their Escutchiones
Are blazoned: Sundry shapes therein enclosed,
With differences whereby younger brothers,
From elders are discerned, and each from others.
111.
Best coats are so deuiz'd by Heralds laws,
As on the view, men cunning in that Art,
Will yield a reason, and disclose the cause
Of each such coat; and tell for what desert,
The Ancestor those ensigns did attain,
Or others after, new atchieuements gain.
112.
A thousand rarities as well as these,
To give instruction, and to breed delight,
Those Artists teach: Thence learn them, if you please,
Or from the books which of this subject write.
Where Honor, still from Virtue is derived,
And Vice, of Arms and Honor both, deprived.
113.
I fear a censure for my ouer-sight,
That scarce a prentice in this mystery,
I durst a dittie thereof to indite,
And wrong the Art: Peccaui do I cry.
The skill, I see good reason to approve;
The civil use thereof, needs must I love.
114.
Look back to Stan. 92.
Return my Muse, unto thy sacred Theme,
Messiah Birth and Pedigree o're-past:
Rowze up thy self, as raised out of a dream;
Of that which yet remaynes, let us have a taste.
Declare in order what succeeded next,
As thou do find it in the holy Text.
115.
Herod.
Then reigned Herod in Jerusalem,
The Romans set the crown upon his head:
'Twas not his right, but that it pleased them,
So Iudahs Race was dis-inherited.
A certain sign of Christ's nativity,
Genesis 49. 10.
As Jacob long before did prophecy.
116.
Herod from Jews had learned by tradition,
That out of Iudahs stock a King should rise:
Whom they conceau'd must be of high condition,
A mighty Prince, on earth to Manarchize:
Which struck into his heart a Panike fear,
When first those wise-mens errand he did hear.
117.
Matthew. 2. 4.
The Priests and Scribes together he assembles,
To learn the certain place of Christ his birth
That fully known, he cunningly dissembles,
Then makes a show of joy, and holy mirth:
Pretends a pilgrimage, as of devotion,
His heart all bent upon a wicked motion.
118.
He boasts within himself for this devise,
Supposed he had the Bird fast in his net:
It Is good (thinks he) be merry, and yet wise,
Now in my Throne I shall be surely set.
Mark. 12. 7.
I Will kill this Heir, then is the Kingdom mine,
When I have cropped this branch of Iudahs Line.
119.
Psalm. 139. 1^
But God, who sees the secrets of the heart,
Who knows the thoughts long ere they be conceau'd:
Preuents the man, for all his cunning Art.
The Magi came not back. Thus he deceau'd,
With fierce revenge was wholly set on fire,
Naught else but blood could qualify his ire.
120.
He used those Wisemen only for a stale,
They mocked him, whom he thought to beguile:
"So, men oft-times are brought unto their bale,
"By plots, which in proiecting make them smile.
Fallere fallentem, non est fraus.
"A false deceauer (never ask him leave)
"Make no great scruple, such one to deceive.
121.
A Simile.
A Woolfe that wendeth to a flock of sheep,
Espyes one Lamb, much fairer then the rest:
Draws near to it (the Shepherd fast a-sleepe)
Prepares his panch for this expected feast:
But in the nick, when he is ready bite,
In runs the Shepherd, soundly does him smite.
122.
Thus having lost his prey, half mad with rage,
He falls in upon another flock:
There, his enraged fury to assuage,
Among them all, he fiercely makes a shock:
He stares, and howles all one as he were wood,
Then snatches, bites, and kills, and sucks the blood.
123.
So, this fell Tyrant failing in his plot,
Much like a mad dog, overcome with rage:
In choler and revenge he waxed hot,
Matthew. (...), 1^.
Slew all the Children under two years age
At Bethlehem, and in the Coast thereby,
Which caused many a woeful mothers cry.
124.
^. 31. 15.
Lo, here again another old prediction,
Which by one Prophet, long before was writ*
Curs't Infidels esteemed it as a fiction,
This Tyrant unawares accomplished it.
Matthew. 5. 18.
"Of all that God fore-spoke, the smallest jot,
"In time to be performed, fails not.
125.
The means how Christ escaped Herodes hand,
Was not at randon left to Joseph's choice:
The Angel bids him fl^e to Egypt Land,
He readily obeyed the heavenly voice.
Himself, the Child, and his espoused wife,
Dwelt in that Country all the Tyrants life.
126.
Wherein was hid a double my sterie,
By God decreed in his deep providence:
(...) 11. 1.
The Accomplishment of an old prophecy,
Which says, That God should call his son from thence.
Each line, nay (near) each word does matter give,
To strengthen Faith, and urge us to believe.
127.
It proves again, though he a Jew were borne,
Their rightful King, to offer them salvation:
Yet of the Gentile-people took no scorn,
But came to call, and save each heathen Nation.
These entertayn'd him better far, then those:
These stood his friends, when the other proved his foes.
128.
(...) m^t ^i e^able end. (...) 7. cap. 8.
That wicked King, when he had tyrannized,
And spilt the blood of harmless Innocents:
With a disease most loath some was surpised,
Part gnawed with worms, part plagued with sundry torments:
A rare example, others to affright;
From shedding guiltless blood, by fraud or might.
129.
Soon after, Joseph was recalled home,
By him that erst advised him to flee:
But hearing Herod's son reigned in his room,
He turned aside, and dwelt in Galilee,
(...) 19.
At Nazareth: whereby it came to pass,
That he a Nazarene surnamed was.
130.
The story notes how that royal Child,
The Son of God, not subject to the Laws:
In humane nature was so mecke and mild,
As he obeyed it in every Clause.
Was circumciz'd, called by that glorious Name,
Phil. 2. 10.
All peoples knees should bow, who hear the same.
131.
Why Christ was circumciled.
Great reason was it he should be circumciz'd,
That Rite by no means, might have been neglected
Else had the Jews at first been scandalized,
The Law of Moses seemed to have been rejected.
Meet was it he should all the Law obey,
Ere to the Gospel he could make clear way.
132.
It proves, his flesh was not fantastical,
As Manichaeus dotingly did dream:
But, as his Mothers true, substantial,
From which (like other men's) pure blood did stream.
This Act affirmed his Humanity,
As did his Actions, his Divinity.
133.
Christ baptized.
Long after this, it pleased him be baptized,
To give allowance to that sacred Rite:
Matthew. 3. 14.
He needed not (Saint John was well aduiz'd)
Since free from sin, he had no cleansing b'it.
That precious badge of Christianttie,
The more to pri'ze, he taught his Church thereby.
134.
The holy Ghost on him descended. Luc. 3. 21.
This holy Sacrament no sooner ended,
A full assembly standing in the place:
The Holy Spirit like a Dove desended,
His Person and that Rite, the more to grace.
A voice from heaven then gave testimony.
And witness bore of his Divinity.
135.
He is presented in the Temple.
Before he ouer-past his Infancy,
And from his Parents tutelage was freed:
Unto the Lord, presented must he be,
Leu. 12. 6,
An offering for him made, as Law decreed.
Whilst in the Temple this was to be done,
Another thing worth noting, there begun.
136.
Simeon. Luc. 2. 25.
Old Simeon, a just man and devout,
Full with the holy Ghost replenished:
Of that Messiah coming made no doubt,
Was by divine instinct admonished,
That death his aged limbs should not surprise;
Till first he should behold Christ with his eyes.
137.
He comes into the Temple, not by hap,
But guided by Gods providence divine:
The Child within his arms he there does wrap,
Him steadily beholding with his eyne:
First prayseth God, then chaunteth Nunc dimittis,
The short'st, and sweet'st, among all sacred Ditties.
138.
His sweet ^ong called Nu^ di^nis.
Now Lord give leave thy Servant may depart,
Since that mine eyes Worlds-Sauiour do behold:
Whom thou have sent, the Gentiles to convert,
Thy Isr'els joy, as thou before had told.
This said, the Parents, and the Child does bless,
Of things to come, fore-shewes them the success.
139.
Anna, her testi^monie of Christ. Luc 2. 36.
The last that bears witness among the rest,
Adds her fair Suffrage, with that holy Crew:
A woman, for her praises not the least,
(That gives assurance what she spoke was true)
Even in that instant to the place she came,
And what she knew of Christ, divulged the same.
140.
Now Jews, and Turks, and unbelievers all,
And christ'ned Atheists, (if some such there be)
You never read, nor heard, nor never shall,
The like sweet sympathizing harmony,
To prove a thing false, feyned and untrue;
Believe on him then, bid the Devil adue.
141.
What Prophets old foresaw, and did foretell,
What Rites, and Types, and Figures did declare,
And Sacrifices used in Israel,
With last-recited stories strange and rare:
Can all these work no sound belief in you,
Nor credit gain, to things so certain true?
142.
Iam. 2. 19. The Devils believe, and tremble.
The Devil does believe the sacred Text,
And knows it is true: it makes him more to tremble:
With knowledge of that Truth, he is ever vexed.
To whom then may I Infidels resemble?
In unbelief, their master they exceed:
And hold some points, worse then the Devils creed.
143.
How could so many Witnesses conspire,
And join their heads, a story to deuize?
Poor Shepherds counterfeit that heavenly Quire,
Gull all that Country, with a forged surmize?
The M^.
Or draw great Princes from a Country far?
Or make an admirable walking Star?
144.
Could poor old Joseph with his tender wife,
Have escaped the bloody tyrant Herod's hand?
Had he the skill to save the Infants life
From slaughter, among those children of the land?
But that some higher Power did him guide,
And warned him in time to slip aside.
145.
These things were not in hidden corners done,
Then set abroach in certain Ages after:
They were divulged just as they begun,
With wonderment received, not scorned with laughter.
Great Heathen clerks do justify the story,
Though to impugn the Faith, they take a glory.
146.
We need no credit beg from Heathen books,
Not from the Eluish Sybills fopperies:
Who on the sacred Text with judgment looks,
Compares with heed, the holy Prophecies:
Shall find enough therein belief to gain,
And crave no help from sutt'lest worldly brain.
147.
O silly fools, what makes you shut your eyes,
And scorn to hear that God who does you call
Surcease the Sacred Story to despise,
Lay hold (at first) on faith historical:
That had, you may proceed and grow in grace,
Without the first, for the other there is no place.
148.
A digression in defense of Poesy, in Divinity.
Here leave I unbelievers for awhiles,
And grant my Muse a little time to wander:
To lighten and refresh her self with smiles,
Half dulled, and mazed within this close meander.
So, when her sprights fresh vigor shall regaine,
She hopes to win your souls, and quit her pain.
149.
A Simile.
A man that sets himself upon the Stage,
Becomes the object of all peoples eyes:
(Especially in this fault-finding Age)
Or must the censures of the most despise:
Or bear himself all steadily upright,
Else some will at him bark, and some will bite
150.
I run the common hazard in this case,
My Muse upon a high Theater stands:
Though she behold none with a churlish face,
Nor quarrelsome with any faction bands:
Yet looks she not to 'scape without some touch,
She arms her self, since she expects as much.
151.
Objections against the use of Poesy, in Divinity.
What means this man (me thinks I hear one ask)
These sacred Mysteries so much to wrong?
What moves him undertake so rare a task,
To bind this heavenly subject, to a song?
This Poetry beseemes a meaner matter,
It is no Theme, whereon a chough should chatter.
152.
Let learned Doctors in the Tongues well-skill'd,
In looser lines, not bound to feet and measure,
Do all they can: when they their books have filled,
With choicest portions of so rich a treasure:
They fail oft-times to tell their minds so clear,
But doubts, and scruples therein do appear.
153.
Hence spring new questions in Divinity,
Less reverence given to the holy Word:
When men, no Clerks, but of the Laytie,
Presume to take in band the sp'rituall Sword.
Such matters must be left to reverend Clerks,
To be discussed in their learned warkes.
154.
At least, they will not endure a Poets quill,
Should scribble on this Theme with Lyrike lays:
This learning comes not from Parnassus Hill,
Her Doctors temples wear no crowns of bays
Take Poets, objects fit for poetry:
And Clericks, subjects of Theology.
155.
The Muses in dicted, and arraigned.
Ye charming Sisters, who in Thessalie,
Were wont, long since, to hold your residence
Between huge Ossa and Olympus high,
And take those shadie woods for your defense:
To tread the flowrie banks of Peneus side,
Whose silver streams by Helicon do glide.
156.
Where antique Altar of that Idol Jove,
With loathsome heathenish sumes too often did smoke:
When Paynims sacrificed in every Grove,
Idolatry did with devotion cloak:
You, with such treasons in old times acquainted,
Against heavens King: and for that fact attainted.
157.
What makes you on this Princes Court encroach,
Whence many Ages since, ye were exiled?
How durst you be so bold as to approach
His sacred Cabinet, ye Traitors vild?
You stand indicted of this treason high,
Now answer for your selves, Who shall you try?
158.
The Objections answered, and Indictment trauerst: with a digression in defense
of Poesy.
An innocent unawares may be indicted,
Yet to his trauerse being once admitted:
His Allegations heard, he may be righted,
And by a Jury on their oaths, acquitted.
My Muse upon the Quest does put her Cause,
And prays the Court, to judge her by the Laws.
159.
From vulgars censures, first she does appeal;
Submits her self most gladly to the rest:
Yet, amongst them all who in such pleas do deal,
She humbly prays the judgment of the best.
Before his Throne she kneeles, her doom to hear,
Her conscience her assures, she need not fear.
160.
Read to this purpose in the authors, Beatic Pacifici, Stan. 146.
That old Indictment, long since was reuerst,
A general gracious pardon freely past:
The Charter has been sundry times rehearst,
Been often allowed, and ever is to last.
The Advantage of that pardon I entreat,
For faults that do precede the same in date.
161.
"Sons must not suffer, for their fathers crimes,
"(Nor daughters for th'offences of their mothers)
Convict me by the errors of my Rimes,
And not for treasons done long since by others.
If in themselves no wickedness appear,
Give sentence on my side, and set me clear.
162.
Tell me what tongue, or language under sky,
Amongst men in life, and faith most reprobate:
But may be well apply'de to piety,
And fit the mouths of men regenerate?
"An earthen vessel may pure liquor hold,
"As Well as one of silver, or of gold.
163.
If then all tongues, may talk of things divine,
The myst'ries not disparaged thereby:
Why should a strict-smooth footed Poets line,
Do worse, then words left loose atlibertie?
"The form of speech, ought not chaste ears offend,
"So as with zeal, to piety it tend.
164.
"A modest Poem bears with it a grace,
"And slily steals into the hearers heart:
"Among the grauest Clerks deserves a place,
"In passages divine, may bear a part.
"The sacred Text is not profaned by meeter,
"By it, the matter rather seems the sweeter.
165.
The Muses are not fett'red to Peruassus,
Nor sworn alone to drink of Helicon:
(Like him who sits fast chained on Caucasus.)
They have, and do hold residence at Sion:
And taste the streams of Sabrine, Thames, or Wie,
As Well as any Spring in Thessalie.
166.
Judge. 12. 6.
Since Shibboleth they can pronounce aright,
Though Ephramites by birth, and parentage:
Ye Gileadites do not against them fight,
Nor seek to kill these sisters in your rage.
They bring their offerings to Jerusalem,
They are at peace with you, war not with them.
167.
Thou princely Judge, before whose sacred Seat,
Mine, and my sisters cause, I humbly plead:
Thy pardon and thy patience I entreat,
To speak at large, as matter shall me lead.
A prisoner for his life has liberty,
(With reverence of the Court) to argue free.
168.
Of such as do our innocence oppose,
Some few (perhaps) by evil will are led:
With silence only will I answer those,
That Is antidote for tongues enuenomed.
Such accusations slender credit gain,
The Courts of Justice, reck on them but vain.
169.
Scientia non habet inimicum, praeter. ignorantiam.
It Is Ignorance, Arts greatest enemy,
That sets it self, the Muses to outface:
They understand not what is poesy,
Who most oppugn, and strive it to disgrace.
I Will teach them if they have a lust to learn,
The Truth (herein) from error to discern.
170.
So when they shall be able judge aright,
And clearly see wherein before they erred:
In quarrel of the Muses they will fight,
And joy, to see their Scholars be preferred.
They Will give them leave, the grauest theames to handle,
And on their knees, the gentle Sisters dandle.
171.
A Poet by signification of the word, is a Maker: and Poesy, is making.
A Poet is a Maker by his name,
And Poesy, a making does imply.
The first of Writers that deserved same,
(Among Professors in humanity)
Were Poets all; who by their sweetened strains,
First stamp't Arts image, in men's duller brains.
172.
Was It not by Poets learned skill and wit,
That men in manners rude, much like to beasts:
In concord and society were knit,
Did freely yield themselves to obey Laws hests?
Antiquity to them that honor left,
To rob them of it, were a kind of theft.
173.
Such sight in things Divine as Heathens had,
Or sauour'd ought of thoughts celestial:
In Poets habits all were neatly clad,
Set forth in shapes, and shows poetical.
Sacri, Sancti, Diuini.
Their styles were Sacred, Holy, and Divine,
The dearest Darlings of the Sisters nine,
174.
Their skill may not be got by institution,
Nemo sit, sed nascitur Poeta.
Not Art, but Nature must a Poet frame:
'Twas ever held, their cunning cameb' infusion,
Vates.
Whence Elders gave to them, a Prophets name.
Furor Poeticus.
Instinct and Fury must possess their brain,
That shall the title of a Poet gain.
175.
Their pen to one sole subject is not bound,
What ever falls within the reach of wit,
Conceit, or Reason: Shallow, or Profound,
From Shepherds poor, to Kings that crowned sit:
Things Sacred or Profane, or Low or Hie,
Are subjects fit, for Poets ingenie.
176.
"To every person, and in every thing,
"It keeps decorum. Virtue best is graced
"By poesy, when Poets thereof sing:
"So, by their poems, Vice is most defaced.
All Sciences within it are contayn'd:
Why should this Art of Arts, be so disdayn'd?
177.
Of heavenly songs (the branch of poesy
Whereof I treat, and seek to make defense)
Examples in the sacred History
May be alleag'd, I hope without offense.
Yet all herein that shall be spoke, or writ,
To Churches censure, wholly I submit.
178.
Sundry sorts of songs in Scripture. First, for deliverance from great dangers
Moses. Exodus 15.
A song of praise for strange deliverance,
Moses and Israel to the Lord did sing:
The Women music made, and led a dance,
With pious mirth, to honor heavens King.
May not like cause now, work the like effect?
Such, as say no, I Will not be of their sect.
179.
Psalm. 18. and 105. David.
Many such songs upon the like occasion,
Did holy David seriously endite:
Needs must it be confessed without evasion,
He did it by th'instinct of the holy Sprite.
On sundry instances I Will not insist,
More in his Psalms you may read, if you list.
180.
^idg. ^. Debora.
That noble prophetess good Debora,
Who boldly put her person to the field:
After the full defeat of Sisera,
By singing, praises to her God did yield.
The three children in the siery Oven.
The children saved from the sierie slame,
Did chaunt a song, in honor of Gods name.
181.
Secondly, for benefits and ble^ings received.
For blessings and Gods benefits received,
Good men and women, holy songs often framed:
More then they all (if I be not deceau'd)
We find in that good King, but lately named:
2. Sam. 23.
Of Israel, sweet singer might he be,
None sang so much, nor yet so sweet as he,
182.
1. Sam. 1. Hannah.
When barren Hannah had a son obtayn'd,
(Often vexed with her Riualls injury)
For whom she prayed, and wept with tears vnfayn'd:
To render God her best gratuitie,
A song she framed with graceful melody,
Full fraught with flowr's of heavenly poesy.
183.
Thirdly, songs of spiritual love, betwixt Christ and his Church. Read all
Solomon's Canticles.
Of love chaste, holy, spiritual and divine,
A Song of Songs King Solomon indicted:
Look on the inside, not the outward rine,
Thy heart with heavenly mirth will be delighted:
To see the enterchange of mutual love,
Betwixt Christ and the Church, his gentle Dove.
184.
How she her self before him does abase,
Unworthy to be matched with such a mate:
Deformitures in feature, and in face
Acknowledges: And at how low a rate,
Her self and all her parts, she does esteem,
That in his love, more happy she might seem.
185.
How he again, her beauty does admire,
And limns it with a grace inimitable:
Embraces her with love all set on fire,
Makes her by his rich gifts, more amiable.
With words and art, merely poetical,
And emphasis super-celestiall.
186.
Fourthly songs for remembr^cers, and admon^uon. Deuteronomy. 31. 19. and 32. 1.
When Moses was to take his last farewell,
And seize Mount Nebo for his sepulture:
Foreseeing that backsliding Israel,
Sound in Gods service, would not longendure,
But bow to Idols of all bord'ring Nations,
And suit their manners, to those Heathenish fashions.
187.
To testify against such heinous crimes,
And make them heedfull of this prophecy:
That they might call to mind the ancient times,
Ere they declyn'd to gross Idolatry:
By Gods express command, a song he wrote,
For them and theirs to know, and learn by rote.
188.
Fifthly, songs for spiritual comfort, deuonon and edification. Colos. 3. 16.
and Eph^s. 5. 19.
Some uses more of Songs, and Hymns, and Psalms,
In sacred Writ expressed do I find:
They serve to wounded souls, for precious balmes,
To ease the heart, and to rejoice the mind.
Fit means they are, to stir up true devotion,
Proceeding ever from an holy motion.
189.
1. Chron. 16. and 25.
The care King David had in this respect,
To beautify Gods service in those days:
May warrant us, not wholly to reject,
That thing which he ordained to Gods praise.
Though God seek inward worship of the heart,
Fit outward helps must not be laid apart.
190.
When Christians in their Temples do assemble,
In holy Hymns, with heart and voice agree:
The glorious Quire of Angels they resemble,
And pierce the heavens with their melody.
Herein the Church while she is militant,
Participateth with the Church triumphant.
191.
See before Magnificat, the Angels song, Benedictus, and Nunc dimittis.
The choicest songs to Christ his birth addressed,
Already have been offered to your view:
You see what in the old-writ was expressed,
Is likewise used, and taught us in the new.
Condemn not that, which rightly may be used,
But only see, the same be not abused.
192.
That Christ our Lord did laugh, I never read,
There Is no such mention in the History:
Mar. 14. 26:
A Psalm or Hymn he sang, so is it said.
His sole example serves the turn, say I.
"Each Act of his (as may be proved b'induction.)
"Is written, and does serve for our instruction.
193.
Saint Athanasius his profound Cr^de, cal^d Quicunq. vult. And Saint Ambrose
his divine ^ Deum, etc.
Have not some godly Fathers in their time,
Made songs: wherein our faiths deep mysteries,
Are chaunted out in soule-delighting rhyme,
No good men grudging at those melodies?
If such high points are sung without offense,
Why may not others, with like reverence?
194.
All Ages such examples do afford,
To justify this graceful exercise,
In poetizing on the Sacred Word.
One sample will I set before your eyes:
Of late-ones he shall serve for all the rest,
Mong sacred Poets, held to be the best.
195.
Du (...) his divine Weeks.
He that by weeks and days his work diuides,
First on the worlds-creation poetizeth:
Then forwards to succeeding Ages slides,
The choicest matters in his Verse compriseth,
Of elder Text: so sweetly beautify'de,
As, with instruction, yields content beside.
196.
"What brings delight, and profit both together,
"That more in reason ought we to respect:
"Then it, which singlely produces either.
"This is of poesy the true effect,
"To make those paths soft, easy, smooth and plain,
"Which in themselves are rough, and full of pain.
197.
Of poesy in numbered words, and measure,
And sweet-concluding-clozes I intend:
(I know, a Poets pen can range at pleasure,
Prose-poetrie it is easy to defend)
That charming Verse, which ends in a rhyme,
The thing by some, much scorned in this time.
198.
Ios. lib. 1. de Ant. Iud. cap. 7. says, that Moses after their delivery from
the Egyptians, made an Ode or long in hexameter verse. See also l. 4. c. 8.
I dare not say, the ancient Hebrews songs,
Ran all in rhyme: it goes beyond my skill.
To greater Clerks, such knowledge deep belongs:
Yet as I said before, so say I still;
They kept both order, number, time, and measure:
It stood so with devotion, and with pleasure.
199.
"These Rimes which to the matter do no wrong,
"Yet by the ear, breed in the heart delight:
"Ought not be lashed with a lavish tongue,
"Give them, as unto looser lines, their right.
If the only Rhyme offend, the words transmute,
It will be Prose, and with your fancy suit.
200.
Conclusion of the de^ence of Poesy.
Thanks to the sovereign Judge with reverence:
Next, to the Court, where Justice holds her seat,
For granting prisoners this fair audience.
No further favor need I to entreat.
I guess, the Verdict must be special,
A Term or two, will show what shall befall.
201.
But thou my Muse, who with thy oaten quill,
Presum'st to pipe these homely rustic Lays:
Whilst some with siluer-sounding trumpets shrill,
Transcend Olympus, graced with wreathes of Bays:
Confess thy slender skill in poesy,
Though thou the Art it self do justify.
202.
Suffice it thee, that on these sacred Theames,
Thou tell thy mind in Meeter smooth, and plain*
Let others follow fantasies, and dreams,
Speak thou the truth, regard no fables vain.
What some affect, for idle ostentation,
Do thou reject, and choose humiliation.
203.
Let tongue-prooffe armor, gentle patience,
Make thee secure: thereon set up thy rest.
A wall of brass, to wit clear conscience
Keeps thee, and this thy Embrion in rest.
As thou and it, shall fair acceptance find,
So strain thy self to finish what is behind.
204.
If thy great Patron, Muses chief Protector,
(He of the Muses most again beloved.)
Hest. 5. 2.
Vouchsafe to hold thee out his golden Scepter,
And give thee life, until thy faith be proved:
Thou need fear no envious Agagite,
By his defense, thou shall be sure of right.
205.
Perhaps when I, the Penman of thy wit,
Shall sleep forgotten, rotten in my grave:
Among those Sacred-Singers thou may fit,
This Motto for thy comfort shall thou have:
Though I sit lowest in this heavenly Quier,
My note is Cela: None has strayn'd a higher.
The end of the second Classis.
DIVINE POEMS. The third Classis.
THE ARGUMENT.
Christ's Miracles on Lazars, Lepers, Blind,
Dumb, Deaf, Dead, wretched men possessed with Devils*
The Apostles no less powrefull in that kind,
By his commission vanquish all those evils.
The strange increase of pious Christianisme,
The unlike growth of hell-bred Mah'metisme.
A comparison used by the Author ere he begin to treat of any the Acts of
Christ that Messiah, and King of Kings.
WHo pens the story of an earthly King,
Whose deeds ask folio-Volumes large and thick:
Ere of his Acts and Gests he fall to sing,
Or come to touch the Matter to the quick:
To times, and things preceding must look back,
Else shall his writings grace and luster lack.
2.
Of all the Kings that ever Scepter swayed,
Genesis 10.
Since Nimrod first that Title did attain:
If all their doings were together laid,
And Kingdoms joined, wherein they all did reign:
Their states and stories no ways might compare
With Isreal's King, nor claim therein a share.
3.
My Muse (like Dogs that running lap and taste.
Of Nilus streams, to quench their raging thirst)
Some passages has posted over in haste
From Eden, where she set her foot at first,
Through hills, and dales, and woods, and champion fields,
Which endless matter of discoursing yields.
4.
Yet she, too weak for such a work of wonder,
(What Atlas can so huge a weight sustain!)
Resolved, part of that burden to goe-vnder,
Which though it put her to no little pain:
Her zeal to do that King true vassallage,
Makes it seem but an easy carriage.
5.
The Author pray eth for divine a^istance.
Dread sovereign King of Kings, stretch forth thy hand,
To stay thy feeble servant least he fall:
Enlighten him, that he may understand,
Those secrets of thy Court he deals withal:
Not pry into thy inner Cabinet,
But walk within the bounds which thou have set
6.
The Sea is deep, no bottom to be found,
Where thou thy greatest mysteries have hid:
Yet may we wade, whilst we can touch the ground,
Keep by the shore, not venture to the mid.
Here little Lambs may sip, and quench their thirst,
Stout Elephants swill deep, until they burst.
7.
From prophefies of Messiah, promises and figures of the old Law: And other
testimonies in and at his birth, and insancie:
With whom predictions of the Prophets old,
Nor types and figures, better things resembling;
Nor Gods sure promises fairly enrolled
By faithful Scribes, that never used dissembling:
Nor witnesses above all exceptions just,
Can work belief, and drive away distrust:
8.
For such, some easier arguments there be,
A pasta^e to the Acts of Christ himself. Heb. 1.
(The future subject of my plaine-tune-song)
By which the simplest sort may clearly see;
The things that were fore-spoken off so long;
And get soule-sauing faith, that is never idle,
A spur to Virtue gives, to Vice a bridle.
9.
A Simile.
Like one, who in a spacious garden set,
With flowers, and fruits of sundry sorts repleat:
Has liberty without control or let,
To take his choice for savor, or for meat:
Looks often about, not knowing where begin,
All is so fair in show, so sweet within.
10.
So I, amid a Sea and World of matter,
Exposed to my choice whereon to sing:
Where no man need to gloze, much less to flatter,
But smoothly say the truth in every thing:
Confounded with my Theames variety,
Stand doubtful where begin my poesy.
11.
First, of his Miracles.
Thus wondering at this wondrous affluence,
As I my pen unto my paper set:
It seemed some hid celestial influence
My wau'ring hand, and purpose did abet,
And moved me first dispose my self to treat,
Christ's Miracles, and works of wonder great.
12.
Christ's doctrine at first required Miracles.
'Twas meet that he who brought new Doctrine in,
Put end unto old Jewish ceremonies,
With Miracles and wonders should begin:
Ioh. 5. 36. and 10. 37.
Such wondrous works performed before men's eyes,
Confirmed his Doctrine with strong evidence,
As none thereat could justly take offense.
13.
His profound^ arguing with Docto^s, at twelve years old, was wonderful: if
not precisely a miracle. Luke 2. 49.
The first, is one among them not the least,
That he, a child of young and tender years,
Even in the Temple, at a solemn feast,
Appos'd profoundest Doctors of the Chaires:
His knowledge and his answers were so rare,
As all men wondered, who then present were.
14.
Yet, by degrees he grew unto perfection,
Verse. 40.
In grace and wisdom daily did increase:
As man, we read he lived in some subjection
To passions: Only sin could not him seize.
His Godhead in his wonders did appear;
So, of his Manhood he left tokens clear.
15.
His turning water into wine. Ioh. 2.
In Galile (next) at a marriage feast,
His mother and disciples coming thither,
Himself likewise a solemn bidden ghest,
And many more assembling there together:
He gave a probat of his power divine,
By turning Water into perfect Wine.
16.
Genesis (...) 2^.
When Adam stood in state of innocence,
In Paradise God knit that sacred band,
With breach whereof no mortal may dispense,
He brought the Woman to the husbands hand.
A mystery, more to be had in honor,
Since of the first Wife, God himself was donour.
17.
Perhaps from truth I shall not go astray,
Nor wrong the holy Text by misconstruction:
If, as I think, so I presume to say,
That Christ herein respected our instruction:
This was properly, precisely and punctually his first miracle.
By his first miracle at a marriage-dinner,
To grace that Rite, whereof God was beginner.
18.
He left a pattern of civility,
To such as should his holy Faith embrace:
To shun all churlish harsh rusticitie,
And frame themselves to persons, time, and place:
Romans 12. 15.
To feast sometimes with friends, at seasons fit;
And sometimes weep, with such as mourning sit.
19.
"No men on earth have Angell-like perfection,
"Whilst we are clothed with mortality,
"To humane passions we live in subjection,
"None is exempt from mutabilitie.
"We laugh, we weep, are sick, recover health,
"From poverty, sometimes rise up to wealth.
20.
His miraculous fasting forty days. Matthew. 4.
As Christ made merry with his friends at feasting,
It Is likewise in the holy Story noted:
He soon retired, and gave himself to fasting,
A work whereto he chiefly was devoted.
The Devil then begins him to try,
And takes advantage of necessity.
21.
Full forty days he spent in meditation,
(He was not idle in the Wilderness)
In which he took no food for sustentation:
This work, his Godhead makes us to confess.
His hunger after that, does testify,
And give sure proof of his Humanity.
22.
The Devils first temptation on our Savior.
Hence that Old Serpent, subtle sophister,
Begins to argue thus: Bread here is none:
That (as thou know) is life's chief nourisher:
Lo, here is matter, Take to thee this stone,
If thou will prove thy self to be Gods son,
Command it to be bread, and 'twill be done.
23.
He had not yet forgot, how simple Eve
By fair pretense, was foully circumuented:
So hoped he our Savior to deceive,
And make him yield as soon as he was tempted.
His wiles in tempting Christ, were far more sly,
They made no show of gross impiety.
24.
The woman did what flatly was forbidden,
From due obedience to rebellion slided:
Foul gluttony within her breast lay hidden,
By sight, and taste her appetite she guided.
Genesis 3. 6.
Because the fruit was pleasant to the eye.
And good to eat, she took it instantly.
25.
One motive, worse then the other two beside,
Preuaill'd with her. A rash, and damned desire
Of knowledge like to God. Lo, here was pride,
A sin that still sets all the world on fire.
By pride, rebellion, sensuality,
The Tempter gat on her the victory.
26.
With Christ, more warely he goes to work.
To turn a stone into a piece of bread,
A man would think no treason here could lurk,
And yet our Lord, withstood him to his head:
Tells him, that God by's word, and providence,
Not by sole bread, procures our lives defense.
27.
Th'audacious boldness of the wicked fiend
Sets out it self, that being once repelled,
He durst his wit against our Savior bend:
The more he was kept down, the more he swelled.
For, having failed in his first assay,
He leaves not so, buttries another way.
28.
The Devils second temptation.
He lifts him up upon the Temples top,
A place of danger, rashly to descend:
A non persuades him, boldly thence to hop,
On confidence that God would him defend:
Matthew. 4. 6.
And for assurance, Scripture he produces,
Though (like himself) the Text there he abuses.
29.
"The Devil, when he leads a man to sin,
"Seeks not t'obtayne his full design at first:
"With slender slips, and errors hee'l^ begin,
"Then draws him on, ^o actions more accursed.
"For, he tha^ to his first assault gives way,
"At next will be more ready to obey.
30.
The third temptation.
One other gilded bait this Tempter sets,
(With such too many in these days are caught)
Him to a huge high Mountains top he gets,
Thence shows ^im all the world with glory fraught,
And offers all, so he might be adored:
But then he was rebuked by our Lord.
31.
Note the manner of Christ's answers to the Tempter.
Mark well, to every point of this temptation,
How Christ still answered with a scriptum est:
The Devil once spoke so in altercation,
Of him his Scholars learn the Text to wrest:
Christ teaches us whereon our faith to ground,
And how all deuillish wranglers to confound.
32.
The odds between the fasts of Moses and Eliah, and th^rof Christ. E. od. 34.
28. Cap. 24. 16, 17, 18.
Though Moses did endure so long a fast,
While in the holy Mount he did abide:
Gods presence was to him a full repast,
He needed not some sustenance beside.
Even in the clowd that time with God he dwelt,
No touch of humane frailty there he felt.
33.
1. King. 19. 6, 7, (...).
Eliah tasted of a heavenly meat,
Ordained for the nonce to give him strength:
An Angel set it down, and bid him eat,
For-cause he had a journey of great length:
Th^s was a mean of good Eltahs fasting,
The Angels food had such a force of lasting.
34.
Genesis 3. 22.
And why not so? Far stranger was that tree,
Whose fruit once eaten, had so strong a force;
The Eater, from diseases had been free,
His body never should been made a coarse.
Then marvel not, if for some forty days,
One Angell-meale the Prophets stomach stays.
35.
Of Christ his fast, no mean at all I see,
But only that he did perform the deed;
His Manhood strengthened by his Deity,
Of secundarie causes had no need.
'Twas God that fasted: so community
Of properties, that speech does justify.
36.
Matthew. 4. 23.
In Galile where he began his preaching,
His miracles abundantly he wrought:
By them he wan assent unto his teaching,
More Auditors to him thereby were brought.
All people that were any ways diseased,
He made them sound, and left them wholly eased.
37.
No sore, no sickness came to him amiss,
He healed all, and every kind of grief:
A leprosy (what spot more loathsome is?)
His curing a leprosy. Matthew. 8. 2.
He cured with his word: 'twas short and brief.
Be clean, such is my will thou should be;
The grief departed, and the man was free.
38.
His cure of palseyes. Matthew. 8. 2. and 9. 1.
Two more he cured, with palsies much tormented,
His word alone he used for their aid:
The one, before him never was conuented,
Only on his behalf his Master prayed:
Go home (says Christ) thy servant shall do well,
If thou believe: and just so it befell.
39.
Curing a fever. Matthew. 8. 14. Verse. 25.
A fever by a touch he did expel,
Rebukes the winds, they instantly obay'd;
Becalmes the Seas which mightily did swell,
Whereat his faint Disciples were dismayed.
Be still (said he) 'twas calm even as he spoke;
Mar. 4. 41.
They all with fear, and wonder 'gan to quake.
40.
"He only is the Lord of Sea and Land,
"He holds the winds fast closed in his fist:
"He has both waves, and blasts at his command,
"He makes them stir, and stays them when he list.
"Of him they stand in awe, and fear his check,
"When most thy strive, he stills them with a beck.
41.
He walks on the sea. Matthew. 14.
To him the Sea is as the firmest ground,
Thereon he walks, makes Peter do likewise:
Who waxed faint, and feared to be drowned,
When he perceau'd a tempest to arise.
"Needs must they sink, whom Christ does not sustain,
"The help of others, we implore in vain.
42.
His healing the blind. Matthew. 9. 27.
Two men, who were deprived of their sight,
(When of their faith they first had made confession)
He touched their eyes, that they might see the light,
Yet 'twas to take effect upon condition,
So their belief were hearty, and vnfayn'd:
Which soon appeared, in that their sight they gayn'd.
43.
Io^. 9. readeall this Chapter^.
Another, noted to be blind by birth,
'Bout whom the Jews used many captious questions:
He spat, and made a temper of the earth,
Amongst them it caused many nice suggestions:
They labored much this wonder to deface,
Their stirring gate to Christ and it, more grace.
44.
A Simile.
As one, who seeks to quench a fire begun,
Bestirres himself with what comes next to hand:
Then to some vessel hastily does run,
Takes up a pot of oil which there did stand,
Throws it thereon, in hope the flame to smother,
But then each little flame, begets three other:
45.
So they half mad; that wonder to disgrace,
(At least, thereof to stop the spreading fame)
Run up and down, and walk from place to place,
One while the man, then they his parents blame:
Verse. 34.
The Deed at length confirmed, and cleared from doubt,
They curse the late-blinde man, and cast him out.
46.
Deaf and dumb cured. Matthew 9. 32. and Mark 7. 32. and 3.
The deaf and dumb, he made to hear and speak,
Limbs withred up, to strength he did restore:
By means in seeming simple, feeble, weak,
Which caused all men thereat to wonder more.
What ever means he pleased to apply,
His will alone, was the only remedy.
47.
A creeple of thirty eight years, healed. Io^. 5.
One creeple noted more then all the rest,
Poor impotent, full thirty years and eight;
His strength regayned when he hoped least,
At that strange Poole, where he so long did wait:
That help which by the Poole he could not have,
Christ with his only word unto him gave.
48.
His miraculous feeding 5000. m^n with eight loaves, and two fishes. Job. 6.
Who ever with such slender store of bread,
As five poor barley loaves, and two small fishes:
Has read, or heard five thousand men full fed,
Whose stomachs might have asked a thousand dishes?
They all were filled, and after meal left more,
Then what to them presented was before.
49.
4000. men, besides women and children, fed with seven loaves. Matthew. 15.
One other meal, much like unto the last,
To men, their wives and children did he make:
With little food, he gave them large repast.
Then they who saw these works, precisely spoke
That this was he, expected for so long;
(Diuine-sweet subject of my simple song.)
50.
Herein was near resemblance with Creation,
No man did so in former time, nor since:
Admit therein but multiplication,
It gives full proof of his Omnipotence.
To make huge matter out of little store,
All Is one, as if there had been none before.
51.
These works were strange; Far stranger rest untold,
The like were never since, nor yet before:
Matthew. (...). 20. and Mar. 5. 25.
Consuming griefs, long-lingering and old,
By touching of his garment, and no more.
To vanish in a moment, and depart,
Not eased, but waxing worse by physics art.
52.
His reviving the dead.
Yet, all diseases, griefs, and maladies
Exceeding physics skill, and surgerie,
May not be thought so far past remedies
As death, attendant on mortality.
When once the thread of life is cut in twain,
God, and no Man, can fasten it again.
53.
This Son of God, both God and Man together,
Like power had over death, as on diseases:
He conquered the one, as well as cured the other,
With His Word, or less then that, does what him pleases.
He could as soon make any dead man live,
As health unto diseased persons give.
54.
Iareus his daughter. Marc. 5.
When first he came unto the Rulers daughter,
(Her fathers humble suit him thither led)
The people there began to raise a laughter,
In that they knew, the Maid was fully dead.
He takes her by the hand, bids her arise,
She walks, and eats meat before their eyes.
55.
The widows son at Naim. Luke 7. 11.
Like deed at Naim, wrought he on another;
A dead man carried out upon a Beer,
Who was the only son unto his mother
A widow, weeping showed she loved him dear:
Christ took compassion, willed her not to weep,
Then rowz'd her son from death, as from a sleep.
56.
These two were strangers, both to him unknown,
(Respecting passions of humanity)
Lazarus. Ioh. 11.
A friend and dear acquaintance of his own,
Who dwelt within the town of Bethanie,
Gives greater cause to manifest Gods glory,
Verse. 3.
As is observed in the sacred Story.
57.
No miracle in all the holy Book,
So fully is described in every part:
I wish my Reader on that Text to look,
Verse. 45.
That deed alone did many Jews convert:
And he who reading it, rests vn-conuerted,
Then any stubborn Jew, is more hard-hearted.
58.
Here are clear signs of Christ's humanity,
His love, his sorrow, witnessed by weeping:
Main arguments of his Divinity,
A waking one, who mortally was sleeping.
By natures course, the corpse began to stink,
Verse. 39.
And so his friends that loved him best, did think.
59.
What though his flesh had been to dust consumed,
And all his limbs disioynted clean asunder?
His former state he should have re-assum'd,
Had Christ been pleased to show so rare a wonder.
He cried alowd, and called him by his name,
The dead man rose, out of his tomb he came.
60.
Why should that Article of our Christen Creed,
Which does assure us of the Resurrection,
(Though Reasons reach in sort it does exceed)
Against belief be held a strong objection?
This one example makes the matter plain,
That dead men may rise up, and live again.
61.
This deed was done near to Jerusalem,
A great recourse of Jews then in the place:
It shows, our Lord was willing to win them,
At least wise such, in whom was spark of grace.
Great numbers did believe; some went their ways,
And told the matter to the Phariseis.
62.
Verse. 47.
Such publ^ke notice of this Act was taken,
That all the City there with began be troubled,
The Priests and Pharisees with fear were shaken:
Chapter 12. 9, 10, 11.
Their malice and their fury both redoubled,
Since Lazarus caused many to believe,
Who knew he had been dead, and saw him live.
63.
A zealous prayer of the Author.
O faithless Jews, most unbelieving Nation,
What madness did your crazie brains possess!
Hard-hearted, stubborn, froward Generation,
Who seeing such great works, would not confess!
The gangren of your incredulity,
Infecteth yet your whole posterity.
64.
Thou souls and bodies Surgeon and Physician,
Have pity on this braine-sick, frantic crew:
Prepare some strong-soule-curing composition,
Vouchsafe their drowsy spirits to renew:
Turn them at last, that they and we together,
May knowledge thee coequall with thy Father:
65.
And by the working of thy holy Spirit,
One God that makes the Glorious Trinity:
Thy heavenly Kingdom we may all inherit,
Knit here below in perfect unity,
In virtue striving each to pass the other,
True Children of thy holy Church, our Mother.
66.
Devils cast out, prove and confess his Divinity.
Another proof of Christ's Divinity,
His greatest foe, the Devil shall auow:
Though wicked men all bent to blasphemy,
Him and his works disgraced, they cared not how.
Mar. 3. 22.
When he the Devils, by his power o're-came,
They said he did it in the Devils name.
67.
Matthew. 12. 24.
Damned blasphemy! Repugnant to all reason,
That Satan should against himself rebel:
Nay, amongst those cursed fiends there is no such treason,
To mischieue us, they all agree too well:
Their concord (such as it is) maintaynes their state,
We lose our selves by strife, and mutual hate.
68.
Mar. 9. 25.
Sometimes he checks the Devils with his Word,
Commands them to come out, and is obay'd:
Luke 4. 33.
Sometimes at very presence of our Lord,
Before he speaks, they cry and are afray'd.
Matthew. 8. 28.
They beg his leave to enter into Swine;
What stronger probat of his power divine?
69.
The Syrophenicians daughter. Mar. 7. 25.
To Jews and Gentiles he was kind alike,
Lord of them both, in mercy rich to all:
One woman who by Nation was a Greek,
Before his feet, most humbly down did fall:
Her daughter from a Devil he set free,
Yet came not near, nor ever did her see.
70.
If all the works of wonder had been penned,
By which our Lord proved his Divinity:
Io^. 20. 30. and 21. 25.
The penmen hardly could have found an end,
They mounted near up to infinity.
These were, and are enough to gender faith;
So I believe, for so the Gospel says.
71.
Some circumstances rest worth observation,
Whereof my Muse desires a note to warble:
The Theme yields her such inward contentation,
She holds it fitter to be grau'n in marble,
Then rudely scribb'ld with her ragged quill,
Yet hopes, the best may like of her good will.
72.
Amplification of Christ's powerful Omnipotency: In that he gave like power to
others, to do such miracles, as himself had done. Act. 4. 13.
In giving power to simple Fishermen,
That they like works should do, as he had wrought:
Most of them wanting skill to hold a pen,
Who never in their youth to school were brought:
This was a wonder much admired at,
The learned Jews took special note of that.
73.
Christ, bodies Surgeon, and the souls Physician,
Great Lord and King of both by lawful right:
Matthew. 10. 1. 8.
To his Apostles gave a large Commission,
Against all griefs, and every unclean sprite.
He bids them heal the sick, make lepers clean,
Cast out the Devils, raise the dead again.
74.
Much v^like him of whom it is written, Vendere iure potest, ^merat ^lle prius.
Act 3. 6. and 8. 18, 19, 20.
Freely they had this gift, paid nothing for it,
As freely they bestowed the same on others.
Money or bribes to take, they did abhor it,
But gave to strangers, as unto their brothers.
This law and practice is grow'n obsolet,
Now men must pay, if ought they mean to get.
75.
A Simile,
While Phoebus shows his face, it shines so bright,
The Moon and lesser Lamps yield not a spark:
There Is no appearance of their borrowed light,
Till he withdraw, and it begin grow dark:
Then, all such force as he to them does lend,
To serve the use of man, they freely spend.
76.
Another Simile, or Comparison.
A King, whilst he is present in the place,
And deignes himself a business to effect:
For subjects then to wait, it is no disgrace,
Till he be pleased, some specially t'elect,
And give them power in those affairs to deal,
To try them trusty, and himself to speale,
77.
Our Lord, long time in persion did attend
His Church-affaires, himself took all the care:
He trayn'd some near about him, to this end
When he saw time, the burden they might share,
And by Commission ample, full and large,
Perform what he to them should give in charge.
78.
The Apostles miracles, were arguments of Christ, divinity, by whose power
they did them.
The Apostles were no slack Commissioners,
But roundly let themselves unto their task:
All people of the world were their Parishioners,
They gave to all, that came to them to ask.
By virtue of Christ's power to them diriu'd,
What e^e they took in hand, proved well, and thriu'd.
79.
Speaking all languages. Job. 14. 16. and Act. 2.
And first, t'assure them of his powerful aid,
To warrant them in that so high a function:
T'accomplish what not long before he said,
On them he did bestow a sp^rituall unction.
They with the holy Ghost were wholly filled,
In every language on a sudden skilled.
80.
Saint Peter. most divine sermon. Verse. 11.
This strange beginning had a fair success,
Though some forbear not, foully to blaspheme
Three thousand souls were gained, and no less
By Peter's Sermon, grounded on that Theme.
41.
Hereby Christ's Godhead was as well made known,
As by the greatest wonders of his own.
81.
What miracles were by The Apostles shown,
Act. 3. 11, 12. and 14. 14.
Though all the people offered them the honor:
Yet they surrendered it to him alone,
Who of their large Commission was the Donour.
"The Author of each work deserves the praise,
"More then the Instrument, which him obayes.
82.
So, what they did as servants to their Lord,
Whence they derived their authority:
Among those Acts I justly may record,
Which give us proof of his Divinity.
Act. 3. 6. and 4. 10. 30.
By him, and in his Name, their deeds were wrought;
Confessed, that of themselves they could do naught.
83.
Healing a ^ple. Act. 3.
As when they set the creeple on his feet,
Who from his birth before could never stand,
Until that Peter friendly did him greet,
And gently taking him by his right hand,
Bid him rise up, and walk in Jesus Name:
Which said, the creeple was no longer lame.
84.
The Jewish Rulers, madded with this deed,
And more, in that they did the people teach:
Laid hands on them. But mark how it did speed,
The Doctrine was so sweet which they did preach,
Act. 4. ^.
So well confirmed, that sieve thousand more,
Were joined to them, which did believe before.
85.
Me thinks, it was a miracle to see,
How these hard-hearted Rulers beat their brain:
To compass, that the deed concealed might be,
Which was so open, manifest, and plain.
Themselves blind-foulded, would have other men,
Seem not to see, what clearly they did ken.
86.
A Simile.
Like children when they hide their eyes, or wink,
While they themselves see not the face of others:
That no man else sees them (poor souls) they think,
Thus please their fancy, and delight their mothers.
Such was the childish folly of those people,
About the business of that cnred creple.
87.
Here Peter's love unto his Lord appeared,
Job. 2^. 15.
Whereof not long before he made profession:
The threatenings of the Jews, he no whit feared,
Act. 4. 8.
But boldly made a most divine confession:
Proves, they had-cast aside that Cornerstone,
Which all the faithful should be built upon.
88.
When he and other of his fellows met,
Recounting how the Rulers had them threat'ned:
Themselves to pray with one accord they set,
Desiring God they might by him be heart'ned,
Boldly to preach: and that in Jesus Name,
They might work wonders, so to spread his same.
89.
The strange moving of the place where they prayed. Verse. 3^.
No sooner had they ended their denotion,
But instantly the place wherein they sat,
Was strangely shaken with a heavenly motion:
They courage took, and waxed bold thereat,
Inspired from above, they all agree,
Their hearts and souls fast knit in charity.
90.
A Comparison.
A King, that seeks his Empire to enlarge,
Winnes strangers to acknowledge him their Lord:
As well of the one, as the other sort takes charge,
Like Justice to them all, he does afford.
One sharp example showed on his own Nation,
Makes strangers love: and fear like castigation.
91.
Some one, who in the Churches bosom lurkes,
Who of Religion makes a fair pretense:
Corrupts his fellows with his wicked works,
To Infidels gives scandal, and offense.
By cutting off so bad a rotten limme,
The body is preserved clean, and trim.
92.
Another Comparison.
A scabbed sheep that would the whole insect,
Good Shepherds use to draw-out from the rest:
The flock, more then one culling, they respect.
The Apostles, Pastors of all else, the best,
With their new-chosen sheep do so begin,
Thereby more love, and credit did they win.
93.
The miracle done by Peter on An^tas and his wise. Act. 5.
What sin more heinous in the Church of God.
Then Sacrilege? Of all thefts, that is the worst:
Such thieves ask scourging with an Iron rod.
Of all Church-robbers, he who was the first
Among men professing Christ, death was his hire:
The manner strange, as did the fact require.
94.
The man who did commit that robbery,
Though 'twere most close, and secret in his heart:
No sooner came in Peter's company,
But he perceau'd his falsehood, and his art:
Rebuk't him sharply for his foul dissembling,
Down dead he fell, even at his feet with trembling
95.
His wife, partaker in the treachery,
Not knowing what her husband did betyde:
Presents her self with like impiety,
But instantly at Peter's word, she died.
These rare examples struck a sudden fear,
In all believers, who thereof did hear.
96.
Simon the sorcerer. Act. 8.
A crime there is, near kin unto the other,
Which from the Author does derive its name:
It Is Simonie, to Sacrilege next brother,
A Sorcerer he was who broacht the same:
Yet, by the wonders which Saint Philip wrought,
Within the Churches verge he had been brought.
97.
He thought Gods gifts with money might be gayn'd,
Saint Peter checks him sharply for his fault,
Exhorts him to repent with zeal vnfayn'd:
Perhaps the man did so as he was taught.
Himself he humbled, seemed penitent,
I find no mention of his punishment.
98.
"That argues not, the fault to have been the less,
"God strikes, and spares whom to him seems good:
"A late example makes us so confess,
Luke 13. 4.
"Like Siloes Tower rightly understood.)
"Those faults are both of them so near of kin,
"I wot not which to call the greater sin.
99.
The Church has long been pesterd with those crimes,
(They Are deeply mor'd, it is hard to weed them out)
If holy Peter lived in these our times,
'T would cause him rowze himself, and look about,
And strike some dead, to make the others fear.
"Examples move, words only beat the air.
100.
As Peter, Ananias and his wife
R^uiuing Tabitha. Act. 9.
For their offenses, with a word did slay:
So, good Tabitha he restores to life,
When kneeling by her carcass, he did pray.
Only he bid her rise, then up she sat,
Many believed, and wondered much thereat.
101.
Cornelius and the Gentiles conu^rt^d. Act. 10. and 11
How much did he amaze the faithful Jews,
In showing them the Gentiles strange conversion?
At first they were offended with the news,
And rashly laid on him a foul aspersion:
But when he plainly told them all the story,
They held their peace, and gave to God the glory.
102.
Other great wonders done by the Apostles. Act. 5. 12.
Strange wonders more were by the Apostles wrought,
As if their Lord himself had been in place:
The sick in couches, and in beds were brought,
No kind of grief made difference in the case:
All coming to them, whole and sound were made,
Saint Peter^ shadow.
Yea some, obtaining only Peter's shade.
103.
Saint Paul^ Napk^. Act. 19. 12.
Not much unlike it is noted of Saint Paul,
The linen clothes that from his person came,
Draue-out foul spirits, and cured diseases all:
Done by Christ's help and only in his Name.
He that to mortal men such power could give,
Him to be more then man, we must believe.
104.
Act. 5. 19.
Strong prison doors flue-ope, to let them out,
So did an Iron gate, though surely warded:
Act. 12. 7. 10. and 16. 26.
They shakt off chains, and fetters like a clout,
And past through all such watches as them guarded:
Till their Commission they had fully ended,
Their Master from all Tyrants, them defended.
105.
Saint Paul's wonderful conversion. Act. 9.
When Saul against the faithful tyrannized,
With bonds and torments threatening them to punish:
In wondrous manner suddenly surpised,
A light from heaven did him so astonish,
That tumbling down he fell, and lost his sight,
The vision which appeared was so bright.
106.
To him our Lord himself distinctly spoke,
Recalled him from the error he was in:
Verse. 20.
He readily obeyed, and nothing slack,
To preach and teach did presently begin:
And plainly proved, that Christ in deed was he,
By God ordayn'd, worlds Savior to be.
107.
Now shall you hear how persecuting Saul,
Converted by so strange an apparition:
Became a most religious preaching Paul,
Act. 18. 9. and 22. 17. 1. Cor. 15. 10. Romans 15. 19.
Received from Christ himself a new Commission:
Wherein he labored more then all the rest,
His labors with a fair success were blessed.
108.
Act. 11. 6. The first name of Christians, was at Antioch.
At Antioch, a City of renown,
The faith of Christ he so divinely taught:
As first the name of Christians in that Town,
Was given to all, who to the Faith were brought.
(O, as we do retain that glorious Name,
So would we do such works, as fit the same!)
109.
Elimas the sorcerer stricken blind by Paul. Act. 13.
As to dark men they often restored sight,
So with a word they would strike others blind.
A Sorcerer resisting Paul with might,
The force of his commanding word did find:
That act made Sergius Paulus yield assent
To Christian faith, with great astonishment.
110.
A most divine and pythie exhortation,
Act. 2.
(Like Peter's sermon at Jerusalem)
Paul boldly spoke to that untoward Nation,
Act. 13. 16.
Yet little good his preaching did to them:
The Gentiles gladly did the Truth embrace,
And were accepted in the others place.
111.
How comes it, that the Word divinely taught,
Makes some more stubborn then they were before?
When other-some therewith are sweetly caught,
With grace replenisht daily more and more?
"What Is antidote to one, another kills,
"What saues the sons life, often the fathers spills.
112.
A Comparison.
The fires warmth, and heat of shining Sun,
A roll of wax does gently mollify:
On dirt and clay the contrary is done,
These more obdurate grow, and hard thereby.
Some men have hearts of wax, and some of clay,
In Sun or Fire the fault we must not lay.
113.
This great Apostle never sat him down,
But still attending on his holy Function,
He trauail'd day and night, from town to town:
Some, moved in their hearts with true compunction,
Were won to Christ: Some others stirred up strife,
And some laid plots, to take away his life.
114.
A creeple healed by Saint Paul at Lystra. Act. 14.
At Lystra lay a creeple impotent,
Who never used his legs since he was bore:
Stand up, quoth Paul; he leapt incontinent,
Then they who long had known the man before,
Would needs have done unto him sacrifice,
And hardly were restrained with his cries.
115.
A Simile, or Comparison.
Even as a grand Commander in the field,
Who over many thousands has the charge:
Walks often about his camp, and rests seild,
Suruayes it round (although in compass large)
Where he perceaues his men stand most in need,
There he runs in, and succors them with speed:
116.
So this grand Captain of the Christian bands,
Who fought against a strong and subtle foe:
Act. 16. and 17. and 18.
Reviewes his Soldiers in remotest lands,
New-heartens those he had, still takes up more:
His foe-mans Soldiers run to him amayne,
With such good pay, he did them entertayne.
117.
He casts out a spirit of divination. Act. 16. 14.
In Macedon where Lydia was converted,
A Maid which had a sprite of divination:
To Paul and Silas who with him consorted,
Great trouble bred, and cruel castigation.
When he the Devil by his word expelled,
Some much incenst with rage against him swelled.
118.
That sooth-saying Damsel brought her Master gain,
Who when he saw the hope thereof was gone:
He cries out to the Magistrates amayne,
Implores their aid, else they were quite undone.
These Jews (says he) do trouble all our Town:
So were they whipped, and to the Iayle cast down.
119.
How loath are worldly men to bear a cross?
Such as be rich, have all things at the full,
Act 18. 2^.
They Will follow Christ, so't be not to their loss:
You prick their hearts, if once their fleece ye pull.
Act. 19.
Demetrius gayning by Dianaes shrines,
With all the craftsmen against Saint Paul combines.
120.
Being in prison, by a wonderful earthquake the Iayler is converted. Act. 16.
Silas and he were fast set in the stocks,
They prayed all night, and Psalms to God did sing:
The prison strangely shakt, off flue the locks,
The ^ayler all amazed at the thing.
Admires the men: He with his family
Baptized, were turned to Christianity.
121.
A Comparison.
A Traitor who unto a Crown aspires,
Deuiseth how to climb up to the Throne:
The better to accomplish his desires,
And gain the Honor due to Kings alone:
Prepares himself by apish imitation,
Ere he presume to broach his innovation.
122.
Like Perki^ in ^. 7.
First frames a countenance fit for Majesty,
Then counterfeits, just like a King to talk:
He learnes the way to speak Imperiously,
Next tries how Prince-like he in state can walk:
Thus when he thinks himself shaped fit for action,
He makes some use of Partners in his faction.
123.
His Warrants and Commissions fly about,
As if he were a King in verity:
His Officers, among the simpler rout,
Make show of justice, and sincerity:
But, as in their mayne-warrant there is fault,
So all their deeds are counterfeit, and naught.
124.
The Devil a Traitor to God, does what he can to counterfeit Gods miracles.
The Devil is to heavens King a traitor,
Vsurps Gods lawful jurisdiction:
He draws unto him many a graceless wayter,
Some he beguileth with his subtle fiction:
By sleights he makes his Vassals to believe,
That he like power, as God himself, can give.
125.
Exodus 7.
When Moses by Commission from his God,
First to King Pharo did himself present:
He rayz'd a living Serpent of his Rod,
To make it known, that he from God was sent.
This deed (in reason) might have moved the King,
But that the Devil closely crossed the thing.
126.
False Sorcerers (the Devils Iourney-men,
That long had been Apprentice to the Trade)
By their enchauntments did the like again,
I think, not so in substance, but in shade.
For Moses Serpent truly being so,
Devoured theirs, which were but such in show.
127.
Exodus 8. 18.
The vilest vermin raised from Egypts dust,
Compelled th'Inchaunters to confess Gods hand:
Small reason had they in their Art to trust,
Exodus 9 11.
Since they in Moses presence could not stand:
But all as much with botches were oppressed,
As other men, the cattle and the beast.
128.
Jewish Exorcists beaten by the Devil. Act. 19. 13.
Among the Jews, while Paul true wonders wrought,
The Devil had Commissioners abroad:
These, not Gods glory, but their Masters sought,
Abused the Name of Jesus to their fraud:
As though bare naming Jesus, and Saint Paul,
Without true faith, could work those wonders all.
129.
These Exorcists were quickly taught to know,
Their fault in using counterfeit Commission:
The Devil made the men themselves beshrew,
For as they used their skill without suspicion,
The man whom they (being seven) had coniur'd,
Does wound them all, and sends them to be cured.
130.
The Devil does seduce his Vassals, to hurt and destroy them.
Behold the common tricks of that Seducer,
Good Angels shape in show he does assume:
Of all that come to him, he is the abuser,
When most upon his favor they presume,
He quits their service with a woeful hire,
Prouides them lodging in a flame of fire.
131.
Mean while (perhaps) till he of them be sure,
With vain and short delights gives them content*
Then having trayn'd them ready to his lure,
Prepares himself unto their punishment.
He Will take a limme or joint, in part of pay,
T'assure him of the whole another day.
132.
These Exorcists, sore wounded for their pains,
With shame and sorrow, took them to their heels:
The man possessed, no help by them regaines,
Nor casement of his former torment feels.
"All deuillish Artists find the like success:
"Small good they do themselves, to others less.
133.
But they to whom Christ did that power impart,
To work great wonders, calling on his Name:
To men oppressed brought ease, and joy of heart,
To them and to their doctrine, praise and fame.
Believers, in their faith were faster grounded,
Oppugners of the Truth, thereby confounded.
134.
Paul r^st^rech dead ^utichus to life. Act. 20.
While Paul at Troas preached till mid of night,
Intending his departure on the morrow:
A chance befell that did them much affright,
Possessed his hearers hearts with grief and sorrow.
A sleeping youth fell down three stories hie,
And with the fall, departed instantly.
135.
Some friends (it is like) were there, who for him grieved,
Discomfort to the rest the chance did breed,
Since he was of the faithful, and belieu'd:
But Paul, who never failed his friends at need,
When he had stretched himself upon the Lad,
Revived him, and made the assembly glad.
136.
"For one good faithful man, of God beloved,
"A multitude often do his favor find:
Act. 27.
By Paul's example that was fully proved,
When in a ship tossed with tempestuous wind,
Two hundred seventy five God to him gave,
And for his sake the lives of all did save.
137.
As he not long before to them had told,
When sad despair possessed all their hearts:
He comforts them, persuades them to be bold,
(So they would ply themselves to do their parts,
For why, fit means might not be cast aside:)
No loss of one man's life should them betide.
138.
It so fell out. A matter seldom seen,
Where seas so swelled, and tempests were so strong:
No trauailer who in like case had been,
So tossed with waves, and toyll'd with labors long,
Would think in such a wreck, near fourteen score,
Not one man lost, should all come safe to shore.
139.
When Paul had past the danger of the Seas,
And safely landed in Melita's I Will:
He rested not, nor idly took his ^ase,
Intending his Commission all the while.
Diseased people flockt to him amayne,
He cured all, and rid them of their pain
140.
Among the rest, the Ruler of that place,
A noble Roman, showed him courtesy:
Whom Paul requited with a work of grace,
The Rulers father sick, and like to die,
In perfect health he settled by his prayer,
And many more, that did to him repair.
141.
That great Physician of our souls and bodies,
Who cured all diseases with a word.
Could not escape the taunts of simple noddies,
Luke 4. 23.
(Whereof in holy Writ I find record)
But some durst say, if thou have power at will,
Physician heal thy self, and show thy skill.
142.
Act. 28. ^.
I read how Paul was once put to that push,
Upon himself his powerful art to prove:
The trial would have made a stout man blush,
But he assured of his Masters love,
Those dangers which did other men appall;
Esteemed light, and reck'ned them but small.
143.
No sooner was he free on shore from drowning,
His nummed lims refreshing by a fire:
As if both sea and land looked on him frowning,
And creatures all against him did conspire:
A worm whose biting present death would bring,
Does seize his hand, and closely to it cling.
144.
This hap, the standers by did much affright,
Who knew the Vipers venom was so strong:
That none whom they should happen once to bite,
V^ 4.
From swelling, or from death could hold out long,
A murderer they judged him to have been,
This plague laid on him, for that horrid sin.
145.
He soon shooke-off the beast into the flame,
Not moved, nor feeling any harm at all:
The people then began t'extoll his name,
They change their minds, and him a God they call.
Poor fools, they might have said, and spoken right,
That none could so have done, but by Gods might.
146.
Now put together since the worlds creation,
All works of wonder done in any time,
Which might deserve or challenge admiration,
In any Country, Region, or Clime:
(Except what Moses and Gods Prophets wrought)
Compared with these, they will seem as things of naught.
147.
Here could I lose my self with wonderment,
Amid this forest of such rarities:
My soul is stricken with astonishment,
And most at Jewish incredulities,
To think how such a Savior they could scorn,
Who of their blood, and for their good was borne.
148.
An Atheistical ob^ction.
An Atheist, or a selfe-wise politician,
Presuming on the finenesse of his wit:
Will raise a doubt (much like a Matchiuellian)
And swear, there is no Divine can answer it.
Such Apes there be that hug their own brain-broods,
Deem all men, but themselves, of muddie moods.
149.
If these Apostles could such wonders work,
Make sick men whole, restore the dead to life,
Give blind men sight, strike some sharpe-sighted dark;
Resolve me of one doubt, to end the strife.
Why could they not have mast'red all their foes,
Who slaught'red them, and bred them many woes?
150.
That (think these men) had been the only way,
Their doctrine and themselves so to have graced,
As all men would them readily obey,
No ^yrant, such examples, had out fac^t.
But since themselves they were not able save,
We doubt how they such help to others gave.
151.
Matthew. 27. 39.
So said the Jews when they our Lord reuil'd,
From them these Wizards this objection borrow:
The Scribes and Priests spoke scoffingly, and smiled,
(What time his sufferings might have moved their sorrow:)
Come down now from the Cross, so we will believe,
Else, to thy Doctrine we no credit give.
152.
Though he had Angell-legions at his beck,
Matthew. 26. 53.
Whereby his foe-men all he could have slain:
Though he could soon have given them such a check,
As all their banding against him, had been vain:
Yet, to another purpose was he bore;
T'accomplish things, long prophecy'de before.
153.
Answer to the objection.
How then should Scriptures be fulfilled? (said he)
That answer may suffice us in this case:
From Masters state, the servants were not free,
Most willingly the Cross they did embrace.
"So, all that purpose to be Christ his scholars,
"In patient suffering they must be his followers.
154.
Sundry Similes.
"Gold's not refined, but if it feel the fire;
"Wheat not well cleans'd, but by the wind or fan:
"Who can expect a worthy Soldiers hire,
"Unless he fight, and quit him like a man?
"We are Gods men of war, his gold, his wheat;
"We must be cleans'd, refined, with labors sweat.
155.
The works by Christ, and his Apostles done,
Might well suffice their Doctrine to auerre:
To get belief in such as would be won,
Confound all those, that wilfully would err.
Of greater works then those there was no need,
Men must be pleased, with what God has decreed.
156.
Luke 16. 27.
The Glutton sought a messenger from heaven,
(When he in hell, for sins fore-past did burn:)
Who might relate a message to his brethren,
And move them from their wicked deeds to turn.
Gods written warnings which they had before,
Were left unto them: they could get no more.
157.
A Comparison.
Is It meet a Vassal should prescribe his Liege,
The way how he his people ought to rule?
Or that a private Soldier at a siege,
Command the breach to enter, or recule?
If no, less reason has a mortal wight,
Direct his God the way to rule aright.
158.
One work of wonder rests to be told,
The wonderful and miraculous increase of Christen faith.
Though some (perhaps) will not confess so much:
As Maxim, not as Paradox I hold,
It justly merits to be termed such:
That Christen faith should grow so fast, and flourish,
E're King, or State endeuour'd it to nourish.
159.
Psalm. 2. and Act. 4. 25.
The Gentiles furiously together raged,
Their Kings and Princes banding did unite:
Against th'Infant-Church they wholly were engaged,
To root it out they bent their wit, and might.
Both Jews and Gentiles therein did agree,
To stop the growth of Christianity.
160.
Maugre Heathen Romans Emperors, in the highest of their power
When Roman Empire flourisht in her prime,
Had all the world subjected to her yoke:
Whose laws to break, was held a heinous crime,
A sacrilege their Idols to provoke.
New legionarie Soldiers then arose,
The Old Emperors had never none like those.
161.
By means in ^eeming weak and feeble.
Grey-headed Fathers marched in foremost rank,
Grave Matrones boldly did those Leaders second:
Young striplings of their blood and life were frank,
And tender Virgins followed them as jocond.
Weak troops (a man would think) to win a field,
Get ground upon their foes, and make them yield.
162.
Such were those noble Christen Martyrs old,
That first enlarged the bounds of Christ's Dominions:
No Heathen worthies ever were so bold,
So constantly maintained their Opinions.
By their example Nations were converted,
And Heath'nish-Idoll-Altars all subverted.
163.
Pious principles of Christianity.
Their Precepts tended not to vain delights,
Nor loosed the reins to lustful liberty:
Not smoothly soothed carnall-minded wights,
Nor sau'ring ought of sensuality.
But teaching men, worlds pleasures to despise,
Set only heavens joys before their eyes.
164.
Humility and Meekness to profess,
To offer no man wrong, but suffer rather:
To succor widows, and the fatherless,
No goods, but only by good means, to gather:
To feed the hungry with their bread and meat,
With clothes the naked keep from cold, and heat.
165.
Chastely to live, and shun Incontinence,
Th'vnruly flesh with often fasts to tame:
To live uprightly, give no man offense,
Of vice and lewdness only to take shame.
To do in all things unto other men,
As we wish others do to us again.
166.
Say, was not this a work of wonderment?
Romans 1. 21.
That men who knew not God, but served the Devil;
The way which Nature led them, therein went;
Whose thoughts were fleshly, all their actions evil:
Their lives in sports, and pleasures vain did spend,
Supposed they were created to that end?
167.
That such men freely should the world forsake,
Bid vain delights, and vanities adue:
Themselves to rigid rules of life betake,
Renounce old errors: like Babes borne of new,
Suck the sweet milk of pious Christen Doctrine,
Gladly endure the yoke of Church Discipline?
168.
Compare these times with theirs, it will appear,
Such alteration was a matter strange:
Since men amongst whom Christ's doctrine now shines clear,
From virtue unto vice profanely range:
Now most professing Christ, like Heathens live,
And by their deeds, deny what they believe.
169.
A wonder it is, in either of the twain,
Or us, or them: (aduize upon the odds)
It Is feared least Paganism return again,
And Heathenish manners, bring in Heathen gods.
Among the Jews, just so it came to pass,
Our state is seen in theirs, as in a glass.
170.
Mahometisme how it first began.
Not so, as did the Christian faith first rise,
That worlds-great-damn'd Seducer did begin:
By other means his foul impieties
Antithesis betwixt it, and Christianisme.
Were set abroach, and did their credit win.
The Roman Empire growing to decay,
To that false prophets doctrine make a way.
171.
Amongst men of nature fierce, of weak belief,
Of manners lewd, of dissolute conditions,
That false Seducer he became the chief,
So pleasingly set forth his propositions;
With cunning art, and subtle stratagemes,
He first divulged his graceless theoremes.
172.
Halfe-Iew, halfe-Christian he makes show to be,
Takes some thing from them both, as likes him best:
What tends to pleasure, wealth, and liberty,
That he cull^-out, and ouer-slips the rest:
So make a medley of religions both,
Which then had in the world the chiefest growth.
173.
A Simile though simple^ yet not unseemly, for the thing assinulated.
Not much unlike a palat-pleasing Cook,
That dights some luscious dish to feed a Glutton:
On sundry sorts of Cates at hand does look,
Takes one choice morsel from a well-fed mutton
One bit he borrowes of a fatted Capon,
Lays in a little piece of sweet new Bacon.
174.
From fat-beeues bones draws half a pound of marrow,
Of Kid he will have a part, and so of Veale:
For birds-flesh minceth out the Lark, and Sparrow,
Adds Spices, Sugar, Sack a pretty deal.
Thus makes a Hotch-potch fit to feed a Gull,
Who chops it up, till he be gorged full.
175.
So, that religion-monger Mohomet,
To feed the fancies of unstable brains:
From all religions does such Maxims get,
As best might sooth men's humors, fit their veins.
No marvel if a doctrine so all-pleasing,
Took root, assisted by his fraud and leasing.
176.
"Force joined with fraud and cunning, may do much,
"It Is hard those sleights, and engines to withstand:
That Sect began, and is vp-held by such,
Not with the touch, whereby the Truth is scanned.
The means that raised our faith, first made it flourish,
Are best the same to foster, feed and nourish.
177.
Gods hand's not short'ned, but that still he can,
And does somewhile work wonders in this Age:
Yet they are needless to a Christen man,
Whose faith is founded on a former gage.
Whom Christ's old wonders cannot satisfy,
An Infidel he lives, and so he will die.
178.
The Author ends this Classis with a devout prayer.
Oh might I live some miracles to see,
(Then die the death that righteous men desire:)
Our pride, converted to humility:
Our cold devotion, to loue-kindling fire:
Our avarice, to liberality:
Our luxury, to stayed sobriety:
179.
Our cancred hatred, turned to charity:
Our captious questions in Theology,
(Foul enemies of fairest Unity!)
To simple Truths sincere Apology.
Our swords diuerted from our fellows hearts,
Against that foe, which works all our smarts.
180.
This work thou, only thou can bring to pass,
Whose admirable acts my Muse does tell:
Thy power is now as great as e're it was,
But we of thee do not deserve as well.
The lesser our desert, the more's thy grace:
Wayuing the first, the later we embrace.
181.
Great Lord of Hosts, and gracious God of Peace,
(These Titles both, to thee of due belong.)
Thou make wars, and causest them to cease,
Defendest right, have no delight in wrong.
Though horse and charet be prepared to fight,
Yet victory consists not in their might.
182.
Show forth thy power, as thou have done of yore,
Bow down the backs of Nimrodizing men:
Now make them feel thy hand, as heretofore,
Let hundreds of them, turn their backs to ten.
Let winds, and seas, and skies at thy drad beck,
Fight for thy chosen, give their foes a check.
183.
Let King and Prince be under thy protection,
As they thy Truth, and people do protect:
Let Subjects yield to them all due subjection,
So, let their favors back on them reflect.
Let Unity us in one bundle bind,
That all may be of one heart, and one mind.
184.
A work of wonder: yet, so well begun,
As cheeres up good men's hearts to see it perfected:
Let them that with fair means could not be won,
Repent for peaceful passages rejected.
When Sion joys in this felicity,
Then with old Simeon I desire to die.
The end of the third Classis.
DIVINE POEMS. The fourth Classis.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Christen Doctrines true, on Scriptures grounded,
With Moses moral written Laws agree:
The Decalogue for proof, plainly expounded;
'Twixt Christ's and Moses Hests, true sympathy.
We for our trial, stick to both the Tables:
But Jews and Turks build up their faith on fables.
A Simile, or Comparison, showing the excellency of Christian Doctrine, about
all other.
THe surest way to know a perfect gem,
"To try true mettle from the counterfeit,
"Is held to be by close comparing them:
"For Truth and Falsehood both together set,
"That, bears in it such a perfect grace,
"As does the others bastard-worth-deface.
2.
Though man by nature be inclined to ill,
Deprived of power to do, or think aright:
Rather to Vice, then Virtue has a will,
Pursues the way of error with his might:
Until he be enlightened from above,
And thereby unto goodness take a love.
3.
Romans 1. 20. and 2. 14.
Yet is he not so brutishly all-blinded,
His reason and his judgment made so weak:
(Though all-deprau'd, and wholly fleshly-minded.)
But that he hears the Creatures lowdly speak,
Inform his conscience to see the odds,
'Twixt good and ill, the Devils ways and Gods.
4.
Else, were it not so, Men might be held excuseable,
Had they no means to know the ill from good:
The way of vice should not be held so damnable,
If virtue from't, might not be understood:
But, when man knows what is good, yet chooses the evil,
He runs from God, and posteth to the Devil.
5.
The Author prays for true understanding in Christen precepts of piety: And
for grace to live accordingly.
Thou God of Truth, with whom no error dwells,
Who would not that men should go astray:
Who warnest him that against the Truth rebels,
Who leadest wandering folk into the way:
Whose precepts are so holy, just, and right,
That men (not hood-winkt) may walk in their light.
6.
Send down thy Spirit of Truth into our heart,
Teach us to know the way that leads to thee:
Poor simple erring souls vouchsafe convert,
Open thou their eyes that they may clearly see,
The path, which all thy servants ought to trace,
Whereby to come into thy resting place.
7.
To me, thy most unworthy Suppliant,
(Who venture of this lofty Theme to sing,
With humble heart.) Divine assistance grant:
That as my pen thy praises forth shall ring,
My self may do, as others I direct;
Not scribble of thy Laws, and them neglect.
8.
Look here for no deep disputable doctrines.
To treat of Doctrines full of deep dispute,
I never had the purpose, nor the will:
Great Doctors, erring Doctors must confute,
That subject suits not with my oaten quill.
I Will pipe of Precepts teaching piety,
Confine my Muse to Country Divinity.
9.
Such rules as Christ unto his hearers gave,
Of duties first to God, and next to Men:
The choice of these in meeter shall ye have,
All grounded on those heavenly Precepts ten.
For, what to life and manners does pertain,
Is all comprised within the Tables twain.
10.
Matthew. 5. 17.
This Law, our Lord came wholly to fulfill,
Not to destroy: (as some conceau'd amiss.)
His errand was, to do his Fathers will,
His Doctrine and his Precepts aimed at this.
And all that will his true Disciples be,
With him in Life, and Doctrine must agree*
11.
1. and 2. Precepts: God only to be adored; and served with divine and
religious worship. Matthew. 4. 8.
Let Satan use the utmost of his skill,
Lay baits of worldly Empire, wealth and glory,
To force, or lead us to his cursed will:
Do we, as Christ did in the holy Story,
Defy the fiend, and tell him to his head,
That God alone is to be worshipped.
12.
Exodus 19. 18.
When on the holy Mount he did descend,
With fearful lightnings, smoke, and dreadful thunder*
To give the Law which his own finger penned,
When Sinai shook, as it would rend asunder:
Deuteronomy. 4. 11.
Similitude or likeness they saw none,
A voice from-out the fire, was heard alone.
13.
Ioh. 4. 24.
To teach them how their God, who is a Spright,
Requires the inward service of the heart:
And that the way to worship him aright,
Is not left free to man's own will, or art:
But plainly chalkt-out in the holy Writ,
Each person strictly bound to walk in it.
14.
Deuteronomy. 4. 24. Similes, showing that God will have no Partners in his worship;
neither Angels, nor Saints.
He Is like a husband, jealous of his phere;
A King, admits no Partners in his Crown:
His Saints and Servants whom he holds most dear,
Want not their due, of honor and renown.
The state of heaven is mere Monarchical,
Where one holds sovereign honor over all.
15.
Yet is he not without society,
Even such as sorteth with equality:
Three persons are there in the Deity,
All Three, make but one perfect Unity.
Here Trinity in Unity does meet,
We must beleeue't, although we cannot see it*
16.
Similes, too simple to illustrate the thing that may not be assimiled.
Does not a Fount, a running stream beget,
From both of which proceeds a standing Poole?
It Is all one water: like in nature, wet,
Like sweet, like fresh, like virtue has to cool.
A poor compare: yet, to our shallow wit,
Points to the thing, and gives a glance at it.
17.
The Sun, from-out it self engenders light,
All-fostring heat and warmth, proceeds thence:
It Is one self thing the Sun, the heat, the light.
The Example fitteth our intelligence:
That Mystery the great'st of Mysteries,
May not be seen, but only with faiths eyes.
18.
Romans 1. 22.
Old worldly wizards proved themselves mere fools,
By forming God to their imaginations:
Of whom they taught such lessons in their schools,
As sorted with gross carnal cogitations.
So far were they become infatuated,
To Adore things made, for him who them created.
19.
Who taught the Gentiles, Idols to derest?
One God, the All-Maker, only to adore?
(A truth wherewith Jews solely were possessed,
And none but they, instruct therein before.)
At Christ's b^rth, all O^acles cea^.
'Twas he, whose coming struck the Devils dumb:
Turned all their sooth-sayes to a wordlesse mum.
20.
Give him the glory of this gracious work,
He led the World from darkness, into light:
Not that false prophet honored by the Turk,
Who claymes the advantage of another right.
Mohometisme began 600. years after Christ.
His pusnie temps, must yield to our primer feisin:
His late revolt, conuinceth him of treason.
21.
3. Precept. Of oaths, and swearing. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. I^r. 5. 7.
A branch of worship due to God alone,
In holy Scriptures often is recorded,
To swear by his great Name, and else by none:
To creatures no such honor is affoorded.
He knows who rightly swears, and who amiss:
False-swearers plagues, Truth-tellers crowns with bliss.
22.
The lawful use of oaths, taken by a Magistrate.
When Magistrates for trial of men's right,
For putting lawful end to doubtful pleas,
For branding falsehood, bringing Truth to light,
For short'ning long demurrs, and fond delays,
Call men to speak their knowledge on their oath.
They ought to do it, be they never so loath.
23.
Who this wise swearing, iustifies a truth,
This man takes not in vain Gods holy Name:
Since thereby glory to heavens King ensu'th,
The just man credit gets, the liar shame.
Heb. 6. ^6.
By this sole mean, all strife amongst men is ended,
As proof falls out, not as the man is friended.
24.
Anabaptists allow no oath, in that they disallow all Magistrates, who alone
have power to minister an oath. Matthew. 5. 34.
Some, seeming pious more then other men,
Pretending care, Gods Name be not profaned,
Allow no oath by any means: not then
When King, or Judges under him command.
The Truth (say they) forbids us swear at all:
Let Yea, and Nay suffice: with us it shall.
25.
It Is spoken well, if well it be apply'de.
Verse. 37.
In common talk, and free communication,
An oath in no wise can be iustify'de:
But such Disputers use preuarication.
Pretending the defense of piety,
They prove bold patrones of impiety.
26.
They Will not endure a civil Magistrate,
Who might exact an oath on good occasion:
Hail fellows all (with them) no King, but Mate;
Equalitie's their aim. So here is th'euasion,
Excluding all degrees of Dignity,
They leave no means, an oath to justify.
27.
Whence learned these Doctors this divinity?
Not from the sacred Volumes old, nor new:
Not from chief Teachers of humanity,
Not from the Christian Doctors, nor the Jew:
Examples, Reason, Scriptures them confute.
What need we more then those, to strike them mute?
28.
"Each virtue bounded sits 'twixt two extremes,
"Truth's doggu'd by Error close on either side:
"As some teach doctrines, so some vent their dreams,
"One falsehood from the other starteth wide.
The case now in dispute does make it clear,
Observe the lesson next ensuing here.
29.
Machiavel allows perjury, and fake-swearing: for policy. In Com. and lib.
de prin. passim.
One Scribbler, Author of a spreading Sect,
Stands not so much on point of conscience.
He bids his Scholars swear without respect,
As frankly with their oaths he does dispense.
Keep faith, and oaths? (quoth he.) Why that is for fools:
No such disciples enter in my Schools.
30.
Provided always, that your perjury
Breed your advantage, work your foes annoy:
It makes no matter, so you gain thereby,
Religion in this case is but a toy.
These be the precepts of that shameless clarke.
Did ever three-tongu'd-hell-hound-curre so bark!
31.
A damned doctrine, hatched first in hell,
The hateful haggish Furies brought it thence:
The foster-father was cus't Machiauel,
He placed it chief in grace about his Prince.
A true resemblance of Don Plutoes court,
Where such accursed courtiers do resort.
32.
Some allow breach of oath upon pretense of advancing Gods cause, and for
piety,
Yet some there be, that out of holy zeal,
Pretending true Religion to promote,
To benefit the Christian Commonweal,
To set the ship of Christ beneapt, a-flote:
To cut off scabbed sheep, not to be cured:
To root-out errors, not to be endured:
33.
As Vladislaus King of Hungary did w^h Amurath, before the unfortunate battle
of Varna.
Think no offense their oath to falsify,
But rather hold it for a pious work:
As those, who (to all Christians infamy)
Periuriously made war upon the Turk:
Where it appeared by the foul success,
How well our Lord such periuries does bless.
34.
2. Sam. 21. Saul.
Saul burnt in zeal for Israel, Gods chosen,
Cracked oath, to work the Gibeonites confusion:
Better that fiery frenzy had been frozen,
His Progeny so found it in conclusion.
Some Saul's now, making show of pure devotion,
With fire and sword, set Europe in commotion.
35.
Let great-ones swear, and vn-sweare at their will,
Make zeal a cloak, ambitious thoughts to hide:
Small hope have they to rest upon Gods hill,
Psalm. 15. 3. 5.
For there plaine-dealing men are sure to abide:
Such men as keep their oaths religiously,
Though they be most assured to lose thereby.
36.
All rash and idle swearing I disprove,
Since common swearers seldom speak the truth:
Yet once I Will venture swear by him above,
It Is damned impiety to break an oath.
Such men make God a witness to their lie:
Shall they escape for this impiety?
37.
Zech. 5. 4. and Ec^lus. 23. 9.
The plague shall haunt them, and their habitations,
Consume the timber with the very stones:
Leave them no issue among the Generations,
Fret-out their flesh, and eat their very bones.
Leuit. 24. 16.
For, such as dare blaspheme Gods holy Name,
Shall loathed live, and lastly die with shame.
38.
A Comparison.
Suppose a Schoole-boy should be taken tripping,
Among his fellows facing-out untruth:
Say, were he not well worthy of a whipping,
If standing to it like a graceless youth,
He vouch his Master to auerre the lie,
Yet knowing that his tongue runs all awrie?
39.
How then can they escape the hand of God,
Who make him partner in their falsities?
They must be scourged with an Iron rod,
And feel the smart of their impieties.
"True lawful oaths, unto his praise redound;
"All idle and false-swearers, he will confound.
40.
"An oath by torture wrested, or by terror,
"Where humane frailty leads men to transgress,
"Leaves place for pardon: (though a grievous error.)
"By circumstances crimes grow more, or less.
"For, wilful sins presumptuously committed,
"Offend God most, and hardly are remitted.
41.
4 Precept. The Sabbath to be sanctified.
When God had brought his six-dayes-worke to end,
And saw that all was purely perfect good:
A day of Rest he to himself did lend,
(The sense must warely be understood)
For, though his labor put him to no pain,
Yet when his work is done, he rests again.
42.
Genesis 2. 2. 3^
That day wherein he is said to have tanc his rest,
To please himself in's works rare perfection:
He hallowed it, and caused it to be blessed,
Respecting chiefly therein, our direction:
Sabbath days works for Christians.
That we might have one special day among seven,
To leave worlds toils, and meditate on heaven.
43.
To lift our minds from rest that is corporal,
From sign, to substance: shadows, unto things:
Our souls to rayse-vp to the Rest eternal,
By mounting thither on faiths nimble wings.
That day to chew the cud, as clean beasts did,
All others, Moses in the Law forbid.
44.
Exodus 20. and 23. 12.
That Servants, sweating for their Masters gain,
Might be allowed their wearied limbs to ease:
The Ox and Ass from travail might refrain,
(For God approues not cruelty to these.)
That all, as well of high degree as low,
Might learn their Maker, and his Laws to know.
45.
Works for the six days.
Six days we have in which we ought apply,
Such works as to our calling do pertain:
The Prince with justice, truth and equity
To rule his people. They must strive again
Obediently to serve, his Laws obey,
Fight for him at his need, and for him pray.
46.
Man was not made to live idly.
God made not Man that he should idle live,
Not him, who Edens garden did possess:
When first his Lord did seisin to him give,
Genesis 2. 15.
'Twas to the end, he should it keep and dress.
He might have done't, with pleasure and delight,
Had he performed his Makers will aright.
47.
Now we unto a harder task are bound,
The fruits of Eden serve us not for meat:
Genesis 3. 17. 23.
For Adams sin accursed was the ground,
It yields us poor relief, unless we sweat.
We sow and reap, we set, we graffe, we plant,
All scarf suffices to supply our want.
48.
Yet the great King of Heaven, and Lord of Earth,
Has stuffed the Land and Sea with viands store:
Enough to keep off penury and dearth,
To please the rich, and to content the poor,
Did not Excess and Riot spend too fast;
Idlers, the fruit of poor men's labors wast.
49.
Sundry Sl^. ^les and Comparisons, dehor^in^ from ri^. and idleness.
The Ox and Ass once having fed their fill,
Forbear more food, till they begin to hunger:
All Neat and Sheep in valley, or on hill,
When nature's well sufficed, they will eat no longer:
The earth that is dry, receiving wet due store,
Shuts up her clefts, and takes in no more.
50.
Then is it not strange, that man whose soul's divine,
Who all the Creatures does command and rule:
From Natures laws should lawlessely decline,
Be more disordered, then the Horse, or Mule?
To gorge himself till he be ready burst?
Not cease to drink, when well has quenched his thirst?
51.
Pro. 6. 6. and 30. 25. The Ant.
How comes it, that the pretty painful Ant,
By wise forecast prouides her store in season:
Makes Summers plenty serve the Winters want?
When some men, showing slender use of reason,
In Harvest fold their hands, sit still and sleep.
Till winters cold, and hunger make them weep.
52.
The Be.
The little busy Be does teach men skill,
They live as in a firme-well-ordred state:
A King they have, and they obey his will,
Each one is ready still to help his Mate.
They Will join together all, to kill the Drone,
No honey shall he eat, since he makes none.
53.
The Squirrell.
Often have I found a nimble Squirrels neast,
So fully furnished with ripe hasell nuts:
As made me marvel at the pretty beast,
How he prouides to fill his empty guts,
By sparing when with riot he might feed,
And laying up, against the time of need.
54.
Such diligence much more befitteth men,
Who are not borne unto themselves alone:
What frugally they spare, the same again
They must disperse amongst others, that have none.
2. Cor. 8.
Our plenty should our neighbors wants supply,
Such is the rule of Christian charity.
55.
Sundry sorts of degrees and conditions of men in a Common wealth, all of them
useful.
"That man which labors not in some vocation,
"Straynes not the powers of body, nor of mind,
"Grows dulled with ease, and lazy recreation,
"Eats till he sweat, and drinks himself half blind:
"Well may he have of man the outward shape,
"Yet is he like conditioned to an Ape.
56.
The painful plowman, stores the Land with bread,
Another spends his days 'bour Calves and Kine:
A Grasier keeps his Bullocks to be fed,
One gets his living by the pleasant Vine:
The flocks of gentle Sheep is this man's charge,
That makes his dwelling in his Boat, or Barge.
57.
Some show their skill in rearing fruitful Trees,
By Orcharding and Gardning they get money:
Some busily intend their stocks of Bees,
Pick pence out of the wax, and from the honey.
The Merchant brings rich wares from Countries far,
The Soldier serves his Prince, and State in the war.
58.
Of Mechanics there is such variety,
'Twould fill a pamphlet to recite them all:
Each of these by their art and industry,
Help hold-vp States, which otherwise would fall.
Pro. 14. 28.
Th'encrease of people, strength and honor bring,
(As says the Wiseman) to an earthly King.
59.
Eccles. 38. 3^. 33, 34.
The Smith, the Mason, and the Carpenter,
The Potter with such like of mean condition,
Albe't never called to the Councell-chamber:
Yet take this for a grounded Proposition,
Without their help a City never stands,
But as man's body wanting both the hands.
60.
Great Counselors, grave Judges, Advocates,
Next place to them allow unto Ciuillians:
Then Galenists: all these are props of States.
(Some men ascribe no less to Paracelsians.)
Above them all, the reverend good Divine,
In most men's judgments sits: and so in mine.
61.
Though amongst these members some the rest excel,
Yet since they have one head, one body make:
The highest may not against the lowest swell.
1. Cor. 12.
For if the foot, or little finger ache,
The head and heart, are partners in the pain:
So, one rejoysing, all rejoyse again.
62.
5. Prec^p^. Ho^our parents.
Before the aspiring nephew of cursed Cham,
Encroacht upon the freedom of his brothers:
Boys only feared their Father, and their Dam,
Acknowledged no subjection unto others.
So, rule and power paternall had the prime
Of Magistracies all, in the elder time.
63.
Man's duties to his God are first set down,
By him who was the maker of the Law:
The Matter, and the Method were his own.
Of Parents next he wills us stand in awe.
That Law he grafted in the hearts of men,
Ere any Precepts written were with pen.
64.
No Child, if he have any spark of grace,
Or (less then that) touch of humanity:
But when he looks his parents in the face,
Beholds therein a kind of sou'raigntie,
Which strikes in him a reverence and a fear,
And makes him to their lessons, lend his ear.
65.
Ephesians. 6.
A promise to this Precept God annexed,
Long life and days repleat with happiness:
You plainly find it in the holy Text,
Our heavenly Father so was pleased to bless
Exodus 21. 15. Deuteronomy. 27. 16. Matthew. 15.
Obedient sons: to lay a curse on others,
That disobey their Fathers, or their Mothers.
66.
Yet, parents some what to their children owe:
Psalm. 78. 4, 5, etc.
They are obliged, of them to have a care:
To teach them how they ought their Maker know,
To give them nurture, train them up in fear,
Heb. 12. 7. Colos. 3. 21.
Correct with reason: not with too much rigor,
So leave them heartlesse, sprightlesse, without vigor.
67.
1. Sam. 2.
Nor like old Ely, on their persons dote,
Wink at their faults, uphold them in their error:
What he and his by such fond cock'ring got,
I read it often, but never without terror.
Verse. 29.
Who so his children honors, more then God;
Both he and they shall feel his heavy rod.
68.
Magistrates comprehended under the name of parents. L^uit. 19. 15.
By Parents likewise Magistrates are meant,
The Fathers of the Kingdom, and the State:
King, Judges, Rulers who by him are sent,
Men's causes, rights, and titles to debate.
Justly to deal with rich, and poor alike,
Shield innocents from wrong, offenders strike.
69.
Matthew. 17. 27.
To these, our Lord himself a tribute paid,
By his example shows what should be done:
Romans 13. and 1. Pet. 2. 13.
The Apostles from his Doctrine never strayed,
But taught us follow him, as he begun.
Matthew. 22. 20.
Render to God, what does to God belong:
Let Caesar have his due, do him no wrong.
70.
Ephesians. 6. 5.
Eye-pleasing service, that is not the thing,
(If well we note the Sense, and not the Letter.)
Which servants, Masters owe: subjects, their King:
The holy Writings, they instruct us better.
Eccles. 8. and 10. 20.
It must be hearty: thoughts, words, deeds agreeing,
As done in sight of him who is all-seeing.
71.
With this prouiso, that our heavenly Father
Be first obeyed, when difference does arise:
What he commands, we must perform that rather
Then it, which earthly parents warantize.
He Is Father, of our fathers: King, of our Kings:
All reverence due to these, from him first springs.
72.
Against Anabaptists, Familists, and all that rabble.
What giddiness possesses some men's brains,
Who frame themselves a body, lacking head?
To lewd licentiousness they loose reins,
As in authentike story often I read:
Judge. 21. 25.
When Is'rel had no King to rule the rest,
Then each man did, what to him seemed best.
73.
Sundry Similes and Comparisons, showing the absolute necessity of
Magistracy among men.
Can ships without a Pilot at the helm,
Attain the Harbor whither they are bound?
But that the waves soon would them ouer-whelme,
Or furious tempests split them on the ground?
Can Coach or Charret pass without a guide,
If Coachman keep not Steeds from running wide?
74.
Did ever Army march into the field,
Without a chief Commander of the Host*
Does not each family obeisance yield,
To one, above them all respected most?
As is the Sun, amid the firmament:
So is the King, in civil government.
75.
Three old received forms of government.
Among the triple forms of policy,
By Sages first for Regiment devised:
The chief and worthiest is A Monarchy,
Democracie long since has been despised:
That State wherein the best bear rule, and few:
Is not so sound in proof, as fair in show.
76.
On old examples I Will not much insist,
But rather look on things more near at hand:
A Monarchy the best, and most absolute of them all.
The States that have been, most of them are mist,
And in their fall, the Mona^chie does stand.
As Nature aims at all her works perfection,
So man, in things left free to his election.
77.
The prototype of Sway and Sovereignty,
Directs us wholly to the rule of one:
One God, one King, it holds Analogy;
This, under him: He, of himself alone.
The Heavens, with our inferior massy ball,
Make but one Kingdom, to the Lord of all.
78.
The lesser Kings, that rule by his Commission,
Have lesser worlds assigned to them in charge:
As that Great Monarch pleases make division,
Which sometimes at his will he does enlarge;
Then subdiuides, of one such world, makes twain;
Ere long, ioynes two or three in one again.
79.
Eccles. 1.
"For, under Sun there is nothing permanent,
"Great bodies suffer change as well as small:
"This, best is seen in forms of government,
"The one is raised by the others fall.
"Where many jointly sway soueraignitie,
"Restless ambition sweates for primacie.
80.
Succession far better then election.
So is it where the Crown lies on election,
Where each man's worth, gives hope to his desires:
Where great-men have the choice to try their faction,
And he that is best befriended, most aspires:
Distracted Commons houer in suspense,
Their hearts not settled on the doubtful Prince.
81.
Pro. 19. 10. and 30. 22. and Eccles. 10. 7.
Well 'twas observed by a great wise King,
When servants sit on seats, and Princes stand:
That Is a most loathsome and unpleasant thing,
Procures much disquiet in the Land.
How can a son, whose father wore a crown,
See's servant in the Throne, and he kept down?
82.
"A freeborn Prince bears Majesty in's face,
"Gaynes greater luster by a long descent:
"Fair branches springing from a Royal race,
"Breed loyal Subjects comfort, and content.
We need no samples from a foreign Land,
None better then the nearest to our hand.
83.
Where can we find (be it spoken in Gods fear,
Without offense, much less to fawn, or flatter.)
Of Royal Sire and Son so rare a pair,
So fit to clear, and justify this matter?
Records of Time, true Chronicles, prove part,
The rest read in each faithful subjects heart.
84.
A short prayer of the Author, for the King.
Blessed little world, Great Britains famous I Will,
From all the world besides, strongly divided:
May heavens great King vouchsafe on thee to smile,
So guide those heads by whom thy self art guided:
That truly serving him who rules above,
They may be served of us with fear, and love.
85.
Psalm. 118. 6, 7. and Romans 8. 31.
Then need we doubt no foe-men to affright us,
Our foes may rather stand of us in fear:
Whilst Piety and Concord do unite us,
Our God will be our buckler, shield and spear.
If he be on our side, do we our best,
He of his goodness will supply the rest.
86.
Church men also have right of privilege in this precept.
To Prelates, Pastors, Preachers of Gods Word,
As to our Parents, filial fear we owe:
Th^se, combat for our souls with sp'rituall Sword,
In honoring them, we must not be too slow.
1, Tim. 5. 17.
If well they rule the Church, and teach withal;
A double honor to their lot does fall.
87.
Not in such sense, as some men do imply
Luke 22. 38. Heb. 4 12.
By those Two Swords, whereof the Text does tell:
One sharp two-edged sword best fits the Clergy,
And serves their turn, if they can use it well.
2. Cor. 10. 4.
It cuts down all that lifts it self on hie,
Brings hearts and thoughts into captivity.
88.
Ephesians. 6. 13.
So long as with this Sword our Churchmen fight,
Fit Armor of defense thereto apply'de:
They need not fear the force of mortal wight,
The Host of heaven stands on their side:
The Saints on earth likewise are ready pressed,
To follow them, as Leaders of the rest.
89.
Matthew. 26. 52.
Such as to other weapons them betake,
Which their Grand-Captayne charged them to forbear:
Christ's Soldiers, those Instructers may forsake,
Against such doctrine closely stop their ear.
1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1 7. Iam. 3. 17. and 1. Pet. 3. 8. 6. Precept. Murder
forbidden.
The Apostles who knew best their Masters will,
Forbad to strive, contend; or fight and kill.
90.
All Precepts of this Table which ensue,
Are negatiues: forbidding sinful deeds.
Foul Murther's first: among the damned crew,
In Beati pacifici, at large, Stan. 272.
Well known: the filthiest of peace-choaking weeds.
My Muse sang lately on this Theme so much,
That in this place she will only giue't a touch.
91.
Degrees and Stayres be many in this sin,
All that step on them, tread the path to hell:
Yet some are deep, and plunge men sooner in,
Some slayers are less deuillish, some more fell.
What erst I writ, that to repeat were vain,
Crambe bis ^cta, nocet.
Twice sodden Cole-worts, breed the stomach pain.
92.
The subiect's large, and yields new matter store,
Wherein my slender talent will I spend,
And treat of what I handled not before:
When as I miss, I shall be glad to mend.
For though the Ink be black, where with I write:
The Pen, the Paper, and the Heart are white.
93.
An allegorical description of mur^her.
The Root from whence this loathsome weed does sprout,
Cursed Malice hight, in Witches gardens grows:
The drops that water it, Envy spues-out,
The fostring warmth, from suming choler flows.
When by these means it is ripe, then comes the Fiend,
His venom, to perfect it, he does spend.
94.
Th'all-seeing Judge, who kenns each inward thought,
He looks not only on the outward act:
Intent and Purpose shall not pass for naught,
With him they are adjudged as the fact.
(...). Ioh. 3. 15.
"In heart he kills a man, that does him hate;
"Though not so censured by the Magistrate.
95.
"Yet plots, and proiects against a sovereign Prince,
"Amount as high, as do the acts of Treason:
"The Person wronged, does aggrauate the offense,
"That Law is grounded on the Base of Reason.
"Since Kings and Princes have the style of Gods,
"'Twixt thoughts and deeds against them, there is no ods.
96.
Admit (in any common persons case)
A Caytife give his Mate a poys'ned draught,
In hope to leave him dead upon the place:
Albe't the wretch be frustrate of his thought,
And strength of nature drive the venom out:
To call him Murderer, who would make a doubt?
97.
A tedious thing is forced prolixitie,
I like't worse in my self, then in another:
Yet on this point powerful necessity,
Constraines my Muse a little whiles to houer.
To beg a pardon, ere a man begin,
All Is one as crave a license for to sin.
98.
A Simile.
I Will rather venture, like a trewant Lad,
That takes a time to play, ere it be granted:
A pardon coming after, makes him glad,
Reuines his spirits formerly half danted.
Dispense with faults, when once you read it over;
If It like you not, then need you read no more.
99.
This Law forbidding one thing, bids another:
The Rule of contraries does so require:
(...). (...). 43.
Kill not: inferres, hurt not: nor hate thy brother:
But love him as thy self, thy son, thy sire.
How ever Jews, and Turks that precept take,
True Christians all, do this construction make
100.
How comes it then, that in these evil days,
Some men who make most show of Christen faith:
Though Meekness, Love, and Charity they praise,
Scarce one of them does practice what he says?
Nay, Churchmen stick not Princes to incense,
To kill, and slay, and swear it is no offense.
101.
While thus we from our Masters paths decline,
Teach doctrines to his Gospel clean contrary:
Yet would we be accounted men divine,
Make some believe, from truth we do not vary.
Pretending holy zeal, and piety,
Against the rules of Christian charity.
102.
A Simile.
When Galley-slaues sit ^ugging at an Oar,
To force their Boat from Land into the Main:
Their faces still are bent upon the Shore,
Their backs to Sea-ward. Just such is the vain
Of some, who gazing all at holiness,
Run backwards to the gulf of wickedness.
103.
Ioh. 18. 31.
The Jews cry'de out, it lay not in their powers
To put our Lord to death: yet instantly,
Within the space of some few after-how'rs,
Ioh. 19. 7.
They found a Law of theirs to cause him die.
"Who bend their minds on slaughter, wounds and blood,
"Will find a color, how to make it seem good.
104.
It Is shame to see a Christian whet his knife,
To stab, or else to cut his fellows throat:
One Christian seeks another Christians life,
The color is, Religion to promote.
That was no Christen Doctrine in old days,
Our Christian Faith, encreast by other ways.
105.
2. King. 2.
What though Elisha, holy Man of God,
Spared not those graceless boys that on him rayll'd?
2. King. 1.
What though his Master with a fiery rod,
Consumed twice fifty men who him assayll'd?
These are examples, not for imitation,
Rather to make us fear Gods indignation.
106.
Luke 9. 54.
Christ his Disciples milder Doctrine taught,
When they upon revenge were wholly bent:
Rebuking them, he said their thoughts were naught,
And that Gods Spirit, no such motion sent.
He came to save men's lives, and not to spill:
So his must win men's souls, not bodies kill.
107.
1. C^r. 13.
Oh, had I skill to speak with Angels tongue,
To work in stubborn hearts some true remorse:
To make them listen to my gentle song,
That words of peace might have with them some force,
That such as long have used their hands to slaughter,
Might once wash clean, and never foul them after,
108.
Kings may lawfully make wa^re, upon just occasions. Genesis 14. Deuteronomy. 20. Luke 14.
Not that I hold with those who do debar,
The Magistrate of his authentike right:
As if he might not lawfully make war,
Nor arm his subjects in his cause to fight.
That Paradox, new Doctors lately broacht,
And falsely on the Princes power encroacht.
109.
As they are priuiledg'd to give an oath,
So are they to draw out, and use the sword:
To swear and fight, good subjects ought do both,
When Kings command them by their powerful word.
The Royal dignity robbed of this right,
Is like man's body lacking soul, and spright.
110.
Their care should be, to see the quarrel just,
The Intent indeed religious, not in show:
The Lord of Hosts likes not ambitious lust,
The thoughts, though never so hidden, he does know.
Kings christ'ned, with their brothers need no brangling,
To please the humors of Schoole-Doctors wrangling.
111.
Is charity among Christians clean forgot,
The ancient badge of our divine profession:
Is Love grown cold, and Hatred waxt so hot,
Has Malice in our hearts taken such possession,
That no mean may be found to reconcile us,
Though Jews, and Turks, and Pagans for it, revile us!
112.
Does not the common Foe behold our folly,
Laugh in his sleeue to see us play the fools:
That making show to be devout and holy,
Against our selves we blunt our sharpened tools?
Meanewhile, our brawles prepare a way for him,
Who hates us all, into our seats to clim.
113.
So gat he first the Empire of the East,
Made slaves of those, who erst proud Scepters swayd:
So has he shrewdly shakt, and spoiled the West,
Yea, had not God his furious madness stayed,
The little left us, should been made his prey,
And all constrayn'd his Scepter to obey.
114.
A comparison of Esopes.
Like Esops Frog and Mouse that strove for place,
Whereas for both there was enough, and spare:
Though simple be the sample, it is our case,
When it is too late, what boots it then beware?
The Kite swept both those combatants away,
Whilst each of them, the other sought to slay.
115.
This Vultures wings, unless they had been clipped,
His talants pared, his rau'nous beak well copt:
Long since by him we had been soundly gript,
Our tallest spreading Cedars had been lopt.
Thanks to heavens King, who sent them orphan Lords,
And caused them against themselves employ their swords.
116.
As they are sinking, sooner may we rise,
A Simile.
Like Buckets in a Well: one goes down empty,
Whilst it low logging in the water lies,
It helps the other to come up with plenty.
By that means first their Bucket they did fill,
So might we ours, would we concur in will.
117.
He prays for vn^tie among Christian Princes. Pro. 21. 1.
Thou, in whose Hand are held the hearts of Kings,
(Thy Substitutes, who rule by thy Commission)
Thou turnest them like as the water-springs,
Thou make the people yield to them submission:
Incline their hearts to unity at length,
That miscreants may feel their coupled strength.
118.
What though my Muse cannot her wish obtain?
Yet while she breathes, she will never cease so wishing.
What, though it seem her hopes are merely vain?
As patient Anglers that delight in fishing,
When fishes will not bite, they rest content,
And think their time in angling not misspent.
119.
7. Pr^cept. Adultery forbidden.
The sin which here in order next ensu'th,
All out of order spreading far and wide:
Some called the proper vice of frolike youth,
Yet old age often retaynes it by her side.
Ecclu^. 25. (...).
"More hateful it is, and loathsome to behold,
"When sin of youth, surpriseth persons old.
120.
This Precept curbeth young and old alike,
Not them alone whom holy Rites have bound:
On these the Rod more heavily does strike,
Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Deuteronomy. 22. 28.
The rest who faulty against this Law are found,
Incur like guilt, though not like penalty:
L^u. 20. 10.
For, the one must bear a mulct, the other die.
121.
God well foresaw Man could not live alone,
All Creatures else had different sex in kind:
Genesis 3. 21^
An help he made him of his flesh and bone,
In sacred Wedlock-bands he did them bind:
That the one of them might cleave unto the other,
More then adhere to father, or to mother.
122.
1. Cor. 7.
Though single life be held a blessed state,
In such as have the gift of Continence:
Yet every Man is free to take his Mate,
So may each Woman do without offense.
To shun the sin of filthy Fornication,
God knit that bond of Marriage-copulation.
123.
A Comparison.
The greater shame it is for a man of wealth,
Whose fields are stored with herds, his chests with coin:
To spare his own, supply himself by stealth,
To rob his neighbors: shift, filch, and purloyne.
2. Sam. (...).
A righteous King, such one to death did doom,
Not knowing that himself supplied the room.
124.
All Acts and Deeds of Lust are flat forbidden,
So be the Thoughts that tend to wanton folly:
For why, from God nor hearts, nor thoughts are hidden,
(...). Pet. 1. 15.
As he is, so his servants must be holy:
Not to the flesh, and sinful pleasures prone,
Like those who never had their Maker known.
125.
Ecclus. 23. 17. Pro. 3.
Yet Wantons swear, that stolen bread is sweet,
Strange Women's lips, to honey they compare:
The path to Hell they trample with their feet,
Like Wood-cocks thrust their necks into a snare:
Consume themselves in body, and in purse,
Draw down upon their souls a heavy curse.
126.
Mat. 5. 27.
Our Master checked the glancing of an eye,
To stop this tainting poison from the heart:
A lustful look mounts to Adultery,
The Tempter uses it as for his dart.
So does he garish toys, and sugared baits,
For he is a close crafts-master in deceits.
127.
A Comparison setting out the Devils craf^ in alluring us ^o^ollie.
An expert Captain lays an ambuscado,
His heedlesse foe the sooner to ensnare:
Sends out some nimble troops as in brauado,
Who give those fresh-men ground, till unaware
They fall within the circuit of the train,
Then all are captives made, or downright slain.
128.
Thus fights th'old-Serpent against the souls of men,
Gives Wantons leave to frolike at their pleasure:
So traynes them in, that hardly one of ten,
Escapes the danger of his deadly seizure.
No Vice so vastly in this Age does swell,
Nor sweepes so many multitudes to hell.
129.
Sine Cere^ and Baccho frig^ Venus.
"Th'allurements are, excess in clothes and diet:
"The One feeds the eye, the other fills the panch*
"For Luxury goes hand in hand with Riot,
"And he that cannot keep his body stanch,
"But eats and drinks profusely of the best,
"Is apt to harbor Venus in his breast.
130.
Ecclus. 31. 12. Rom 13 13.
Why be the works of Abstinence so praised,
As fasts, and slender food, the flesh to tame?
But that thereby the soul is sweetly raised,
From carnal thoughts, and deeds producing shame,
To motions holy, sacred and divine,
Which our depraved nature do refine.
131.
The Author taxes the va nitie of lascivious and wanton Poe^:
Say (gentle Muse) what makes thee hang thy head,
To close thine eyes from looking on the Light:
To taint thy cheeks with an un wonted red,
To loath bright day, wish for the sable night;
As if some deed of darkness soyl'd thy name,
And caused thee turn aside thy face for shame?
132.
Shame it is in deed that makes me look awrie:
How can I with a modest view behold,
The gross abuse of graceful Poetry,
In which all sacred Mysteries of old
Were first divulged: God and good men extold,
Each Virtue praised, and every Vice controld?
133.
The true subject of ancient Poesy.
Heroike deeds, high acts of Chivalry,
Exploits of noble Captains, and their Bands,
Skie-knowledge course of Stars, Astronomy,
Reports of dangers past by Seas and Lands:
These were choice subjects in the elder times,
Of Poets songs, and well-composed Rimes.
134.
Now finest wits, enricht upon Pernassus,
Refresht with our sweet streams of Helicon:
Reject our Maiden-precepts, and disgrace us,
They chose them wanton Theames to sing upon:
Wasting their brains about some idle toy,
Of Citharea and her blinded boy.
135.
A Simile.
Sweet sounds the pipe whereon the Fowler plays,
By which the Birds are trained to his lure:
Such is th'attractiue power of Poets Lays,
A gentle heart cannot the assaults endure:
The poison slides so swift into each vein,
As wounds to death, before one feel the pain.
136.
This fuel feeds the soule-deuouring flame
Of goatish lust, draws tender youth to folly:
For, what ^ewd sonets teach, these think no shame
When they have learned, to act it free and boldly.
"No marvel is it, for well we be instructed,
"That by ill words, good manners are corrupted.
137.
Since then our sacred skill is thus profaned,
Our modest learning made a bawd to Vice:
Our shame thereby in open streets proclaym'd,
Our antique Virtue, valewed at no price:
I Would rather blushing hide my Maiden face,
Then bluntly to behold this ^oule disgrace
138.
Forbear (my Muse) take not this thing to heart,
Be not distraught for others so offending:
Be chaste thy self, use modest-virgin-art,
So may thou be a mean of their amending.
If one be won by imitating thee,
Such one may after him draw two, or three.
139.
Admit, some learned in Canon Laws, or Civil,
Or some professing Galens useful art:
Say, some Divines (whose books teach them no evil)
Abuse their learning, play the lawd-mens part:
Shall Physic, Laws, sacred Theology
Lack their defense, and just Apology?
140.
Read Cluss. 2. Stan. 15 8. in defense of Poes^.
Not so. Nor may the sacred sisters nine,
So highly honored in all former ages:
Whose off spring and whose learning is divine,
So much esteemed by Greek, and Latin Sages:
Be scorned for a few loose poetasters,
Whose songs breed to their hearers some disasters.
141.
You gentle wits devoted to Apoll^,
Whose purer spirits do most partake of fire:
Shun subjects base, Celestial still follow;
Strive with the towering Lark, to mount up higher:
So bind your Muses to a modest song,
That Enuie't self may blush to do them wrong.
142.
Chase Venus and her son from out your Court,
Take Vesta and her Virgins in their stead:
Tell Wantons, here is no place for their lewd sport,
Chaste Maids and Matrones, they alone must read
Your hallowed spells; and men reclaym'd from folly,
Vowed in their lives and doctrines, to be holy.
143.
Then Libertines; and men of brutish lives,
That make a jest this Precept to transgress,
Corrupt young Virgins, tempt the sob'rest Wives,
Consume their precious time, in foul excess,
Think heaven is only in their Mistres arms,
Detest (as hell) all sacred Doctors charms:
144.
Such men (I say) shall not approach your Cell,
Their lips impure, shall not defile your name:
They Will not ascend the Mount whereon you dwell,
Nor haunt the Groves, wherein you walk, for shame.
Your ancient glory thus you shall attain,
Your Scholars grow in good men's grace again.
145.
8. Precept. Forbid^ing theft.
Well does the holy Text connect together,
Those sins, which in this Table are forbid:
The murderer, lecher, thief, false-witnesse-bearer,
(Night-brats, who fear the light, wish to lie hid.)
These doggue each other closely at the heel,
As linkes in chain, or spokes do in a wheel.
146.
That sacred Psalmist, of all Singers sweetest,
Worthiest of Kings, mong Prophets the profoundest:
Who knew what method in his Psalms was meetest,
Whose judgment was in spiritual knowledge foundest:
Psalm. 56. 18, 19, 20.
He ranked these as birds all of a feather,
For commonly most of them flock together.
147.
Next shedding blood, and foul adultery,
The Law prescribes a strict restraint of theft:
All things were never held in common, except by Adam and Eve: who may rather
be said to have had propriety in all and ^o, no (for^) communi^ warranted
since the creation. Gen 4. 2.
What every man holds in propriety,
That to the rightful owner must be left.
A tortious act it is, and open wrong,
To take that which to others does belong.
148.
Promiscuous use of every thing in common,
Which idle Iacks tumultuously do crave:
None ever had, since that first Man and Woman,
To whom this Earth, and all therein, God gave.
For Abel had his stock, distinct from Caine:
Community was not betwixt them twain.
149.
Then, that which Moses long time after wrote,
Gods people practiced since the first creation:
Yet, to the intent it might not be forgot,
But left to each succeeding Generation,
That holy man first writ it in a book,
And charged Gods people often thereon to look.
150.
This Precept does au^re meum and tuum.
Steal not, says God, which plainly does infer,
That things possessed by thee, are justly thine:
Then Familists, and those false Brethren err,
Who think all I have, 's theirs as well as mine.
Those merry Mates, if apprehended stealing;
Say, they take but their own, and that is plain dealing.
151.
Differences and degrees in theft.
Of thieves and robbers sundry sorts there be,
Though all transgressors against this Law divine:
Yet some run further to impiety,
Some from the precept barely do decline.
The punishments are diff'rently expressed,
Which proves some worse offenders, then the rest.
152.
First, Churchrobberie or ^acriledge is the worst theft. Mal 3. 8.
When God is robbed, can any sin be greater?
Such thieves in elder times there have been found.
It Is strange to think that any mortal creature,
Who sucks the air, or sets his foot on ground,
Should dare against God commit a robbery,
And hope to do it with impunitie.
153.
Amos 4. 6.
One certain plague allotted to such thieves,
Is, curses on their Land, and its increase:
To righteous men God store and plenty gives,
Their Barnes are full, they sow and reap in peace.
Who knows himself delinquent in this sin,
Should retribute, and fall no more therein.
154.
To spoil the Church, or Churchmen of their right,
That Is sacrilege, God thereby suffers wrong:
Though done in secret, once 'twill come to light,
Th'offendors seldom prosper with it long.
My friend that in this case has done amiss,
I wish make God amends, and get his bliss.
155.
Some Clergymen, worse then the Laity,
Are said to rob the Church, men's souls to kill:
Scarce fit for one, hold soule-cures two, or three,
With wool their backs do cloth, their bellies fill
With sheep sweet milk: their flocks the whiles unfed.
If some such bad men live, it is time the were men-ded.
156.
Secondly, Tyrants that oppress and rob the world.
Some Tyrants great in power by Sea and Land,
Rest vnsuffic'd with that which God has lent them:
Though many Kingdoms lie at their command,
There Is naught but all the world can content them:
Like Macedonian Philips stirring son,
Who wept since yet one world he had not won.
157.
These be great thieves that rob the universe,
Suppose this All was for themselves created:
Grow proud, cause after-ages shall rehearse,
How many Lands, and Kings they ruinated.
Or these men break this Law forbidding theft,
Or of my judgment I am clean bereft.
158.
I judge those Monarks blessed in their estates,
(And sure I am herein my iudgement's right.)
Who give no cause of quarrels and debates,
For just and lawful causes only fight:
Till wrong be offered them, do not begin:
Stick closely to their task, when once they are in.
159.
An Apostrophe to the Kings Majesty.
Dread Lord, vouchsafe to hear a lowly Swain,
Whose Muse (presuming on your former grace)
First humbly prays* you long in peace may reign,
And leave it firm unto your Royal race.
All let us removed that to a breach do tend,
Each enemy of yours, turned trusty friend.
160.
Next vote of mine depends upon condition,
Deuteronomy. 20. 10.
(I take it from a holy man of God)
If Peace into their hearts get no admission,
By whom your children under foot are trod;
The fault is theirs, strain curt'sie then no longer,
Your quarrel being just, you are the stronger.
161.
Psalm. 55. 22
More smooth then supplest oil have been their words,
What time stern Mars did harbor in their hearts:
Seeming to heal (as balm) they cut like swords,
Wounding far deeper then the sharpest darts.
Accept a subjects vote, though bluntly spoken;
Psalm. 141. 5.
Let not your head, with their sweet balmes be broken.
162.
Psalm. 141. 5. Prou. 28. 6.
It Is better from our friend to bear a stroke,
Take words that to the ear may sound unpleasing:
Then kisses from our foes: whereby they cloak.
Disguise their falsehood, treachery, and leasing.
Two great wise Kings who found this true by proof,
Have writ it in their books for our behoof.
163.
Take graciously, what loyally is meant,
(I only wish, too weak to give advise)
My pen sets freely down my hearts intent,
Act. 26. 26.
I know the King, to whom I speak, is wise.
Graunts pardon to ingenuous liberty,
When duty bounds it with humility.
164.
3. Robbing a Realm, or Commonwealth,
To rob the Kingdom, or the Commonwealth,
Wherein one had his birth, and has his being:
This seems to me a most accursed stealth,
Some know it, yet wink as if they wanted seeing.
If any such there be within this Land,
I wish they were upon the mending hand.
165.
By indirect deceauing their Prince.
If any by close tricks abuse their Prince,
Through fair pretense of doing him good service:
If they his treasure, and revenues mince,
Whereby themselves to great estates do rise,
Without desert to King, or Commonweal:
What if one ask you, whether such men steal?
166.
By bribery and Extortion.
If Magistrates, and Officers extort,
Take Gifts and Bribes, which blind even wise men's eyes:
Exodus 23. 8. Mal. 3. 5.
It Is like at length they may be plagued for it,
Since God does hear oppressed poor men's cries:
Ier. 22. 13.
For such misdeedes roots-out the Generation
Of wicked men: and often subuerts a Nation.
167.
By defrauding Orphans, Widows, and poor of their right.
If men (for friends and wealth) of mickle might,
(Whose conscience is as large as Friars sleeves)
Rob Orphans, Widows, poor men of their right,
And under show of Justice, play the thieves.
This Precept strikes at them, as at the others,
They may shake hands, and pass for sworne-brothers.
168.
By betraying poor Clients Causes.
If Advocates receive poor Suitors fees,
Give wrong advise, make Causes bad, seem best:
Regard not whether Clients win, or leese,
So they grow rich, and feather well their nest:
A sin it is against this Law, I take it:
If any have so done, let them forsake it.
169.
Restitution ordained for theft, by Moses. Exodus 22. Pro. 6. 31.
(...) Moses Law, Thieves were but to restore,
For Chattle-theft no man was judged to die,
But only render fow'r for one, or more:
All Nations now have changed that penalty.
I Will not dispute the Cause that moved them to it,
The Effect appears: for every where they do it.
170.
The Trade of Theft, and Robbing is so rife,
Against Nations laws, and Man's society,
They Will venture on it, with hazard of their life:
Work? Fie upon it, they rather choose to die.
Such as be trayn'd up idly in their youth,
Will sooner hang, then sweat and live by truth.
171.
They only think on bodies punishment,
Fear but the mulct, and outward penalty:
Consider not, how when the body's spent,
The Soul, assenting to the felony,
Before another Judge must take her trial,
Confess the fault, for there boots no denial.
172.
Theft by false play; and cheating.
Those subtle Thieves, more cunning then the rest,
Which rob by shifts, false play, and crafty cheating:
Hold fast in earnest what they get in jest,
Escape scot-free without hanging, either beating:
Are but repriued to a further day,
To bear a heavier check for their soule-play.
173.
Christ's doctrine is so full of piety,
So pearcing to the heart, and inward thought,
So set on Justice, Truth, and Charity,
From fau'ring, far: or cloaking, what is naught:
1. Those. 4. ^. Luke 12. 33. and 18. ^2.
That it forbids all fraud, deceit, and guile,
Bids give our goods, though lackt our selves, somewhile.
174.
A rich man that does not almsdeeds, robs the poor.
It Is not enough t'abstayne from open stealing,
Live on thy own, for bear to filch from others:
Thou must give Alms, use liberal and free dealing,
If thou have store, relieve thy needy brothers.
Ecclus 4 1.
For, he that is rich, and does not help the poor,
Detraudes them of their due. I urge no more.
175.
Suffice it what has on this Theme been said,
A further search remaynes for greater Clerks:
Perhaps, if Town and Country were suruey'd,
True men from Thieves, distinguished by these marks:
A young Arithmeticians brains 'twould cumber,
To tell in haste, which were the greater number.
176.
9. Precept. Against false witness.
You never knew a Thief, but was a Liar,
Twins laughing still, and weeping both together:
The smoke clings not more closely to the fire,
Beware them both alike, put trust in neither.
Thieves preying on our goods, less hurtful are,
Then Witnesses that lie, and falsely swear.
178.
The Precepts ten, so firmly are connext,
That breaking one, we fail in all the rest:
Iam. 2. 10.
So I have learned in the holy Text,
Gods curse is got, by sinning in the least:
Yet (well conceau'd) it may be rightly spoken,
One hurts more, then another, being broken.
178.
The heynousnesse of false Testimony; To God, and Men.
A Witness speaking falsely on his oath,
Assumes in vain Gods great and fearful Name:
Of life and liuelyhood he robs us both,
Oft-times bereaues us of our honest fame.
Pro. 6. 19.
Such false Truth-wresters, Breeders of debate,
Are they whom God especially does hate.
179.
Their punishment just Moses does appoint,
When Judges hap their falsehood to discover:
Deuteronomy. 19. 16.
Life must be had for life, and joint for joint,
Do to him, as he would have done to the other.
Dan. 13.
Susannaes false accusers had such hire,
As they to lay upon her, did conspire.
180.
1. King. 21.
Naboth was charged to have blasphemed the King,
Two sons of Belial wickedly bely'de him:
He never thought, nor dreamt of such a thing,
Yet of his life, and land, false oaths deprived him.
Matthew. 26. 59.
By such a trick, our Lord was circumuented,
The Priests themselves that treachery invented.
181.
The great Lawgiver wisely did foresee,
What danger perjured witnesses might breed:
Deuteronomy. 19. 15.
He therefore wrote, that two at least, or three
Must prove, before a matter be decreed.
One, was too few: and many, hard to get:
Two at the least, or three, were fitly set.
182.
And yet, the old Serpent, father of all lies,
To whom the naked Truth is most displeasing:
By many shifts and glozes does deuize,
To set up falsehood, perjury, and leazing.
With sundry men, he works sundry ways,
As each one is inclined, his bait he lays.
183.
Envy, Malice, Hatred, are strong passions inciting to false wi^nesse.
Among passions all, that draw a man to sin,
Hate, Malice, Envy bear the greatest sway:
Who to his heart, once lets these Monsters in,
They lead him down to hell the ready way.
In their designs, they are so fierce and strong,
They Will have their purpose, be it by right, or wrong.
184.
Saint Steuens false accusers. Act. 6. 13.
The men who with Saint Steven did dispute,
Unable to resist his Arguments,
The Spirit by which he spoke, stroke them all mute:
For spite whereof their heart insunder rents.
False witnesses suborned, do accuse him,
So by their hate, and malice they abuse him.
185.
Act. 7. 60.
They charge this holy man with blasphemy,
(An odious crime in sight of God, and Men)
Then martyr him: who full of charity
Kneeles down, and most devoutly prays for them.
Thus Testmonie, meant for furth'ring right,
The wicked do pervert, to wreake their spite.
186.
A Simile.
The Level, and the Square, framed for a guide,
Whereby each skillful Builder leads his work:
Once set awrie, then th'architect goes wide,
In fine is carried clean beside the mark.
So Witness, whereon Judgments should be grounded,
If false, all right is thereby quite confounded.
187.
Fear and favor of great persons.
Some, are so fearful of a great-mans frown,
So glad to wind themselves into his grace:
Their souls at stake they wilfully lay down,
To get the smiling aspect of his face.
1. King. 21.
Those elders swayd by Iesabels damned letter,
Were such lewd Mates. I cannot term them better.
188.
Lands, dignities, and prom^tions. 2. Sam. 16. 4.
Lands, Offices, and Dignities do much,
The hope of these does many more entice:
Mephiboshets false seruitour was such,
A slander against his Lord he did devise:
So got possession of his whole estate.
Let all men bless themselves from such a Mate.
189.
Money the common corrupter of witnesles.
What is it, that money cannot bring to pass?
"Makes crooked things seem straight, turns black to white:
This may we see as clear as in a glass:
Matthew. 28. 12.
The Soldiers swear, that while they slept by night,
Our Lords Disciples stole him from his Tomb:
'Twas money made them speak, else they would bin dumb.
190.
A Simile.
Who hunts, an old and crafty Fox to catch,
Goes warily to work ere he can get him:
On all sides of the wood, leaves some to watch,
When out he runs, there roundly does beset him,
Not leaving him a hole wherein to hide,
His wiles then fail him, in the Champion wide.
191.
So, reverend Judges deal with cunning Mates,
Suspected to rely on subornation:
Dan. ^3. 48.
Note what each Witness severally relates,
Mark circumstances breeding alteration:
A Truth cannot so closely be deny'de,
Nor Falsehood voucht, but it is by them descry'de.
192.
2. Sam. 14. 20. and 19. 27.
For they (on earth) are Gods, whose seat they hold,
A Truth from Falsehood quickly they epsy:
Let no false-witnesse-bearer be so bold,
As hope he may outface them with a lie.
Nay, God in heaven, and Gods on earth agree,
Both here and there, to punish perjury.
193.
10. Precept. Covet nothing of thy Neighbour^ Matthew. 22. 37. Romans 13. 9.
The Law, though branching into many parts,
Is briefly couched in a word or twain:
First, to love God sincerely with our hearts;
Then, Neighbors as our selves. (Cold love is vain.)
Give freely all to God, that is to him due:
Wish naught from Neighbors, that 'longs not to you.
194.
The lesson's short, soon learned out of book,
And may be all observed: (as some have thought.)
Matthew. 19. 20. Pro 20 9. and 1. Ioh. 1. 8. Genesis 6. 5. and Job 4. 18.
That young man in the Gospel much mistook,
We otherwise in holy Writ are taught.
No thoughts are so upright, no heart so pure,
That can the censure of this Law endure.
195.
The least desire, or ^oue^ing from o there is, makes us guilty of the whole Law.
This Precept, shutting up the Second Table,
Requires such cleanness in the heart of man:
Presumption 'twere to think a mortal able
To keep it strictly, do what ere he can.
The best who shun gross sins (be sure of this)
Cannot but wish oft-times, and think amiss.
196.
To love thy friend of whom thou art beloved,
Do good to him, who does as much for thee:
True charity is thereby faintly proved,
Matthew. 5. 44.
For wicked men so far^e in love agree.
But we must love our foes, that most defy us:
Wish well to those, who slander and belie us.
197.
Matthew. 19. 18. Romans 13. 9.
Herein the six last Precepts are obay'd,
If, as our selves, so we our neighbor love.
This is the sum of all that can be said,
Examine well thy self thereby to prove,
If thoughts, and deeds walk not sometimes awrie,
So learn to know thy own infirmity.
198.
Sundry Simile^, showing the good use of the Law, albeit we cannot fulfill it.
He that with in ward sickness is surpised,
Whose grief grows closely on him vndescri'de,
Scarce feels his pain: that man is m^saduiz'd,
No greater danger can such one betide.
To go astray, and think thou walk right,
All Is one, as take the Darkness for the Light.
199.
The wound that is deep, yet taken as a scarre,
Endangers most the body that endures it:
That Feed-man often his Clients cause does mar.
Who ere he fully knows, rashly assures it.
(...).
The Pharise, selfe-soothed holy man,
Came short in goodness of the Publican.
200.
The Law lays open our sickness, and our sore,
Instructs us where, and when we go astray:
Declares our case as it is, nor less, nor more,
Our faults unmasked, before us it does lay.
So when we see our wretchedness, and error,
It strikes into our hearts a holy terror.
201.
This terror does our inbred pride abate,
Leads to repentance, and humility:
Makes us renounce our selves, our sins to hate,
Drives all to have recourse for remedy,
Gal. 3. Esaias 53.
By him who kept the Law in every ^ot,
Yet suffered death, which he deserved not:
202.
To quit that debt which we should have discharged,
Or lain in Iayle, till the utmost farthing paid:
From prison by his gift we were enlarged,
Not one mite left, that on us could be laid.
Each one who humbly sues for his acquittance,
Is well-com'd in, and finds a free admittance.
203.
Thus do good Christians Moses Law expound,
(The rule of Justice, and of Righteousness)
We build our Doctrine on no other ground,
^m. 2. 2^.
Though Jews, and Turks pretend to do no less:
Yet they stick only to the outward Letter,
We join thereto the Spirit: and that is better.
204.
My Muse craves further time to end this song,
That sacred Theme requires more meditation:
The Parts already sung, have held her long.
Here tenders she her humble Supplication;
Sir, begs your pardon for all faults, and slips;
Your Princely hand, to grace her Virgin-lips.
The end of the fourth Classis.
DIVINE POEMS. The fifth Classis.
THE ARGUMENT.
Our Saviors method most divine in teaching.
Repentance first: Beatitudes and Woes:
Love, Alms, Fasts, Prayer, subjects of his preaching:
His perfect form of prayer for a cloze.
In Parables our lessons he does read us,
His Flesh and Blood made special food to feed us.
THe proverb tells what proof confirms for true,
Some mar good matters, handling of them ill:
Some by their cunning vent old stuff for new,
Make black seem white. (There Is falsehood in that skill.)
A worthy subject handled in it is kind,
Approues it self to every honest mind.
2.
I find not that Moses writ ought, before he received the Tables written by G^d
in the Mount. Deuteronomy. 5. 22.
The first who fully writ of things divine,
At Gods own hand received it ready penned:
He from that model never did decline,
Proposed unto himself no other end.
That compass was his guide to sail aright,
Taught him whereof, and in what style to write.
3.
Yet after him among the Jewish Tribes,
Succeeded some who on his chair did sit:
Matthew. 16. 6. 12. and 26. 57. and Mar. 14. 64.
Proud Pharizees, selfe-wise-conceited Scribes,
Abused the Law, and mis-expounded it.
True Doctrine they accused as blasphemy,
Against the Law, adiudg'd The Just to die.
4.
Matthew. 23. 2, 3.
When to the people they sound lessons taught,
(As listening to their charge, most-times they did.)
Then commonly their lives were loose and naught,
Hypocrisy within their hearts lay hid.
"What boots it, of Gods upright Law to talk.
"And in the Devils crooked ways to walk?
5.
Moses a type of Christ.
A perfect pattern of sincerity
In life and doctrine, Moses shadowed out:
My humble Muse deuotes her ingenie
To trace them both. (Well may she bring't about)
A weighty load, too great for her to bear;
Yet light, if he vouchsafe the burden share.
6.
A prayer for as^stance in this divine ^aske.
Then thou, whose tongue spoke never but the troth,
Whose actions all, were rules of piety;
Direct my hand and heart to treat of both,
(Instructed by the Sacred History)
In modest meeter, that the grau'st Divine,
May say, the Sprite, that ruled the pen, was thine.
7.
(...). 1. ^
For, every work that any good has in it,
Proceeds from thee, the God of Truth and Light;
Thy Spirit helps to end, and to begin it,
All glory unto thee belongs of right.
The good that is here, and worthy praise, it is thine;
The faults and errors, I confess, be mine.
8.
The ground of Doctrines lately has been laid,
The root and branches both describ^d at full;
Of circumstances much rests to be said,
That grace and power of speech, whereby the dull
Hard hearted Jew, the Gentile-Idoll-monger,
Were forc^t to yield to him, as to the stronger.
9.
Job. 7. 3^
When Officers were sent abroad to watch him,
The Priests enjoining it by strict command:
Though some of them were fully bent to catch him,
Verse. 44. 45, 46.
Yet none had power to lay on him a hand.
Their answer was (when they were checked therefore)
Like unto him, never spoke man before.
10.
Iuk. 4. 16.
Is It not observed in the holy Book,
At Nazareth, when first he 'gan to preach,
How steadfastly all people on him look,
Matthew. 7. 28. Mar. 1. 22.
Wonder to hear how sweetly he does teach?
Unlike the Scribes, whose words had no such force.
To work in th'hearers pity, or remorse.
11.
Act. 24.
Tertellus trusting to his Oratorie,
Supposed to daunt poor Paul, and strike him mute,
In his affected style he took a glory;
The prisoner does this Orator confute.
Verse. 25.
Bribe-louing- Felix could not so dissemble,
But that Paul's peircing speeches made him tremble
12.
Mar. 13. 11. and Luke. 21. 14.
He from his Lord received such forcefull power,
Who left this comfort to his Scholars all:
That when they needed most, even in that how'r,
No Tyrants surie might their hearts appall;
His Sprite would teach them speak with such a grace,
As should confound their foe-men in the place.
13.
(...). ^.
Confound their foes, confirm the faith of others,
(Two strange effects proceeding from one breath)
Make reprobates of some, of some make brothers;
To these give life; to those bring shame and death.
That Word alone so sharp and peircing is,
Of the end to which it aims, does never miss.
14.
My silly Muse, how dare thou soar so high,
Neglecting danger of a dreadful fall?
How may thy flaggie wings bear thee so nigh
That glorious Sun, whose brightness dazels all?
"Dispose thy self unto some lower pitch,
"Mounting too high, makes some lie in the ditch.
15.
"Yet humble men that downwards cast their eyes,
"All-dis-esteeme themselves, confess their vildnesse,
"Think they are unworthy to behold the skies:
"Recounting their Redeemers grace and mildness,
"May fix their towering thoughts on his high Palace,
"Scorn earthly, and in heavenly things take solace.
16.
Matthew. 11. 25.
"Things vndiscouer'd to the worldly-wise,
"To Babes and Children God oft-times reueales;
Ioh. 12. ^0.
"He shuts the ones, sets open the others eyes,
"Expounds to some, from other some conceales:
Matthew. 7. 7.
"Instructing us to ask, to seek, to knock,
"That we may have, and he the door unlock.
17.
Now give me Lord, what faithfully I ask;
Guide me to find the Treasure that I seek:
The skill to handle well this heavenly task,
Which none can do, but humble men, and meek.
"For pride strikes her possessors all so blind,
Similes or Comparisons, expre^sing the care and diligence of our Savior in
his teaching, to heal soules^ke men, and lead them to heaven.
"The path that leads to bliss, they never find.
18.
A good Physician caring for the sick,
Of whom he once does undertake the cure;
Casts not how he his Patients purse may pick,
Or lingering make him longer pain endure.
But bends his wits to know the malady,
Then by his Art, prouides a remedy.
19.
A faithful Pilot having taken the charge,
To pass Seafaring men to their own Land;
The Passangers once shipped in his Barge,
Their goods and lives delivered to his hand;
Aduizing of the trust to him committed,
Takes care that for the voyage all be fitted.
20.
An Advocate to whose fidelity,
Poor Clients causes wholly are commended,
When lives and liuel'hood stand in ieopardie;
Till those great causes thoroughly be ended,
Gives not himself to idleness and pleasure,
But in that business spends his how'rs of leisure.
21.
Our best Physician, Pilot, Advocate,
Who freely undertook to heal each grief;
To bring home wandering souls, to heavens straight gate;
Vn-feed, to plead for every man's relief:
Neglects no time, lets no occasion slide,
Fit slaves for every sore he does provide.
22.
Strong purges, bitter pills, sharp corrasiues,
To some he gives as sicknesses require:
To some sweet Iulips, sound restoratiues,
Expecting neither fee, reward, nor hire.
He offers help to all, if all would take it;
Most see not their own want, and so forsake it:
23.
Repentance the first Doct^e ^h^ Christ and his Harb^g^r Io^ Ba^st ^gh^. Matthew.
3. 2, and 4 17, (...)
One groundwork for all sick-soule-cure he laid,
His Harbinger before him had been sent,
To work on that: for so it is plainly said,
They both began with one self word, Repent.
"Who thinks he is sound enough, and no help needs.
"Must die of that disease, whose root he feeds.
24.
Matthew. 9. and Mar. 2. 17.
To righteous men (that to themselves so seem,
And so by others falsely judged to be,
Such as did think they had no lack of him)
To call these men, I am not sent, says he.
They must both know, and knowledge their own need,
That would b'assured of my help to speed.
25.
"Doubtless there is no other way to heal,
"When men are deadly sick, and will not see it;
"But cause them tell their grief which they conceal*
"Disclose't to him, who knows what help is meet.
Our Medic thus his practice did begin
The cure fails none, that rightly enter in.
26.
No wit, nor art of man (say I) is able,
(Though all their art and wits were joined together)
So pithily as he in one Parable,
By speech or writing to persuade the Hearer,
To turn from folly, and return to God,
When he reclaymes us with his gentle rod.
27.
The most excellent pithy parable of the prodigal son. Luke 15. 11. to the
end of the chapter.
That son which wilfully forsook his father,
Consumed his goods with luxury and riot,
When all was gone, no means left more to gather,
Swine-offals failing him (a wretched diet)
To fill his panch, the hunger was so great,
Feign would he been sufficed with such course meat.
28.
What does he then? begins to change his mind,
Thinks on the plenty, at his fathers table:
In hope to have him pitiful and kind,
Once more will gain his grace, if he be able;
Confess his fault, unworthy name of son,
Crave but a servants place: so home does run.
29.
No sooner homeward turns he his face,
The father hastening, meets him half the way,
Embraces him, receaues him into grace,
With shoes, and ring, and robe, does him array:
A fatted Calfe he kills, and makes a feast,
With mirth and minstrelsie to please this Ghest.
30.
Nay more, when the elder brother'gan repine,
To see this vnthrist Lad so entertayn'd,
The father prays him to come in and dine,
For why? My son was lost and is regayn'd.
I thought he had been dead, but since he is living,
We must rejoice, and cheer our hearts from grieuing.
31.
A short discourse it is, yet most divine,
Most full of grace, most pithy to persuade;
Displayes our wretched state before our eyne,
Points out the way by which our peace is made:
Our heavenly father's pronesse to forgive,
Ezech. 33. 11.
Would no man's death, but that he turn and live.
32.
The same by two like samples he auerreth.
Luke 15.
Among an hundred sheep if one be lost,
Or one poor groat among ten: the loser stirs,
The fields are searched, the stuff i'th'house is tossed:
That lost-sheepe found, gives th'owner more content,
Then all the rest that straying never went.
33.
The Angels all, for joy in heaven showt,
To see a man whose steps to hell-ward tended,
Reclayme himself, his course turned clean about,
His faults forsaken, and his life amended.
There Is naught (me thinks) can cause that man be sad,
Which walks the way, that makes good Angels glad.
34.
Can any graceless trewant be so mad,
Though once he played the fool to go astray;
Being well assured his pardon may be had,
His welcome more, then ere he went away,
As not return to rest, and live with store,
But beg, or steal, and lastly hang therefore?
35.
If such there be (too many sure there are)
That love to feed on husks, and live with Hogs:
Within the City gates, they get no share,
Revel. 22. 15. Matthew. 25. 10.
But out they must abide among the Dogs.
"When doors be shut once, there is no coming in
"It Is best while men have time, in time begin.
36.
Christ's heavenly Sermon in the Mount. Matthew. 5.
His hearers thus prepared to lend their ear,
A sermon he begins; wherein each line
Is full of weight; excites to love, and fear,
To knowledge him a Preacher most divine.
Great Doctors on that Theme, great Books may write,
My Muse brief Poems only must indite.
37.
A Simile.
(Like Be among the flowr's about she goes,
The Wax and Honey labors how to find:
Though venomed herb none in this Garden grows,
Yet Spiders are so spiteful by their kind,
The wholsom'st herb, and sweetest flower in fields,
Some poison to their cancred nature yields.)
38.
The eight Beatitu^es. ^t^h. 5.
He teaches first what sort of men be blessed,
The fruit to every blessing is annexed;
Eight in their ranks distinctly are expressed,
So shall you find them in the sacred Text;
And noting well the opposites to those,
Discern who are accursed, and see their woes.
39.
1. Poor in Spirit.
Blessed (in the fore-ranke) be the poor in Spirit,
He means not all that live in beggerie:
For rich as well as poor may heaven inherit,
So they be fraught with sp'rituall poverty.
Ecclus. 25. 2.
"A poor man may be proud, of God detested:
"Then bliss in all poor men is not invested.
40.
Revel. 3. 17. and 18. 7.
Some beggar-bare, soule-decking riches wanting,
Persuade themselves to have enough, and spare;
Such, of their sp'rituall wealth are ever vaunting,
These men had need provide them better ware:
Least being found their wedding garment lacking
They be thrust out of doors, and hunted packing.
41.
Revel. 2. 9.
Some others truly rich, yet make no show,
Their treasures lie close hidden in their heart:
These be the better sort, though they be few,
In this Beatitude they have their part.
Are poor in spirit blessed? heavens joys obtain?
Then sp'rituall proud, in hell must suffer pain.
42.
Such be those men (to make the matter cleerer,
Since contraries set one by the others side,
Do best appear when they are joined the nearer.)
Luke 18.
Who in their gifts and graces take a pride,
Extol themselves as men of much perfection,
And think all others owe to them subjection.
43.
2. Mourners. 2. Sam. 14. 2. etc
Next blessedness, to Mourners is allotted:
Not such as walk in black for friends departed,
Whose inner vest'ments oft-times are bespotted,
Their garments sad, themselves not heavy hearted.
Such kind of mourning, cannot make men blessed;
To take it so, were the holy Sense to wrest.
44.
True mourning, whereby blessedness is gained,
Has other ground, aims at a better end:
It must be from the heart, and not be seyned,
Arise from evil deeds, that God offend:
Psalm. 119. 53. 158.
Like his, who mourned and grieved at the heart,
When wicked men from Gods Law did depart.
45.
Psalm. 38. and 51. and full thoroughout his P^almes.
So when himself through frailty did amiss,
When Church, or Commonwealth endured affliction;
He prays and mournes, and rents his heart for this.
Herein he shared in this benediction.
For such occasions, after he had mourned,
His heaviness to mirth, and joy were turned.
46.
What shall we think (on the other side) of those,
That laugh and jest, when godly men are mourning?
It Is like in time their mirth may turn to woes,
When the other are at rest, these may be burning.
Luke 16.
The Glutton glutted late with wine, soon after
Begged hard, and mist to get one drop of water.
47.
3. Meek.
Now come ye meek, and humble men of heart,
You gentle harmless souls, by worldings scorned;
Among the Blessed you must have your part,
Your lowliness, shall highly be adorned.
Psalm. 37. 11.
The Earth to you is given, and to your seed,
Take that as part, and portion of your meed.
48.
With rest and peace your dwellings shall abound,
Your selves delighted in that happy state;
Fierce-firie-sprighted men God will confou^d,
That stirring race of people he does hate.
Among Bears, and Woolues, in some poor Hermits cell
I Would rather live, then near such Furies dwell.
49.
4. Hunger and thirst for Righteousness.
A man with thirst, and hunger hardly pressed,
His belly ever thinks his throat is cut:
He never sleeps, nor walks, nor sits in rest,
Till meat and drink be got, to fill his gut.
That being had, affoords him more content,
Then richest pearls from farthest Orient.
50.
Some thirst for gold, as others do for drink;
They hunger after wealth, no less then meat;
Such thirst and hunger, here you may not think
Are understood, nor belly-cheere to eat.
To hunger much and thirst for righteousness,
Is that for which Our Savior here does bless.
51.
"A blessed thirst indeed, and yet a feast;
"A holy hunger, 'mid great store of cates;
"Well is the man that sits here as a ghest,
"Blessed he that at this banquet drinks, and eats.
"This hunger, and this thirst, the Soul so feeds;
"The more's her appetite, the less needs.
52.
"Here, food and feeding both are sp'rituall,
"An earnest longing of the Soul and Heart,
"To do the works of Justice unto all,
"Lewd livers from their follies to convert;
"To help the poor oppressed, to their right;
"Defend the feeble from a man of might.
53.
Who thus-wise hunger, either thirst endures,
Shall have his fill of that for which he longs;
The Text each faithful man thereof assures,
And who so doubts of that, the Preacher wrongeth.
Such as to Justice have no appetite,
Their state's the worse, they get no blessing by it.
54.
5. Merciful.
The works of Mercy highly are commended,
And their reward (in sort) exceedes the rest:
For by the scope of Scripture it is intended
Without Gods mercy, no man can be blessed.
Romans 6. 23.
"Not merit, but his mercy freely given,
"To true belecuers, opes the gates of heaven.
55.
This sauing-mercy those alone shall find,
That cheerfully show mercy unto other;
Who can expect his father should be kind
To him, which deals unkindly with his brother?
Pro. 21. 13.
"The merciful like mercy shall obtain,
"Men mercilesle, shall look for it in vain.
56.
Matthew. 18. 23.
That graceless servant fully cleeres the case,
Who owed his Lord an endless mass of debt:
And having naught to pay, yet out of grace,
Upon request, at liberty was set.
He should have done, as he was done unto,
But soon forgot, what he was bound to do.
57.
He takes his fellow-seruant by the throat,
For such a pelting debt, as (to his own)
Deserved not to be valued at a groat:
This dealing to his master being known,
He bids the laylors take him to their charge,
To pay each farthing, ere he go at large.
58.
Among works of Mercy there be many more:
To visit sick, give aid to men distressed,
To clothe the naked, to relieve the poor,
For these, and such like works, we shall be blessed.
Matthew. 25. 41.
These duties, he that wilfully neglects,
A curse upon himself, and his reflects.
59.
6. Pure in heart. Pro. 30. 12.
Blessed be the Pure. Not such as seeming so,
Are full of spots, and filthiness within:
Not such as make of purity a show,
Math. 23. 25. Job. 4. 24.
Yet loosely live, lie wallowing in their sin.
It Is purity in heart that God desires,
Pro. 23. 26.
Our heart's the thing, that he of us requires.
60.
Job. 15. 14. Pro. 20. 9.
Can any man pronounce, My heart is clean,
Since heavens in his sight appear impure?
Psalm. 51. and Act. 15. 9.
Yes, those which by his blood have washed been,
Whom faith has purged. Such be cleansed sure:
2. Pet. 2. 22.
Who with the Sow, return not to the mire,
But to live cleanly afterward, desire.
61.
To these the promise in the Text is given,
To see their God, aye to behold his face,
To pass from darkness to the light of heaven,
Ps. 24. 4.
T'as^end Gods Hill, rest in his holy place.
Where shall th'impure, and cancr^d-hearted dwell?
I know no Mansion for them but in Hell.
62.
7. Peace makers. Beati Pacisici, so there at large.
Peacemakers likewise are pronounced blessed,
(Of these my Muse has sung with some delight)
The privilege they have, is not the least,
Gods children they be styled: it is their ^ight.
The Devils brats needs must those others be,
That wilfully break peace, and unity.
63.
8. P^rsecution for Christ's sake
Blessed be all those that Persecution suffer
For Righteousness and Truth, and for Ch^ists sake:
When men revile us, rail, all wrongs do offer,
And we with patience gladly do it take.
Here, heau'n's not barely promis't for reward,
But great increase of bliss in that regard.
64.
"All-suffring is not priuiledg'd with blessing,
"The pain makes not a Martyr, but the Cause:
1. Pet. 2. 20. and 4. 15.
In sundry places we be taught this lesson,
When malefactors suffer by the Laws:
Such suffering is not truly Persecution,
But rather termed Legal execution.
65.
Matthew. 10. 33.
On the other side, when we are put to trial,
Religion, Faith, and Conscience laid at stake:
If fear, or ought else force us to denial,
Our faith renounce, our Savior to forsake:
At latter day he will say to us, be gone;
Deny us, as we erst by him had done.
66.
The Philosoph^rs folly in the search of Fe^e, or blessedness.
Lo here, eight easy steps to blessed state,
Framed by a perfect Architect indeed:
Philosophers were ready fall to bate,
All searched to find the thing, but could not see it.
One said'twas this, another said'twas that,
Some lost themselves, and said they knew not what.
67.
A Comparison.
Like Fools shut up in a Dedalian maze,
A spacious one, with room enough to wander:
Well might they run, or walk, or stand and gaze,
No sooner find the way out, then could a Gander.
This laborinth constrayn'd them all to dote,
To speak their minds, and tell their tales by rote.
68.
Another Simile or Comparison.
What marvel, if a man deprived of sight,
Set in a Wilderness, or Forest wide,
Where thousands are of ways: yet but one right,
And all the rest diuerting him aside:
If he (I say) among thousands, miss that one,
Though he should walk there, till the day of doom?
69.
"Oureyes brook not the brightness of the Sun,
"Celestial things surmount our reasons reach:
" Beatitude by other means is won,
"Then such as Heathen-men were able teach.
The man from whom these lessons we received,
Was God and Man, and could not be deceau'd.
70.
Here for a Corollarie it would fit well,
Deuteronomy. 11. 29.
From Gerizim, Mount Ebal to ascend:
Of woes likewise in number eight, to tell,
Whereon our Lord was pleased some words to spend:
But first our Preachers footsteps must be trac't,
The rest pursu'de, as in the Text it is placed.
71.
The prime part of this heavenly Sermon ended,
Beatitudes to pious works assigned:
More precepts to his hearers he commended,
By which their lives and manners were refined.
The Scribes delighted of the Law to talk,
But made no conscience after it to walk.
72.
The duty of Preachers and Pastors.
The Apostles, and all Preachers of the Word.
He shows what manner men they ought to be:
Their lives should with their doctrine well accord,
In virtue they must shine; that men may see,
And seeing render glory to his Name,
Who gives them grace, and pow're to do the same.
73.
He came not to destroy, but to fulfill;
Not to obscure the Law, but to explain:
See before in Class. 4. St. (...). etc.
He taught them truly what it was to kill,
Break wedlock, take the name of God in vain.
Each other Precept rightly he expounded,
Which Scribes by their false glosses had confounded.
74.
As it was with Moses. Psalm. 78.
Two things true Doctrine strongly do approve,
Great miracles in which Gods hand appears:
Strange signs and wonders showed down from above,
Which tell the eyes, as words do to the ears.
Job. 6. 30.
The Jews required that he a sign would give,
To the end they might behold it, and believe.
75.
Of these they had so great, and so great store,
In Class. 3. all throughout.
(Whereof at large I have already spoken)
That Moses never gave their fathers more,
Yet they regarded neither sign, nor token.
They madly did (unto their own confusion)
The premises confessed, deny conclusion.
76.
Good life likewise is needful in a Preacher.
Matthew. 7.
For, just as by the fruit, the tree is known,
So, wicked life not only shames the Teacher,
But makes the seed to wither, as it is sown.
The good tree seldom fails to bear good fruit,
So life and doctrine must together suit.
77.
Moses that man of God, a type of Christ,
By whom the Law was given to the Jew:
In doctrines and in deeds came to him nigh'st,
The one were holy, and the other true.
He was a man, and had his imperfection,
Some times he faulted, wanting Gods direction.
78.
But he that was both God and Man together,
His life and doctrine each approved the other:
He erred not, nor faulted once in either,
He lived ever spotless from his Mother.
His foes that neer'st into his life did pry,
One blemish in his actions could not spy.
79.
Some hole they sought to find out in his coat,
Matthew. 22. 15.
Laid wait (at least) to catch him in his talk,
They would have seen in's eye the smallest moat:
He so uprightly did both speak, and walk,
Verse. 22.
As what they plotted for his hurt and shame,
Redounded more to glorify his Name.
80.
Matthew. 11. 18.
From sland'rous tongues he stood not wholly free,
(His Harbinger and he were in one case)
Since he sometimes frequented company,
At feasts and friendly meetings had a place:
They say he eats and drinks more then measure,
Among such men as lived in sinful pleasure.
81.
If he whose life was mere integrity,
A pattern of perfection to all others:
In whom was neither guile, nor flattery,
Did good to all, as they had been his brothers:
Despiced riches, honors, worldly pleasure,
Sought after no thing else but heavenly treasure.
82.
If he could not escape enuenom'd tongues,
Nor find protection in his innocence:
But was content to bear, and put up wrongs,
And take his patience for his best defense:
Then let all those who glory in his Name,
Learn what he did, and strive to do the same.
83.
That Harbinger of his, in life austere,
Whose food and diet were both mean and slender:
A shameless false report of him they rear,
(The conscience of back-biters is not tender.)
That sure he was a wicked man, and evil,
A Saint in show, but in wardly a Devil.
84.
Proud Pharisees, chief Rulers, captious Scribes,
Were they that still oppugn'd, and wronged our Lord:
The multitude, most part, of all the Tribes
Gave witness on his side, with one accord:
Job. 7. 48 and 10 21. 41. Mar. 7. 37.
Those damned his deeds, as if they came from hell:
These truly said, he had done all things well.
85.
Revenge forbidden.
For trespasses, for injuries and wrongs,
By Moses Law men might require amends:
Luke 18. 9. and Romans 13.
(What right to God and Magistrates belongs,
All that the Gospel charily defends.)
Matthew. 5. 38.
Yet Christ says, Suffer wrong, and seek no righting,
Resist not, neither turn thy cheek from smiting.
86.
To love our Enemies.
The Scribes supposed, so they their knowne-friends loved,
Of enemies there needed no respect.
Our charity by better marks is proved,
On friends and foes alike, it must reflect.
God makes his Sun on good and bad to shine,
His love extends to all: and so must thine.
87.
Luke 10.
The sample of that good Samaritan,
Shows us the way in which we ought to go:
As he was kind unto the wounded man,
Whom he never saw before, nor did him know:
So all that need our help, for Christ his sake,
As our good friends and neighbors we must take.
88.
Alms. Matthew. 6. 1.
Alms deeds are works in which God takes delight,
Rewards them frank, and freely of his grace:
They must be closely done, as in his sight,
He Will quit them openly, before all men's face:
But hypocrites that vainly seek for praise,
Have none at all with God, so Scripture says.
89.
1. Sam. 16. 7.
He sees the heart, and thoughts that lie most hidden,
The Intent, even as the act when it is done:
If we conceive a thing that is forbidden,
It Is clear to him, as is to us the Sun.
Marc. 12. 41. 2. Cor. 9. 6.
Be It much or little, let thy Alms be frank,
Done with a cheerful heart, thou shall have thank.
90.
Prayer. Matthew. 7. 7.
Who lives on earth, that needs not help from heaven?
Who, knowing he may have it for the asking,
Will not pursue the ready way, and eeuen,
But gad about, as in dark night, a-masking?
The way to have our wants supply'de with store,
Is zealous hearty prayer, and no more.
91.
Several parables expressing the efficacy of feruen^ prayer. Luke 18.
The wicked Judge, whom that poor widow hanted,
Though he of God, ne man had no regard:
By importunity her suit he granted.
Sure, of the righteous Judge we shall be heard,
If daily to him we devoutly cry,
What e're we seek that is fit, he will not deny.
92.
What man, though closely couched in his bed,
His doors fast shut, and he laid down to rest:
Would not rise up to give his friend some bread,
If with long suit, and praying he be pressed?
Though law of friendship could not force him to it,
Yet crying importunely makes him do it.
93.
Is any carnal father so unkind,
Whose son begs of him bread, or else a fish:
That can conceive such rancour in his mind,
As lay a stone, or Serpent in his dish?
If Mortals on their sons, good gifts bestow,
Much more will God, from whom all good does flow.
94.
^am. 1. 6.
"There Is nothing of more force then fervent prayer,
"Proceeding from the heart with true devotion:
"'It Is not the idle beating of the air,
"Much less is it hypocritical lip-motion.
"On faith it must be grounded: fear and doubt
"In prayer, ever makes us go without.
95.
Iam. 5. 15.
Eliah had (like us) infirmities,
Yet so much by his prayer he obtayn'd,
As to command the Meteors, and Skies,
That in three years and half it never rayn'd.
^. King. 18.
And when he prayed on the other side again,
Thick clouds congealing, powered down great rain.
96.
In sacred Writ, examples there bestore,
Of Patriarchs, of Prophets, and of Kings,
Of holy men and women many more,
Whose prayers brought to pass most wondrous things.
Ioh. 14. 13.
What need more? all that is asked in his Name,
We have a promise to receive the same.
97.
A Simile.
What greater savor can a subject crave,
Whose Sovereign of his bounty gives him leave,
Into his presence free access to have,
His just requests assured to receive?
With God (by prayer) this is each man's case,
To talk as with a friend, even face to face.
98.
In private prayer, secrecy does best
'Twixt God and thee, thy closet door made fast:
The Pharisees fond praying was a jest,
By mumbling in the streets where all men past.
That Pharisaicall fashion, though worne-out,
Some (yet) affect it as they walk about.
99.
Church-seruices where Christians use assembling,
With uniform consent of heart and voice
To pray, and praise their God: that is no dissembling,
Matthew. 18. 19.
For of such service God himself makes choice.
There many members, one whole body make,
It Is one request wherein they all partake.
100.
Much babbling, vain and idle repetitions,
Was used by Heathen people when they prayed:
Sooner they hoped to speed in their Petitions,
As if God knew no more, but what they said:
Whereas ere we begin, he knows our needs,
And seruent faithful prayer, ever speedes.
101.
Luke 11. 1.
The Apostles (yet) not growne-vp to perfection,
Finding how needful thing it was to pray:
Not trusting wholly to their own election,
Besought their Lord to set them in the way.
It seems he did their motion well allow,
And instantly began to teach them how.
102.
He needs not greatly on the matter pawse,
Whose learning is not got by institution:
Christ was not bound to humane rules and laws,
Gal. 1. 11.
Who gave perfection to others by infusion:
A perfect form of prayer then he gave them,
With some instructions else, how to behave them.
103.
The Lords prayer. And first a preamble, or procm. Our father.
What sweeter comfort to a man that prays,
Then that he makes his suit to his own father?
The father seldom childrens suites denayes,
Hence full assurance every man may gather,
All that he justly seeks to obtain:
And not present his Orisons in vain.
104.
With reverent respect and filial fear,
(Such as good children owe unto their father)
Men must prepare themselves ere they come near,
For that is the way to make them speed the rather.
Not seruilely affraide, as slaves are wont,
When sharp correcting masters them confront.
105.
Which art in heaven.
When to an earthly Sire we make petition,
Had he the will to grant what we require:
He may perhaps be of such weak condition,
As fails in power, though not in his desire.
This father's Lord of heaven, sea and land,
These are (and all in them) at his command.
106.
As he is powerful, so he is all as ready
Psalm 50. 15. and 145. 18. and Jer. 29. 11.
To hear, and grant: his promise thereto ties him.
He in his promise evermore is steadie,
Who this denies blasphemously belyes him.
Thus having will and might, how can it fail,
But in our lawful suites we must prevail?
107.
Since he to whom our prayers we present,
Above in th'heauens has his habitation:
Our chiefest scope therefore, and may ne intent,
Must be when we prefer our Supplication,
To aim at heavenly objects, and celestial,
Not fix our thoughts on things base, and terrestrial.
108.
1. Petition. Hallowed be thy Name.
First we desire, Gods Name be sanctifi'de.
By worship, and religious invocation;
That nothing but himself be Deifi'de,
His Truth be spread abroad to every Nation:
His Name not used in charms, or coniuration.
Nor in vain oaths: all these cause profanation.
109.
So men professing God, and his Religion,
If they live loosely in licenciousnesse,
Make their profession fall into dirision,
And scandalize that Faith which they profess:
2. Sam. 12 14. Romans 2. 29.
This is Unhallowing of Gods holy Name,
Breeds the Professors, and their Doctrine, shame.
110.
2. Petition. Thy Kingdom come.
As thou art Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
So we entreat thee, let thy Kingdom come:
As thou have made, and gouernest all things,
So those whom thou have chosen, call them home:
Enlarge thy Kingdom by thy powerful Word,
That Nations all, may knowledge thee their Lord.
111.
Who so against thy Church lifts up his hand,
Who seeks to stop the passage of thy Word,
Who does thy Gospel impiously withstand,
Cut them off with thy sharp two-edged sword:
That all the world may knowledge thee their King,
Es. 49. 18.
Their Sons and Daughters to thy Temple bring.
112.
The Kingdom of the Dragon, and the Beast
Beat down, and bring them shortly to confusion:
Reu^. 19. 17.
Let fowls of the air be called to the feast,
Lord bring this battle to a short conclusion.
Let Michael and his Angels overcome,
That we may say (not pray) thy Kingdome's come.
113.
3. Petition. Thy will ^edone in earth, as it is in heaven, Matthew. 6. 39.
The Son of God, though he were sinlesse man,
Yet to his Fathers will subjects his own:
Then we which how'rly sin, and naught else can,
Should by our daily prayers make it known;
That we desire his holy Will be done,
And not our wills, which wilful courses run.
114.
All that thou, in thy wisdom have decreed,
Which (vnreucal'd) is known to thee alone:
Accomplish it (if it be thy Will) with speed,
Let Men, and Angels, all agree in one:
That like as they above, so we below,
May strive thy Will to do, as well as know.
115.
An idle cavil avoided.
These three requests to God himself pertain,
His glory and his honor they concern.
Some may object, we pray for them in vain,
Since of this lesson no man is to learn,
Psalm. 99.
That what God will, shall be: that he will be King,
Though all the Earth storm, and oppose the thing.
116.
A Simile.
Is not a father pleased with his son,
For begging that, which he intends to give him?
Job. 17.
I read that so 'twas by our Savior done,
So here he teaches, if we will believe him.
2 S^m 7. 25. 1. King. 8. 25.
That God would keep his promise, good men prayed:
Who of non-keeping it, were not affrayd.
117.
4. Petition. Give us this day, our daily bread. Matthew. 6. 25. no^e the place.
Next for such things whereof we stand in need,
This heavenly Doctor teaches us to pray:
He means by Bread (whereon we daily feed)
Meat, drink, and clothes the body to array.
For as the bellies food we cannot lack:
No more some needful clothing to the back.
118.
Genesis 3. 17. to 21.
When Adam had his doom, and the earth accursed,
That fruitless Thorns, and Th^stles it should yield:
God for his needful food takes order first,
Commands him eat the herbs that grow in field.
Then brought him clothes, for him and for his wife,
As things thought needful, to sustain their life.
119.
We may not pray for superfluity,
Nor beg abundance to maintain excess:
But only to supply necessity,
Our daily wants, we daily must expr^sse.
To pray at some few times, for all the year,
That Is not the way, prescribed to us here.
120.
No man, but needs something every day,
The greatest Monarch reigning on the earth:
This may enforce us daily thus to pray,
At least though w^ feel neither want nor dearth,
We pray not barely for our selves alone,
But for our fellow members all in one.
121.
5. Petition. Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
Two things in brief are learned by this Petition
That all have need for pardon to entreat:
And since the suit is made upon condition,
The suitor here by no means must forget,
To plead condition really performed,
Else out of Count his suit and he are turned.
122.
This point more fully afterward is cleared,
In playner terms expressed for our learning:
Gods sight may not with counter^eit be blear'd,
And the efore is subioyn'd a gentle warning,
That none shall have of God his debts forgiven,
Till first with his own debtors he make even.
123.
Aduize in what a desperate case he stands,
A Simile, or Parable.
Who begging pardon from a mighty King,
For endless debts on forfeiture of bands:
The King seeks naught in lieu, but one small thing,
Which if not granted freely without faultring,
He takes his whole d^bt, to the utmost sarthing.
124.
6. Petition. Lead us not into temptation.
This last Petition more then all the rest,
Requires our care to understand it right:
Temptations to distinguish first it is best,
Thereby to give this place the better light.
For in that word there lies a double sense,
Which may distract our weak intelligence.
125.
Iam. 1. 2.
One parcel of the Text Canonical,
Begins with a special consolation,
Exciting to rejoice when as we fall,
Into a Christian trial, or temptation:
A trial of true Faith, whence patience springs,
Which all her works unto perfection brings.
126.
Such as be tempted thus, he calls them blessed,
If constancy accompany their trial:
The end of all their labors shall be rest,
A crown of lasting life without denial.
Revel. 2. 10.
Thus God has promis't those that do him love,
So they endure when gently he does prove.
127.
Such trial or temptation as this,
Proceeds from God, and for his chosens good:
1. Cor. 4. 17. and 10. 13.
To whom it breeds a great increase of bliss,
And so by constant Christians understood.
Heb. 11.
This tempting is a token of Gods favor,
The faithful ever found therein sweet savor.
128.
But men are tempted often by inbred lust,
By fleshly motions pricking them to sin:
This tempting's not of God, for he is just,
And to such By-pathes never leads us in.
The Fiend observes these sparks of fire beginning,
Then blows the coals, and sets us on to sinning.
129.
When thus through humane frailty we be tempted,
Unable of our selves to make resistance:
By thy good grace (Lord) let us be exempted,
Then grant to us thy holy Sprites assistance:
Though strong temptations happen to distress us:
Yet, of thy mercy, let them not oppress us.
130.
Lord into this temptation lead us not,
Assist us with thy aid, and heavenly grace:
^. Cor. 3. 5.
Within us there is no power, the smallest jot
To help our selves: Oh hide not thou thy face,
Draw not thy mercy from us in our need,
Least Sin and Satan in their purpose speed.
131.
But deliver us from evil.
But free us from all kind of sin and evil,
Which hinders us from cleaving unto thee:
Defend us from our chiefest foe the Devil,
Who enuies most at man's felicity:
That rid from these, we may intend the rather,
To serve and wait on thee our heavenly Father.
132.
The Epilogue. For ^hine us the Kingdom, the power and the gl^rie for ever.
We knowledge thee a King by lawful right,
In power and glory all Kings far transcending:
For they be all as nothing in thy sight,
Their Kingdoms fail, thine never shall have ending.
Thus end our prayers, with thy praise: and then,
Amen.
To show our hearts consent, we say Amen.
133.
Here Is that briefe-worded, richly furnished prayer,
All heavenly and divine: (as is the Maker)
W^ll does the Church observe this custom fair,
(Though some unto ward sons therein forsake her)
To beg all boones of God in Jesus Name,
And shut up all our prayers with this same.
134.
Fasting.
The perfect form of prayer fully ended,
Fit rules for Christian fasting he prescribes:
Displayes abuses first to be amended.
Hypocrisy, with Pharisees and Scribes
A common fault, he warns his to shun,
Then in few words sets down what is to be done.
135.
Scribes and Pharisees.
Those Hypocrites, men-pleasers, fasting often,
Deuiz'd how they might make it so appear:
The only thing which by their fasts they sought,
Was praise of men. (Their guerdon they had here.)
Luke 18. 12.
So fasted that proud Pharisaike man,
Who lifts himself above the Publican.
136.
Matthew. 6. 1. 5.
He teaches us to fast, and not be seen,
(As he had done in prayer, and almes-deed.)
Anoint thy head, thy countenance keep clean,
That in thy face, thy fasting be not read:
Then God which sees thy works in secrecy.
Will of his grace reward thee openly.
137.
Here fast and pray are fitly knit together,
This simply in it self of greatest worth:
That secondarily, as tending hither;
For, zeal to pray, by fasting is set forth.
"The soul then talks to God at greatest pleasure,
"When as the body's fed in sparing measure.
138.
Some kind of fasts not om^endable.
Yet all men's fasts are not to be commended.
Some pinch their panch, thereby to spare their purse:
These Euclioes are to be reprehended.
Some fast, to eat the faster: those are worse.
They Will fast a day or two before a feast,
Then eat as much as two or three at least.
139.
All times likewise for fasting are not fit.
(Though praying no day falls out of season.)
Matthew. 9. 14.
The day wherein ones marriage bands be knit,
May free that man from fasting, with good reason.
To fast that day, were peevishness, and folly,
A trick to prove one sullen, more then holy.
140.
"Fasts fitly walk with crosses, and affliction.
"When Church or Commonweal are in distress.
"The Prince, or Pastors lay an interdiction
"From sustenance, not barely from excess:
"And to this Act is joined the proper end,
"That all to pray, the better may intend.
141.
If one would cite Examples in this kind,
The sacred Books abound with so great store:
That entering in, 'twere hard an end to find,
The Church observes it now, and heretofore,
Though not so rightly as was done at first:
Compare all times, the latest still g^ow worst.
142.
Ecc^us. 34. 26.
To fast, and yet run on in doing ill,
This fasting profits not the man that prays:
Zech. 7. 9.
But works of mercy who so does fulfill,
Nor from the perfect rule of Justice strayeth,
The widow, poor and fatherless defends;
Such fast, his prayers up to heaven sends.
143.
Of sundry fasts the Scripture makes mention,
Watching. Vigilate and Orate. watching and fasting, are in themselves
indifferent.
All commonly accompanied with prayer:
So Watching serves for the same intention,
Both, in themselves, things me^ ^ndiff'rent are.
Fasts, watchings, praying joy (...) with devotion,
Make way to heaven with a ni^e motion.
144.
To fastings, some exceptions have been taken:
The like of watchings may be verifi'de.
By watchful thieves a purse oft-times is taken,
And many other mischieues done beside.
Pro. 23. 29. and 7.
The letchers, and wine-bibbers watch whole nights,
With more excess to follow vain delights.
145.
Then Watching (simply) is no pious deed.
The watchings which our Lord so often commends.
Matthew. 24. 42. and 25. 1. and Luke 21. 34.
In lively samples left for us to read,
They serve, and were laid down to better ends:
To rowze us from our gross security,
And cause us on his coming cast our eye.
146.
His coming will be sudden like a thief,
In dead of night, when men do least suspect.
This apprehended with a firm belief,
We would no opportunity neglect,
For fear he come unawares, and find us sleeping,
Then cast us to the pit of endless weeping.
147.
So were those foolish Virgins taken napping,
Unfurnished when the Bridegroom entered in:
The gate once shut, in vain they fell to rapping,
When 'twas too late, then they to cry begin.
For lack of watching well, they were excluded,
And ever after, all their hopes deluded.
148.
Riches perilous to their possessors.
Among much riches, many snares are found.
First, those that do possess them by descent,
In pride, excess, and riot often abound,
Then lauishly too frequently they are spent.
And such as first acquire them (for most part)
Use violence, or some deceitful art.
149.
The parable of the vn^u^ Steward. Luke ^6.
The wicked Steward, poor (it seems) by birth,
Lived bravely on the substance of his Master,
His time he spent in jollitie and mirth:
Found-out at last to be a lavish waster,
His subtle wit suggest to him a shift,
To help at need: though 'twere a knauish drift.
150.
The parable of the rich Gl^^on.
The great rich Glutton wallowing in his wealth,
Costly array, and in his sumptuous fare:
He came not to them (that I read) by stealth,
Yet as he took them, they became a snare,
To train his soul and body into Hell,
Because he had no care to use them well.
151.
'Twas not enough for him to fill his belly
With food for health, his hunger to expel:
But dainties must be had, as pamp'ring gelly.
And pouring in, till he begun to swell.
Wines of all sorts, full Bolls of sugared Sacco.
If all this within the parenthesis seem unfit to any man; he may grant so much
to poetike liberty: yet leave it out if he lift, the sense not interrupted.
(Yet durst I swear he never drank Tobacco,
152.
That smoke at those times was not in request,
But for this doting age reserved in store:
Now it is an after-course at every feast,
To some it may do good, but hurt to more.
Some fellowship is in it: for few or none,
Without a fellow drink of it alone.
153.
The Glutton wanted that good property,
Which might have made his other faults the less.
But he had rather see the poor man die,
Then feed him with the scraps of his excess.
They be no niggards of their costly smoke,
It flies so thick, that some are ready choke.)
154.
Worldly cares prohibited: by similitudes, or comparisons.
To hoard-vp treasures in a Boothe, or Tent,
And in a desert, where is no long abiding:
Where the house by Thieves may easily be ^ent,
The owner shortly must be there-hence riding:
Be wrayes him for a mad man, or a fool,
In Bedlam well he may be put to school.
155.
To hide much stuff, or furniture, or cloth.
Lay Brass, or Tin, or Iron in the dust:
Where those will soon be eaten up with moth,
These half consumed with canker, and with rust:
Seems not the part of him that is well aduiz'd,
But of such one, whom folly has surpised.
156.
L^k. 12. 13.
Remember him whose grounds brought such increase,
His houses would not serve to hold his store:
Then to his soul he vainly promis't peace,
And built his Barnes far bigger then before:
But in that very right grim Death arrests him,
Of goods, and lands, and life at once deuests him,
157.
Many such be that hunt for worldly wealth,
Make it the chiefest comfort of their life:
Which shortly they must leave, or lose by stealth,
By toyling gotten, kept with stir and strife.
True treasure, worth the getting, they despise:
Some mist of darkness sur^y dims their eyes.
158.
"The Storehouse of true treasures all indeed,
"Is that where blessed Angels keep the keys:
"Where th'owner shall be sure to serve his need,
"Where safely it is laid up out of thieves ways:
Luke 12. 34.
"Our treasure lying there, our heart will thither!
"For that, and this, go commonly together.
159.
Make choice, you worldly men, which likes you best,
Of Masters twain, to serve or the one, or the other:
You must resolve, and thereon set your rest,
To leave the one, and cleave unto the other:
For God with Mammon will not take a part,
He will have all, or no piece of your heart.
160.
Meat, drink, and clothes for which we daily pray
By name of Bread (as formerly is told)
Acquire, yet not with too much carke we may;
On Providence we chiefly must lay hold.
For he that gives us life, will give us meat,
And clothes to keep our corpse from cold, and heat.
161.
An Argument from birds, and flowers.
The birds sow not, nor reap, nor keep in store,
Yet God prouides them food to serve their trunes:
If so for them, for you he will do much more.
The grass, which quickly in the Oven burns,
Is clothed so gaily while in field it grows,
That Solomon in state no brauer shows.
162.
And why should men, whom God for sons does take,
Misdoubt the goodness of so kind a father?
Why should they fear least he will them forsake,
And not rest full assured of his favor:
Since herbs, and birds he in their kinds preserves,
Both which to us for use, and pleasure serves?
163.
Querite primum regnum Dei.
The way to heaven first we must seek out,
Desire and love the things conducing thither:
For earthly things then need we make no doubt,
They shall be heaped on us all together.
But Heathens only scrape for things below,
Celestials they have no lust to know.
164.
O heavenly Preacher! Sermon most divine!
Like Sermon never preached was before:
(...). 10. 23.
Bl^st were your ears, and blessed were your eyne,
That heard and saw these things, and many more.
Great Kings and Prophets wished to see, and hear them,
Yet only by faiths eyes, could they come near them.
165.
L^ke b^cke at S^an. 38.
The blessings on Mount Gerizim all ended,
From Ebal woes and curses are denounced,
Against some men that would not be amended
With wondrous works, nor heavenly words pronounced.
Eight woeful Woes he threatens them withal,
Sins crying for them, on their heads to fall.
166.
1. Woe. Matthew. 23.
Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites:
Most wilfully ye shut the gate of heaven,
Your selves will not come in, when Christ inuites:
And (like mad men, of reason clean bereauen,
To fill up full the measure of your sin)
You hinder others that would enter in.
167.
Act. 4. 18. and ^. 40. (...). 5. 43.
Here Is Stubbornness and Malice met together,
Two damned sins, too common amongst that crew:
So not with Christ, they run they care not whither,
The proverb in these men was proved true:
A dog i'th'manger, though he will eat no hay,
The Ox that would, by snarling drives away.
168.
^. Woe.
Woe to you rau'nous greedy Cormorants,
The Widows houses closely ye devour:
Among such simple folk ye have your hants,
Feed on the fat, and eat the finest flower:
Pretending prayers for their souls salvation,
The greater therefore shall be your damnation.
169.
3. Woe. Description of a Jewish pro^elite.
Woe to you Scribes that compass Sea and Land,
To win a Heathen man from Gentilisme:
And having brought him ready to your hand,
Instructed newly in your Iudaisme;
You make him wiser then he was before,
As wicked as your selves, and twofold more.
170.
Some rags he keeps of old Idolatries,
Wherein by heathenish teachers he was trayn'd.
These, patching with your Jewish ceremonies,
A sweet religion (doubtless) he has gayn'd.
With one sure knot, him to your selves ye tie,
To cross and hinder Christianity.
171.
Here Is the description of a Proselite,
The new disciple of those boasting Jews:
A work of theirs proceeding most of spite,
Christ's Doctrine to oppose, his Name abuse.
Woe to such damned Doctors, and their Scholars,
With all that in like practice are their followers,
172.
4. Woe.
Woe to you Scribes, ye foolish guides, and blind,
Who teach a superstitious kind of swearing:
Instilling vain precepts into the mind,
Which rightly pondred, are not with the hearing.
You would be thought deep Doctors of the Law,
Whereas your Doctrine is not worth a straw.
173.
A man (say you) that by the Temple swears,
Or by the Altar: it is no sin at all:
If by the Gold, or Gift: his sin he bears.
A doctrine fond, and hypocritical.
The Temple (sooles) its gold does sanctify,
So does the Altar, gifts that on it lie.
174.
The Temple then, is greater then its gold;
The Altar, better then the gift thereon:
Who swears by either of them both (be bold)
He swears by all therein, and thereupon.
As he that swears by Heaven, Gods high Throne,
By him swears also, not by it alone.
175.
5. Woe.
Woe to you Scribes, full of hypocrisy;
(Which in this one point, grossly does appear)
You strive for things that of small moment be,
As tithing Cummin, Mint, and such like gear:
For matters of great weight, you take no thought,
If to your profit they avail not ought.
176.
You labor not in judgment to do right,
You pity not the poor in his distress,
Faith is not much esteemed in your sight:
You should have joined these greater, with those less.
But hypocrites in trifles place devotion,
For breach of those they stir up foul commotion.
177.
6. Woe.
What greater mark of gross hypocrisy,
Then washing outsides of the cups, and platters,
Though filled within with cates for luxury;
Drinks for excess, and such like filthy matters?
Blind Pharisee, first make the inside clean,
The outside after that cleanse thou again.
178.
Pharisaicall traditions. M^. 7.
These hypocrites, all bent on superstitions,
With Scripture-learning not well satisfi'de,
Join thereunto an heap of their traditions,
To walk by Moses, and the Prophets side:
That helps to further virtue they might seem,
And taken so, be held in more esteem.
179.
1. King. 13.
As that Seducer strictly charged his sons,
(Seeming to do the man of God a favor)
In one selfe-tombe by him to lay his bones,
And made a show of other kind behau'our:
Ios. de Antiq. lud. lib. 8. cap. ^.
It was (in truth) to do himself a grace,
As one great Scholar notes upon this place.
180.
Just so in following ages it fell out.
2. King. 23. ^5.
When other graves were ript-vp, and defaced,
The bones on that base Altar burnt about:
That tomb wherein the man of God was placed,
Remayn'd untouched: the bones in it, were spared:
Therein the bad man, with the good one shared.
181.
The Pharisees, our Lords Disciples blame,
Traditions of the Elders not respecting:
Not washing hands when to their meals they came,
And some like observations else neglecting.
But he reproues such holy-seeming rites,
And to Gods service seeks their hearts, and sprites.
182.
These outward things do not a man defile,
What enters by the mouth, and serves for meat,
It stays within the belly but a while:
Ill thoughts that hold within the heart their seat,
From whence proceed theft, murders, blasphemies,
These stayne men both in souls, and in their bodies.
183.
7. Woe.
Woe to all such as righteous seem in show,
Like Tombs set forth in honor of the dead:
Bedeckt with gilded Puppets on a row,
With wreathes and crownets to adorn the head,
When all within is filth, and rotton bones.
False hypocrites, all of you are such ones.
184.
3. Woe.
Woe to you, for your close dissimulation,
Your false pretense of zeal, and piety:
Your shadow of religious veneration
To Prophets, and their blessed memory,
By building of their tombs, and monuments,
And trimming them with curious ornaments.
185.
For murdering them, your fathers you betwit;
These you condemn, your selves you justify:
You say, you would not have partak't in it.
Yes sure, you pass them in impiety.
You brood of Vipers, think upon it well:
How mean you to escape the pit of hell?
186.
As did your fathers, so and worse, will ye.
I Will send you Prophets for your admonition:
You Will scourge and kill them, 'cause they come from me:
That all the righteous blood (by just permission)
Which from the first, unto the last is shead,
May all together light upon your head.
187.
Jerusalem, that City so renowned,
The Glory (once) of all the world beside:
Shall shortly be laid even with the ground,
All ruinated for her childrens pride:
For killing Prophets, stoning of the just,
She shall lie waste, and scatt'red in the dust.
188.
Her children under couen of my wing,
As Henns do Chicken, so should I have hid:
Yet they would not, but prowdly scorned the thing,
At length they will repent for what they did.
The time shall come (though long) when they will say,
(Turned once to me) Blessed be that happy day.
189.
A happy day, and joyful to behold,
To all that love the coming of our Lord:
Ioh. 10. Es. 40. 11. and 27. 12.
When both the flocks shall fall into one fold,
As sacred Writers often do record.
When that Great Shepherd, owner of the sheep,
From Woolues and Hirelings safely shall them keep.
190.
It Is time this Shepherd set his helping hand,
To seek such wandering sheep as go astray:
Psalm. 23. 4,
To rule and shield them with his shepherds wand,
(For now to rau'nous beasts they be a prey.)
To cure some griefs where with they are so oppressed,
That among themselves they cannot live in rest.
191.
A short digression of the nature of sheep: serving for instruction.
Above all beasts, and every brutish creature,
The Sheep for sundry reasons I commend:
Most harmless, and most gentle is his nature,
The pasture where he feeds, he most does mend:
He yields us food, and clothes for back, and bed,
Great profit we have by him live, and dead.
192.
A simple beast, none else he does offend,
Not Fox-like crafty, others to deceive,
Himself he knows not well how to defend:
If to himself, the shepherd do him leave,
He keeps no Bounds, but strayes on every Hill,
Where Woolfe or Curre that meets him, may him kill.
193.
And albeit he be by kind a Ranger,
Yet will he listen to his Keepers call:
But not endure the whistle of a stranger,
Regard his voice, or follow him at all.
Poor sheep! let none account it for a shame,
To be euti^led by so good a name.
194.
Then with deep judgment does the holy Writ,
Compare Gods people to a flock of sheep:
Th'Analogie betwixt them is so fit,
A man that is not drowsy, or a-sleepe,
May read and aptly make an application,
Without a gloss to help th'interpretation.
195.
An observation touching the biting of mad sheep. No c.
It Is strange in this most gentle natured beast,
If one of them do happen to fall mad,
(As often it does) that runs, and bites the rest,
No cure for such their biting can be had.
There Is help for dogs that bite, when they be wood:
For mad sheep biting, I know nothing good.
196.
Some madness lately Christ his sheep has seaz'd,
The One hunts and bites the other in such rage,
Their fury by no means can be appeaz'd,
The Pastors fail their fury to assuage.
A heavy case: when Woolues are cloyed with biting,
To see one sheep, against another fighting.
197.
A prayer to the great Shepherd.
Great Shepherd, it is thy flock which thou have bought,
With things of higher price then purest gold:
Forsake them not, nor sell thou them for naught,
But fetch them home, and bring them to thy fold:
Ordain some curing salve, or wholesome drench,
The fell infection of their blood to stanch.
198.
This wooluish humor out of them expel,
In such whose nature is not wholly tainted;
That sheep, like sheep in meekness may excel,
And be no more with rau'nous beasts acquainted:
That all which to thy Fold do appertain,
May come to thee, and make one flock of twain.
199.
The Jews.
Some sheep thou have, yet of another leare,
That long have strayd, and will come home in fine:
Then have been often called, but would not hear,
Thou only know which of them be thine.
Me thinks I see one let of their conversion,
Yet on no Man, or State I cast aspersion.
200.
An observation touching the Jews and their slow conversion.
De facto, or De jure I may err,
Feign would I learn, take sober satisfaction.
Somewhere I read, and some I hear auerre,
As if by rigor, and extreme coaction,
They were kept back from Christianity,
If so, the greater is their misery.
201.
Into the Church they cannot get admission,
Nor have lauacre in the sacred Font,
But only upon this extreme condition,
Their wealth, and liuelihood must lie upon it:
Their goods all to a groat, they must forsake
What others please to give, that only take.
202.
The case seems hard. (I think it is theirs aright.)
Though all (compared to Christ) should be neglected,
Life, lands, and goods we must esteem but light,
If keeping them, our faith must be rejected.
But here (for my part) I see no such cause,
If 'twere not for the rigor of the Laws.
203.
A woe was laid upon their p^decessors,
S^an. 165.
(The first of eight, whereon I late insisted)
For hind'ring some that would have been possessors
Of heaven; but that their entrance they resisted.
Their children now find some such opposition,
That stops into the Church their free admission.
204.
In this my speech, I would not be mistaken,
The case (I know) a difference does admit.
The Scribes would have Christ way to be forsaken,
And hindered men from entering into it.
All are invited now into the way:
Yet tell me, why they should so dearly pay?
205.
The Gentiles are not fully yet come in,
Romans 11.
Until that time, their Calling is deferred:
They Will come apace, when once they do begin,
And love the Truth at length, that long have erred*
All signs but that, are come to pass (some say)
Which before-runners of the latter day.
206.
More lessons yet recorded do I find,
Which our great Doctor to his Scholars taught.
Rash judgment forbidden. Matthew. 7.
Rash judgment is a weakness of the mind,
The practice of it, altogether naught.
"Pry not into the faults of other men,
"Least others do the like to thee again.
207.
"A beam (most times) abides in his own,
"That soonest spies a moat in's neighbors eye:
"The faults behind the back, are hardly known,
"In that end of the Wallet ours doelye.
Each man first mend himself ere he begin,
To check another rashly for his sin.
208.
Holy things not to be given to dogs.
Things that be holy, give not unto Dogs,
To men profane, that be of currish kind:
Nor cast your rich pearls unto filthy Hogs,
To men in shape, but of a beastly mind.
You get no thanks of them, nor will they mend:
But scorn your Lore, and rail at you in the end.
209.
The narrow gate, and the broad way.
Two ways there be, wherein men use to walk,
Two places whereunto those ways do lead:
The one is narrow, rough, and hard to stalk,
Facilis discensus ^uerni.
The other broad, fair, smooth, and soft to tread.
Few walk in that, yet tends it unto bliss:
The later leads to hell, most run in this.
210.
Good fellows have a byword in their lips,
The more, the merrier.
Go where ye will, to Heaven or to Hell,
Still company is good. The Devil skips
At such fine jests: the saying likes him well.
The fewer the better cheer.
I rather hold, as I have learned here,
Where fewest be, there is the better cheer.
211.
Beware of false prophets.
He warns us, false prophets to beware,
A sort of men not lightly to be known:
Some notes he gives to find out who they are,
They take a shape upon them, not their own.
By outward show, you think them to be sheep,
Their wooluish nature inwardly they keep.
212.
As fruit declares the virtue of the tree,
Whereby men judge it either good, or bad:
So by their works, these men prove what they be,
A better proof then that, cannot be had.
Their fruits are wicked doctrines, vices store,
Of teachers such as these, were never more.
213.
A parable of the house built upon the sand.
Like one that builds his house upon the sand,
When rain, and storms, and tempests on it beat;
Foundation being weak, it cannot stand,
But down it falls, the fall thereof is great:
So's he that hears the Word, and thereof talks,
Yet as the same commands him, never walks.
214.
The house upon the rock.
But he that hears, learnes, and thereafter lives,
Is like a man that builds upon a Rock:
Let storms and tempests rage, it never gives,
But still unmoved abides the hardest shock.
Wise builders thus, from foolish we discern:
And doers, from those that do naught but learn.
215.
Sundry parables. First of the Sower, and the S^ed. Matthew. 13.
Of hearers, sundry different sorts there be:
Some only take the sound in at the ear,
The heart does never thereunto agree,
The Devil takes the seed that is sown there.
Seed by the ways side.
And this is it which on the ways side fell:
To hear nothing at all, would do as well.
216.
Seed in stony ground.
Some (little better) hear and understand,
And cheerfully true doctrine do embrace:
But lacking root, when troubles are at hand,
They fall away, and dare not show their face.
"Prosperity gets friends (such as they be)
"True friendship's tri'de best in adversity.
217.
Seed among Thorns.
In some (and sure that number is not small)
The care of wealth, and other worldly things,
So choakes the fruit, it thriueth not at all,
The Thorns together with the Seed vp-springs:
By all these means, much seed is shed in vain,
The Sower loses labor, and his grain.
218.
Seed in good ground.
Good seed, when in good ground it haps to fall,
To th'husband-man yields wonderful increase:
It thriues apace, yet not alike with all,
Those thirty, sixty those, an hundred these
For one do make return, as God does bless,
Ones glory shall be great, one others less.
219.
The parable of the Tares.
A fruitful field, when seed therein is cast,
The ground and grain both, being good and pure:
How is it that it does not always last,
And perfect in its prime estate endure?
The reason of this change, feign would I learn,
For how it comes, I cannot yet discern.
202.
Whilst Doctors of the Church securely sleep,
The Devil sowes his Tares among the Wheat:-
Good watch therefore the Pastors ought to keep,
For if these weeds, once root and moring get,
They Will not be weeded cleanly from the grain,
But among it till the harvest must remain.
221.
Of the net cast ^to the sea.
Such is the meaning of that fishing Net,
Wherein were catched fish of every kind:
The fishermen all up on shore do get,
Not leaving any, good nor bad behind.
The best then into vessels do they lay,
The bad they set aside, and cast away.
222.
Of the mustard seed.
The Church (which is Gods Kingdom here on earth,
Whereof great things in holy Writ are told)
As is a mustard seed, small in her birth,
So she: yet growing up, and waxing old,
It Is strange to see her wonderful increase,
In greatness, glory, riches, state and peace.
223.
Three other short parables, all tending to one end.
By three short pithy parables beside,
The virtue, worth, and value of his Word
He represents: it cannot be deny'de,
But each of them instruction does afford.
For, things whose use and worth be known aright,
Are more esteemed, and held with more delight.
224.
Of the leaven.
Good leaven works in a heap of meal,
And makes it sau'rie bread to strength the heart:
So sound and sau'rie doctrine taught with zeal,
Soule-feeding viands does to man impart.
Matthew. 16. 6.
But Pharisaicall leaven is so ill,
A little of it, all the lump does spill.
225.
Of the hid treasure, and the pearl.
As treasure closely hid within the ground,
Or Orien^ pearls of price inestimable:
When once a thriftie Merchant has them found,
And knows them to be things invaluable:
Sells all he has even to the utmost mite,
And in those jewels gets himself a right.
226.
The Word of God.
The value of this pearl invaluable,
Was never better known then in these days:
Never so much proclaym'd incomparable,
Never in any age found greater praise.
Yet press us with our wordly wealth to buy it,
We Will rather keep those trifles, and deny it.
227.
Matthew. 19. 20.
Like that young man who vaunts himself too boldly,
That all the Law he carefully had kept:
Touched in his goods, took that receipt so coldly,
As hanging down his head, aside he stepped.
See, too much love of riches is a let,
That th'Owners up to heaven hardly get.
228.
Our trading is not (chiefly) for that coast,
Where this rich pearl, and treasure's to be got:
Some fear with winds, and tempests to be tossed,
Some find the way too cold, and some too hot.
Best things indeed are hard'st to be obtayn'd,
Toys little worth with less ado are gayn'd.
229.
When all these heavenly Doctrines he had ended,
He turned him home to preach among his kindred,
M^. 13. ^4.
But these men at his person were offended:
(Though hearing him, they stood amazed, and wondered)
They twit him with his parentage, and breeding,
And muz'd from whence his learning had proce^ding.
230.
Such was their wilful incredulity,
He had no long abiding in that place:
They scorned him for his great humility,
Requit his love and labor with disgrace.
No Prophet esteemed in his own Country
The old saw touching Prophets, held in him,
The nearer home, the further from esteem.
231.
The fleshly sons of blessed Abraham,
Rom 3. 1. Romans 9.
Though therein they had some pre-eminence:
Yet were not they made blessed by the same,
No more were Christ his kin, who took offense
At him, and at his Doctrine most divine,
Whereat through unbelief they did repine.
232.
When he began his miracles and teaching,
And chose the twelve, whom he Apostles named,
Who after might succeed him by their preaching
Man. 3. 21.
His kinsmen hearing it, were not ashamed
To wish him bound, as if he had been mad,
When with his presence all men else were glad.
233.
Men linkt to him in sp'rituall alliance,
Apostles and Disciples, with some other
Who heard him gladly, put in him affiance,
Matthew. 12. 46.
Those he esteemed his brethren, and his mother.
What comfort to all Christians should this be,
To hold with Christ so near affinity?
234.
Humility comm^nded. Matthew. 18. and ^0. 20.
Though his Disciples long had heard him preaching,
And might by him have learned humility:
It seems yet they had need of further teaching
To keep them from ambitious primacie.
They ask him, who in heaven shall be the great'st?
He wills them suit themselves unto the least.
235.
Then for example sets a little child
Amid them all, and bids them look on him:
As he is, so be you meek, humble, mild,
By these three steps to heaven must you clim.
This is the ready way to bring you thither,
And straying hence, you walk you know not whither.
236.
The parable of lab^urers in the Vineyar^, elegantly s^tin^ o^ seu^rall
Christi^n Doct^ines. Ioh 11. ^0. and 1. C^r. 10. 12.
To Princes, and the civil Magistrate,
Gods deputies; dominion does pertain:
You may not their example imitate,
Your office is to teach, and not to reign.
The great'st among you, let him be as the least:
And he that is chief, do service to the rest.
237.
You call me Master, therein ye say true,
I am content to wash and wipe your feet*
Do each to other, as I did to you,
By my example that you learn, it is meet.
The servant who takes scorn his Lord to follow;
His heart unto his Master is but hollow.
238.
To come to God, it is best begin by time,
Each man when he is called, must attend:
Yet not presume himself to be the prime,
Or that the Lord, his wages ought to mend.
Nor envy others of a later calling,
But look well to himself, for fear of falling.
239.
That labourer which works but one hour,
Called to the Vineyard when the daye's near spent:
His hire may hap to be as good, and more
Then some, which thither in the morning went.
The first, be last: the last, somewhiles be first:
And of such as be called, some may be cursed.
240.
The parable o^ the ^a^age of the Kings (...). Matthew. ^2.
And other Scripture fully proves the same.
The story of that royal marriage feast,
Where every sort of people called, came:
One was excluded like a saucy ghest.
A maxim ladi, that among men called, of those
The Lord some few, as pleases him, does chose.
241.
The parable of the great supper. Luke 14.
Some being called to this sumptuous feast,
Come not at all, though lovingly requested:
The number of such men is not the least,
They have excuses formally digested.
Their worldly business pleades excuse for some,
But wiued men say flat, they cannot come.
242.
Conclusion of this fifth Clas^is, with that most heavenly doctrine of our
Savior. Ioh cap. 6.
The Isra'lites with Manna long were fed,
Whereof their children afterward did boast:
They labored for body-filling bread,
(And so it is now the practice of the most)
They had the shadow: Christ at length does bring
That which by it was meant, the very thing.
243.
Here Is the true bread of life that came from heaven,
The man that eats thereof, shall never die:
1. Cor. 5. 8.
Here must be joined no mixture of old Leaven,
The fruits of malice, and impiety.
Who comes to him and in him does believe,
Nor thirst, nor hunger ever shall him grieve.
244.
What kind of food is this, that ever lasts?
Genesis 3. 1. King. 17.
A Tree of life like that in Paradise?
As th'widowes oil and meal that never wastes?
No meat like it, nor of so high a price.
Ioh. 6. 34.
The Jews desired of our Lord that food,
Ere they the nature of it understood.
245.
J^b. 4 15,
Their sense was like the Woman's at the Well,
Gross Capernaites, thought on their belly-cheare:
For when they failed of that, away they fell,
Of sp'rituall eating, had no lust to hear.
Because they ate the loaves, and had their fill,
Chap. 6. 26.
They followed, looking for such feeding still.
246.
Why carke ye for the meat that soon does perish,
That s^rues the turn but whilst it is in chewing?
Seek that, which had the hungry soul does cherish,
The eater with spiritual grace endewing.
This is the food (says he) which I will give
To every one that does on me believe.
247.
My Flesh and Blood are meat and drink indeed,
Who eats not thereof, must die for ever:
But he that faithfully thereon does feed,
Dwells so in me, that no thing shall us sever.
I dwell likewise in him, and as I live,
So life eternal to him will I give.
248.
Here Is a true feast, not parabolicall,
Deuiz'd to shadow out another thing:
A feast indeed super-celestiall,
Made for all comers by an heavenly King.
A^g. Creed, and (...). Verse. 35 47.
Believe and thou have eaten, says one Father:
From Christ's own words, that sentence he might gather.
249.
Matthew. 11. 28.
Come all that under heavy burdens groan,
The weight whereof you are not able bear:
I Will take them from your shoulders on my own,
Come rest your selves with me, and do not fear.
Ioh. 3. 14, 15, 16
Believe, and live: I came not to condemn
But those, who offered grace prowdly contemn.
250.
He had himself a special kind of meat,
Ioh. 4. 34.
To work and do his heavenly Fathers will:
So, by believing truly, we do eat,
There is no feeding else, the soul to fill.
To eat, believe, and come to him express
Here, one self thing; and neither more, nor less.
251.
The Sacrament was not yet instituted,
No Sacramental bread is mentioned here,
The words of this place In the institution of the Sacrament.
after be transmuted:
Yet all which at that time believers were,
Did eat and feed on him to souls salvation,
Vneating unbelievers found damnation.
252.
This Doctrine of all others most divine,
Th'Epitome of th'Euang^like writ:
At preaching caused many to repine,
To leave their Lord, and take offense at it.
The Apostles, by their mouth who for them spoke,
Confession of their faith more clearly make.
253.
They knowledge him that Christ, the Son alone
Dan. 15. 5, 6.
Of God; the true God, and the everliving:
Another Lord or Savior they knew none,
From him they hope for help through their believing:
Forsaking Lords, and Masters all beside,
Consent with him for ever to abide.
254.
Here, gentle Muse, repose thy self a while,
A sweeter place of rest thou can not find:
Let thought of this, all other thoughts beguile,
And make thee apter for the task behind:
That singing on a Theme so far above thee,
Good men for thy endeavor may approve thee.
The end of the fifth Classis.
DIVINE POEMS. The sixth Classis.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Apostles warned, and arm'd'gainst Persecution:
Strange news to them who saw Mount Tabors vision.
The Cities, Temples, Worlds last dissolution,
Sweet Comforts mixed often, by our souls Physician.
The Passion, with all circumstances traced:
Christ's blessed Body in his Tomb left placed.
THe means I have observed in every story,
Which treats of famous Captains, and their Acts;
Whereby themselves attayn'd the height of glory,
Their Armies honoring them with due respects:
Were not to all, nor at all times, the same,
It asks more skill to play so hard a game.
2.
Our Cheiftayne pressed unto this sp'rituall war,
(A conflict of much peril, and much pain)
Meant not to gaze upon the fight from far,
His men to 'bide the brunt, he take the gain:
But puts his person foremost at the breach.
(The brauest way, young men at arms to teach!)
3.
By compari^on with w^rlike Captains, here is s^t forth the wi^dome and v^lour
of our great General in the spiritual warfa^.
He fails not often withal to use persuasion,
With words of grace, and reasons full of weight;
So takes from coward mates all just evasion,
Commands them tread the narrow way, and straight:
Propounds rewards to all that stoutly fight,
Casts shame on such as yield, or turn to flight.
4.
When he enrolled them first in's muster book,
With title of his Soldiers once endew'd:
For heart'ning them, a skillful course he took,
Against all assaults that afterward ensu'de.
Their faith by signs and wonders he makes sure,
Hard-after-trials better to endure.
5.
Doubtless at first it seemed strange to them,
To hear of persecutions and affliction,
Whose eyes were fixed on fair Jerusalem,
Where they expected temp'rall jurisdiction.
Matthew. 27. 42. ^o^. 6. 15.
The Priests and Elders dreamt of such a thing,
That Christ must be a potent earthly King.
6.
^y 9. 7.
What Prophets of his sp'rituall Kingdom spoke,
Expressing state, and great magnificence;
A wrong construction thereof they did make,
According to their gross intelligence.
Their children yet are blinded with that error,
Of stubborn unbelief a wondrous mirror.
7.
So much they doted on this idle dream
It Was hard to draw them from that poor conceit:
He therefore preached upon another Theme,
Taught what great troubles they were to await:
To look for trial, combats, heavy crosses,
No gain of worlddly treasure, but all losses.
8.
A Simile.
Unlooked for 'larams, Soldiers most affright,
Amaze and quickly put them to a rout:
But chiefly if they happen in the night,
When men lie sleeping void of fear and doubt.
Great armies by these means are often defeated,
With stratagems (force failing) they be cheated.
9.
Our Leader in his wisdom this foresawe,
Instructs his Soldiers what they must except:
He b^ds them neither faint, nor stand in awe,
Their troubles would produce a good effect:
Such momentanie sufferings should procure,
A crown of glory ever to endure.
10.
Yet mark the time (for well it is worth the noting)
Matthew. 16. 15.
When first this point of Doctrine he divulged:
Not whilst they hou'red in opinions floting,
(By such a storm, as then, they might been bulged.)
But when in points of faith they were well grounded,
Then doctrines of afflictions he propounded.
11.
By questioning he sounded their belief,
Demands them all, whom take you me to be?
One answered for the rest (as being chief)
Thou art that Christ, the son of God, says he.
Their faith expressed by this divine confession,
Proved them good Christians in a fair progression.
12.
They thus assured of his Divinity,
Of pow're enough all foemen to subdue,
And since his love to them they daily see;
What danger could be doubted to ensue?
Where will to do them good, concurres with might;
In confidence they may expect for right.
13.
Now thought The Apostles they stood most secure,
In easy state, serving so great a Master:
But that persuasion did not long endure,
For soon he told them of a strange disaster;
A case that made the greatest of them shrink,
And on some cunning remedy to think.
14.
The Apostles forewarned, and armed against persecutions.
He showed them what great crosses he must suffer
By Elders, Priests, and Rulers of the Jews:
What injuries and wrongs they would him offer,
His Person with indignities abuse:
And lastly cause him die with bitter pain.
But in three days (says he) I Will rise again.
15.
Which latest words if they had noted well,
Such special joy and comfort did contain,
As served all care and sorrow to expel,
And leave them no occasion to complain:
Matthew. 17. 9, 10. Luke 18. 34
But they (as then) perceau'd not what it meant,
Their thoughts, and hearts another way were bent.
16.
The man (it seems) who loved his Master best,
(His Lord as dearly loving him again.)
Was bold aside to take him from the rest,
(Amazed much to think he should be slain.)
Persuades him not to yield unto their will,
Who bent themselves his guiltless blood to spill.
17.
Thus ran he side-long led by a wrong byas,
Deceived with a false imagination,
Not knowing yet the office of Messiah,
But doting on an earthly domination:
He hoped to see him in a royal Throne,
A thing that all the Jews rely'de upon.
18.
But Christ was borne unto another end,
To conquer Satan, Hell, and Death by dying:
What Adam had deprau'd, that to amend,
Not to resist, nor save his life by flying.
Matthew. 16. 23.
So checks his servant for his misse-aduise,
Who to the World, but not to God, was wise.
19.
No, no, says he to his Disciples all,
If you will be my men, and follow me:
You must resolve to come when I do call,
To bear my cross, much less from crosses flee.
Who for my sake is bold his life to venture,
Into a better life shall surely enter.
20.
There is a death of deaths, that dies never;
The thought whereof makes wicked men aghast.
This is a life of lives that lasts ever,
The life we lead here, is to it a blast.
Some of you die not, till thereof you taste,
And find the full fruition often at last.
21.
To gain the world, with all the wealth therein,
And lose this blessed life whereof I tell:
What case, I pray, were such a winner in,
That for exchange of Heaven, gets Hell?
That for some pelf, and transitory pleasure,
Does damn his soul, exceeding all earths treasure.
22.
Here Is a cooling card for men delitious,
A bastinado to bumbast a coward:
A counterbuffe for Christians ambitious,
A spur to prick snaile-pasing soldiers forward.
A Simile.
Schoole-boyes are led with gifts, or forced with rods;
'Twixt men and boys (herein) there is little ods.
23.
Another Simile, or Comparison.
Physicians next to pills, and bitter potions,
Give comfortable broths, or pleasing drink,
Our Lord soon after those heart-griping motions,
Which brought them near the pit, even to the brinke:
To give new heart, and to refresh their spright,
Was pleased to let them see a glorious sight.
24.
Such visions God at other times revealed
To holy men, wherein they did behold
High things, from others meet to be concealed.
Exodus 33. 12.
This may we read in sacred writings old,
So much of God as man's sight could abide,
He from his servant Moses did not hide.
25.
That great Apostle, Gentiles Doctor Paul,
(Though called last, and least in his own sight)
Who amongst his fellows labored more then all,
Act. 9. and 18. and 22. And 2. Cor. 12.
Had several visions passing clear and bright.
Once taken up to heaven, he saw and heard,
What to no mortal man might be declared.
26.
Rare mysteries, and visions most divine,
Saint John in the Revelation.
Saw that beloved Disciple of our Lord:
The host of heaven set before his eyne,
The King himself, whom humbly all adored.
So they who Christ transfigur'd here beheld,
With joys of heaven for the time were filled.
27.
The transfiguration of Christ. Matthew. 17.
Up to Mount Tabor three of them he leads,
To see and take a taste of heavenly pleasure:
A wondrous clowd the Mountain ouer-spreades,
His shining glory they beheld at leisure.
Two Saints appear, that in them they might see,
The blessed state of such as Sainted be.
28.
Then from that shining clowd they hear a voice,
(...). 16. 10. and (...).
(The God head, as of old, therein abiding.)
The words were such as made them all rejoice,
Though to the ground they-fell, their faces hiding.
The Father of his Son did witness bear,
Commanding them precisely him to hear.
29.
This vision for their faith and comfort shown,
His Person and his Godhead clearly proved:
Yet charged he them in no wise to make known;
Till he again were risen from the dead.
Lo of his death he once more here makes mention,
To the end they might observe it with attention.
30.
This doctrine could not sink into their brain,
Though often it had been beat into their ears:
A question thereupon they move again,
(Me thinks I see them hang 'twixt hope and fears.)
Matthew. 17. 10.
Why say the Scribes Elias must come first?
He Is come, and they to him have done their worst
31.
And as they did to him, they will do to me:
His person they despised and set at naught,
Though all his life were full of sanctity,
The doctrine sound and holy which he taught:
That could not shield him from their sla^derous tongues.
Such recompense from them to me belongs.
32.
Matthew. 21. 33.
These be those husbandmen all void of grace,
That to their Lord his lawful fruits deni'de;
That beat his men, left some dead on the place,
That did him many spiteful wrongs beside;
That killed his son, th'in heritance to get.
On such a mischief, Jewish priests be set.
33.
Arguments and exhortations to patience and suffering with Christ. Matthew. 10. 28.
From these bloud-suckers what can you expect
When Me your Master they will not forbear*
It Is like to you they will carry small respect,
Yet have you no great cause their force to fear:
The Soul they cannot touch, nor do it hurt*
The body's but a clot of clay, or dirt.
34.
Before the civil Judges they will cite you,
As evil doers that transgress their Laws:
Of capital offenses they will endite you,
And though you give none, they will find a cause.
Luke 21. 17.
All men shall hate you for your love to me,
Your neer'st in blood, and consanguinitie.
35.
The sons and fathers shall betray each others,
All linkes and bonds of nature broken quite:
Men shall not spare to persecute their brothers,
John 16. 1.
Thinking thereby they do to God his right.
Church-rulers they will anathematize you,
1. Cor. 4.
And as vild outcasts of the world despise you.
36.
This is your state, this must be your condition,
Peace with this world I am not come to make:
They bend themselves to quarrels and sedition,
Against the Truth; the Devils part they take.
2. King. 9. 22.
What peace with such should my Disciples hold,
Who to all sin and vice themselves have sold?
37.
Your life must be a warfare under me,
As well my foes with courage to withstand;
As patiently to bear their tyranny,
When I permit you fall into their hand.
A little trial will augment your glory,
These sufferings past, you shall no more be sorry.
38.
Reward there is none to them which faint, or fly.
All that with me in triumph will ascend,
Must be resolved to overcome or die,
And persevere my Soldiers to the end.
Finis Coronat opus.
The end is it that every work does crown,
Half deeds deserve nor honor, nor renown.
39.
Two apt Similies. Luke 14. 28.
What man attempts the building of a Tower,
That does not first account upon the cost?
Least having once begun, it pass his power,
So shame is gotten, and his labor lost.
Then all beholders thus at him will flout,
This man began, but could not bring't about.
40.
Or who so foolish to begin a war,
(A business that does great foresight require)
But first whilst yet his foe remains afar,
Consulteth of his force ere he draw nigher?
And if he find himself the weaker party,
By Embassies entreats a friendly parley.
41.
A Comparison.
Should any Captain (bent to give a charge)
With words and arguments of half this weight,
Exhort and animate his men at large,
To march with cheer and on their Leader wait:
Were It notfoule shame for Soldiers there to faint,
Their memories with cowardice to taint?
42.
This Captain after seated in a Throne,
His faithful, hardy Soldiers well rewarded:
Shares with the good, those bad-ones should get none,
Not come within his Court, nor be rewarded.
Who him forsakes, of him shall be forsaken:
This Caveat may faint-hearted Christians waken.
43.
Thus his beloved Disciples he enformes,
Their Masters office rightly t'vnderstand:
Thus heartens them against all future storms:
A Simile.
As Nurses lead young Children by the hand,
Till they get strength, and wit to walk alone
Yet fall they often, when the Nurse is gone.
44.
Great need they had to be so well fore-warned,
Since hard encounters they were to sustain:
(A man that is warned, is said to be half armed,
Sudden surprisalls, strongest places gain:)
Their Lord abused, scourged, nailed to a Tree.
What greater grief then such a sight to see?
45.
Themselves who building on their Masters power,
Framed Castles in the air, dreamt of high things:
Each of them hoping for some Princely tower,
All making full account to reign as Kings:
'Twas doubtful when their hopes herein did fail them,
Least sad despair, through sorrow, should assail them.
46.
A Simile.
As often it befalls to worldly men,
Who missing hop't-for honors, wealth and treasure;
Most commonly not one of them amongst ten,
Joys afterward, or feels true hearty pleasure.
To keep his servants from such deep despair,
Instructions he them gives, and warnings fair.
47.
Of no one point so frequently he talked,
When he and his Disciples were alone;
When company removed they solely walked,
This piece of Text, most commonly, was one.
Matthew. 16. M^rke 10. Luke 18. John 12.
Th'Euangelists do all of them record it,
The Apostles when they heard thereof, abhorred it.
48.
Once walking fairly to Jerusalem,
(The place that for his suffering was appointed)
Mark 10. 32.
As of his Passion he discours't to them.
Like men amazed, their members half disioynted;
They stood as if they knew not where they were,
With terror much affrighted, and with fear.
49.
Their Lord who knew their hearts, which way they be^ded,
How much the name of Crosses them afflicted;
How at his Passion they would be offended,
How with their own hard trialls, more dejected:
Often comforts them with greatness of the pay,
To his true Soldiers at the later day.
50.
Palme-sunday.
Now Isr'els King is on his sacred march,
A solemn feast day 'twas among the Jews:
Es. 62. 11. Zech. 9. 9.
The Prophets tell you, if ye please to search,
An Asses colt to ride on, he would choose:
Thereby is noted his humility,
Yet here be further signs of Majesty.
51.
The people entertayne him as a King.
Some straw the way with branches from the trees,
Some with their clothes: and all Hosanna sing,
Flocking about him like a swarm of Bees.
Thus to the Town in triumph he was brought,
Which in the City much amazement wrought.
52.
Matthew. 21.
The time unto his Passion drawing near,
He leaves some marks of his Divinity:
The Temple from profaners he does clear,
Then heales the lame, and makes the blind to see.
The children cry Hosanna here again,
Whereat the Priests offended do complain.
53.
Tokens of the Temples and the Cities destruction, with the end of the world
intermixed. Matthew. 24.
The Temples and the Cities overthrow,
(A news at first strange-sounding in their ears)
As far as he saw fit for them to know,
By certain signs and tokens he declares:
To lift their minds from base imaginations,
And fix them all on heavenly cogitions.
54.
He tells them of a dreadful time of horror.
False prophets, yea false christ's there will arise,
Fierce wars betwixt all Nations bringing terror,
Plagues, famine, earthquakes causing woeful cries:
Yet this of sorrows is but the beginning,
A finer thread of mischeiues will be spinning.
55.
Vexed shall you be, and killed for my sake,
By brothers, and by nearest kin betraide:
Iniquity shall such free passage make,
As all the heat of love will be allaide.
Yet fear you not, be constant to the end,
The rich reward shall all defaults amend.
56.
Know this, though raging Tyrants Truth assail,
In hope the Gosples shining light to darken:
Their tyranny therein shall not prevail,
All Nations on the earth to it shall hearken.
It must be for a witness to them all,
To comfort such as come when I do call.
57.
The Sun and Moon shall lose their wonted light,
The Stars fall down from-out the firmament,
The powers of Heaven shall be shaken quite,
It is probable the sign of the Cross to be here meant (without tach of
superstition.)
And then My Sign before me shall be sent,
That wicked men beholding it may cry,
Because my self in glory am so nie.
58.
Then shall my Angels swiftly fly about,
With trumpets sound, much louder then the thunder:
My chosen servants they shall single-out,
And from the wicked sever them a-sunder.
The heaven and earth must fade without all cure,
The words I speak, shall certainly endure.
59.
Against all crosses here is a consolation,
A complete armor persecution-proofe;
Not forged by spells, or planet-constellation,
But by the Son of God for our behoof.
Ephesians. (...)
Let Us put on this, and all the powers of Hell
Cannot so harm us, but we shall do well.
60.
A Simil^
When friends that long have loved, and lived together,
By chance or choice a-sunder must depart,
Where parting is a cutting grief to either:
To hold each others memory in heart,
Some friendly token left by one behind,
Makes the other always keep his friend in mind.
61.
Our Lord, the truest friend that ever loved,
(Lord, Master, Friend, and Brother all in one.)
Though sundry ways he carefully had proved,
To cause us think on him when he was gone:
Yet left he to his lovers such a pledge,
As gives the bluntest heart, a sharper edge.
62.
The pledge he left was not a piece of gold,
Nor (as most lovers use) a pretty ring;
A jewel it is, not to be bought, nor sold,
Himself (in truth) it is no worser thing.
He parting left (in sort) himself behind:
True faith must search this mystery to find.
63.
Matthew. 26.
The Pascall supper he ordaynes to eat,
That Lamb, was of himself a perfect type:
His precious Body was (indeed) the meat,
Which with our faith, not with our teeth, we gripe.
The legal Supper ended, his begins:
Which faithful eaters cleanses from their sins.
64.
The Apostles twelve fate with him at the board,
Amongst those twelve one Judas there was found,
Who loved his money better then his Lord:
He with the Priests for silver did compound,
To do a Trayt'rous deed so full of shame,
That Traitors ever since, do bear his name.
65.
Ioh. 6. 70.
The treason he could not so closely work,
But that his Master long before descri'd it:
He knew what mischief in his heart did lurk,
The Traitor with his cunning could not hide it.
But when he found his falsehood was bewrai'd,
Out of their presence he himself conuaid.
66.
Mary Magdalen. Matthew. 26.
Against this wretched man we may oppose,
A woman famous for her piety:
She that a box of precious ointment chose,
T'anoint our Lord there with before he die,
Washing his feet in it, mixed with her tears,
Luke 7.
And often kissing wiped them with her hairs.
67.
The mention of this worthy pious deed,
My sacred Muse by no means would omit:
That all who do these hallowed verses read,
May note what honor she attayn'd by it.
Her memory eternized thereby,
Matthew. 26. 13.
Amongst all professing Christianity.
68.
The Traitor greatly grudged at this cost,
Pretending care and love unto the poor:
As now it is bestowed, he counts it lost,
Then presently he gets him out of door,
And sells his Master to recover that,
Which in his greedy thought he gaped at.
69.
Was ever such a wicked wretch as he?
Was ever yet so foul a treason plotted?
If any such false Iudasses there be,
A Judas death to them were well allotted.
But leave we these, and turning to the Text,
The circumstances note ensuing next.
70.
A sacred supper, banquet most divine,
He institutes, wherein himself is eaten
By faithful feeders on the bread and wine:
1. Cor. 11. 27.
(Un worthy eaters shrewdly shall be beaten.)
He bids us eat his Body, drink his Blood:
A blessed myst'rie, rightly understood.
71.
Modo sacramentali and in effabile percipimus Christ^. Hoc fides credat,
intelligentia non requirat, ne non inuentum putetur in credibile, aut repertum
putetur non singular. Presentiam credo, modu^ nescio. Ioh. 6. 52. Note here
the most divine comfortable conference of Christ with his Apostles, immediately
after his last holy supper: And in his journey to the Garden. Ioh. chap. 13,
14, 15, 16, 17.
Here is that pledge whereof before I spoke,
No figure bare. (Such fantasies I loath.)
His Body and his Blood he wills us take,
We must believe he truly offers both.
Be sure it is so, for Christ used no deceits:
Yet ask not how, so did the Capernaits.
72.
As often as this Supper we partake,
Our Saviors goodness we must call to mind;
Remembering what he suffered for our sake,
Each other love, as he to us was kind.
How can those men, which feast thus often together,
Live out of love, or one oppress the other?
73.
The Jewish supper, and the Christian ended;
Before the acting of this tragedy,
Some passages deserve to be intended,
Divinely written in the history.
More choice then here (if I be not mistook)
You shall not find in all the holy book.
74.
No sooner was the traitor gone abroad,
To work that deed of darkness in the night;
But Christ unto the rest a lecture rode,
To strengthen them against the future fight.
First as for him, they should not be offended;
His death unto his greater glory tended.
75.
(Humbling himself to dye upon the cross,
In sight of men a shameful ignominy,
He gat increase of honor, and no loss;
For God the Father lifted him on hie,
Where in such glory he is seated now,
Phil. 2. 9.
All knees should at the name of Jesus bow.)
76.
You, for a time, shall find of me the lack,
Where I am going, yet you cannot come:
Mean while in Love see that you be not slack,
Do mutually, as I to you have done.
Herein you shall express your love to me,
If constant among your selves in love you be.
77.
Io^. 14.
At my departure ought you not to grieve,
It Is for your good, if you perceived the case:
As in my Father, so in me believe,
My going is to get for you a place,
And though I go, I Will shortly come again,
That you with me, for ever may remain.
78.
I am my self, the Way, the Truth, the Life,
No man comes to the Father but by me:
Thomas and Philip.
Here some of them were at a little strife,
Not understanding what the sense might be.
With words of comfort he resolves them both,
Then forward in his gracious speeches go'th.
79.
In seeing me you all have scene my Father,
I dwell in him he likewise dwells in me:
For my great works you ought believe the rather;
So, greater works by you performed shall be.
And what you ask the Father in my Name,
Doubt not of speeding; I will do the same.
80.
Another cause of comfort does ensue,
A promise of the Comforter: even he
The Spirit of Truth, that shall abide in you,
Sent by the Father, comes also from me.
I will not leave you comfortless, be sure;
If for a while you patiently endure.
81.
Who does as I command, he loves me well,
This is the trial of a trusty friend:
With such my Father and my self will dwell,
And make abode with him unto the end.
But he which to my precepts gives no ear,
That man to me no love at all does bear.
82.
Though I depart, I Will leave my peace behind,
Not worldly peace, which has no comfort in it:
My peace rests in your heart, and in your mind,
Strive to attain this inward peace, and win it.
My absence you the better may abide,
If my true peace do in your hearts reside.
83.
Lastly my parting should not make you sad,
For passing to my Fathers company:
You ought rejoice hereat, and be more glad,
For he, I tell you, greater is then I.
These speeches ended from the board he rose,
Then forth upon his latest journey goes.
84.
The nearer to this conflict he approaches,
Ioh. 15.
Full well discerning their infirmity:
New comfortable doctrines he still broacheth,
T'encourage them against adversity.
A parable he sets before their eyne,
Of quick, and witherd branches of a vine.
85.
A parable of the vine and branches.
The branches wither, cut once from the tree,
They serve to no use else, but for the fire:
Dead branches you are, except ye bide in me,
Men cast you out, and burning is your hire,
Abide in me, continue fruit to bear,
So shall you grow more fruitful then ye were.
86.
You are my friends, if you my words fulfill,
No more by name of servants I you call:
The servant knows not his masters will,
But I have showed you, from my father all.
And I have chosen you unto this end,
That, being fruitful, I might be your friend.
87.
The world will hate you, as it hated me,
It loves only such as be his own:
Now from the world since I have set you free,
Love at the worldlings hands, you shall find none.
Expect not to escape better then your Master,
You must drink after me, I am your taster.
88.
Least at my cross you all should be offended,
Ioh. 16^
Forsake the truth, for fear of persecution:
My speech upon this point so long is bended,
To make you firm, and constant in conclusion.
I say again you must endure affliction,
If you will get the heavenly benediction.
89.
The Priests will bolt-out Excommunication,
And banish you from all their holy rites,
They Will reckon you as vessels of damnation:
That done, to execute their further spites,
Your lives they will shorten with the civil rod,
And think they do good service unto God.
90.
Remember well, when these things take effect,
How I forewarned you of them long before:
These words (I see) your spirits do deiect,
Whereas in truth your joy should be the more.
That Comforter, else to you will not come,
But I will send him after I am gone.
91.
He in the way of truth will you conduct.
The Oracles of God to you reveal,
In many things to come, will you instruct,
No needful point of knowledge he will conceal.
He shall receive of mine, and give to you:
For, all the Father has, is mine by due,
92.
The time is short I have with you to stay.
Yet shortly I will come to you again:
Up to the Father I must lead the way,
My absence will procure you grief and pain.
The world will live in mirth, whilst you do mourn
But soon your sorrows into joy shall turn.
93.
A Comparison.
As women when their travail first drawes-on,
With fear and anguish sorely be oppressed:
The Child once borne, and their hard throws all gone,
Then joy of Childbirth sets their hearts at rest.
So will I come and rid you of your pain,
That never after shall you grieve again.
94.
Then in my Name ye shall not need ask ought,
The Father holds you dear in his own sight,
And knows your wants ^re you of them have thought;
He loves you, cause in my love you delight.
Into the world I from my Father came,
Now from the world, return I to the same.
95.
Say, was not this sweet after-suppers talk:
A dainty later-course to such a feast?
Could ever Man be weary so to walk?
Who would not here have gladly been a ghest?
The number of the ghests that time was small,
But now this feast is open unto all.
96.
John 17.
Those exhortations and instructions past,
To comfort them who stood thereof in need:
He gives himself to prayer at the last,
In reading it, to every word take heed.
My hand often shakes in scribbling of this song,
For fear to do the Sacred Myst'ries wrong.
97.
The Author prays briefly
(My Lord, here taught by thee, I turn to pray.
I walk a pilgrim to the Land of rest;
Vouchsafe to set and guide me in the way,
To thee alone my humble suit's addressed.
Psalm 45.
My heart of heavenly matters does endite,
Oh teach my pen, how readily to write,
98.
Not Sonnet-wise, Nor in heroicke verse
With style affected, praise of men to gain:
But modestly deep myst'ries to rehearse;
In meeter tuned to a lowly strain:
True Soule-delighting, not eare-tickling lays,
That may my readers hearts to heaven raise.)
99.
Our Saviors most sweet and loving prayer before he entered into the garden.
John 17.
My heavenly Father, now the hour is come,
(He speaks with eyes right lifted up to heaven.)
By thee ordained to glorify thy Son,
That thou by him be glorifide again.
My glory to thy own so sure is knit,
No power is able once to sever it.
100.
1. He prays for himself.
All flesh thou have subjected to his power,
For all the race of men he is to die:
Yet those that come to him they be the fewer,
Certes themselves are in the fault, not I.
For none have life but such as knowing thee
To be true God, do learn the same of me.
101.
By me on earth thou have been glorifi'de,
All thou commanded'st me, that have I done:
Now with thy self let me be dignifi'de,
In that full height, as ere the world begun,
I did enjoy the same in Unity,
The second person in the Trinity.
102.
Herein by me thy glory has been sought,
In that through my great miracles and teaching;
To knowledge thee all nations have been brought,
And trained to virtuous living by my preaching.
Those whom thou gave me, they were thy own,
And by my means, thou art to them made known.
103.
The word I taught them, that they soundly keep,
Not flitting in the grounds of their belief:
From me they have received thy secrets deep,
They surely hold this point which is the chief.
That I came down from thee with full commission,
To give repentant sinners whole remission.
104.
2. For the Apostles in particular.
I pray for them (precisely) in this place,
Whom thou have geu'n me by a special choice:
For worldly men which feel not of thy grace,
I do not pray: They will not hear my voice.
But these are thine, by thy own free election;
And mine, by truly yielding me subjection.
105.
Now need they most thy fatherly defense,
Since in the world they yet have their abiding:
I come to thee and am departing hence,
Therefore (good Father) keep thou them from sliding
Keep them in concord, love and unity,
That they may all be one, like thee and me.
106.
Whilst here with them I had my conversation,
I kept them in thy truth without suspicion:
All that thou gave me shall get salvation,
Save only that lost child, Son of perdition,
Psalm. 69. 129.
To whom it fell as Scriptures had forespoken,
Of which one title never can be broken.
107.
Now must I leave the world, and come to thee;
My pers'nall presence they can have no longer;
Which makes me pray for them thus heartily,
That by thy aid, they may be made the stronger:
Till they in spiritual knowledge be well skilled,
To see and feel my joy in them fulfilled.
108.
Thy word and truth to them I have declared,
Whereto with full assent they did obaye:
And cause with worldly men they have not shared
In unbelief, nor walked in their way;
The world alike does hate both them, and me:
For light and darkness never will agree.
109.
Out of the world I would not have them taken,
But pray thee keep them evermore from evil;
That in their faith they never may be shaken,
Nor overcome by falsehood of the Devil.
Thy Word and Truth so sanctify their hearts,
That in their calling they may do their parts.
110.
As thou thy Son into the world did send,
To teach thy Truth: (They hate me for my pain)
So sent I them unto that very end.
(Like thanks as had their Master, they shall gain.)
The more they need thy fatherly assistance,
Since in the world they shall find great resistance.
111.
It Is for their sakes my self I sanctify,
A sacrifice to cleanse them from their sin:
I freely offer up my self to die,
That they eternal life thereby may win.
I pray thee therefore (Father) them preserve,
That from thy Truth, and Faith they never swerue.
112.
3. Thirdly (...) prays for all the faithful in general, to the worlds end.
I make not my request for these alone,
But for Believers all that e're will be:
That in true faith and love they may be one,
As I in thee, and thou likewise in me.
To the end all people of the world may see,
And surely know that I came out from thee.
113.
The glory which on me thou have bestowed,
To turn the world from darkness, unto light:
By preaching and by wonders: that has flowed
From me, on them who do believe aright.
To prove that as thou loued'st me thy son,
So love thou those, which to my faith are won.
114.
My Father, this is also my desire,
That mine may ever in my presence dwell:
There to behold my glory, and admire
How much all Kings in glory I excel.
Nor barely to behold, but to partake,
So much, as shall them also glorious make.
115.
^. Cor. ^.
The worldly-wise were merely ignorant,
Of Ghostly things pertaining unto thee:
Of fruitless idle knowledge they could vaunt,
But I have known, and mine have learned of me:
Yea in true knowledge they shall still proceed,
Until they know as much as serves their need.
116.
A prayer of all prayers most divine,
Where true-loue-passions sweetly are expressed;
In which our Saviors Love does clearly shine,
On all that in his Churches bosom rest:
A Christian man who reads it with devotion,
Must needs feel in his heart some heavenly motion.
117.
What greater comfort can believers have,
Then know the Son of God to be their friend?
That of his Father he for them does crave,
And will not fail of speeding in the end?
The man which of this comfort has no feeling,
His zeal is like a tool that lacke^h steeling.
118.
A Comparison.
Who so presents his suit unto a King,
And has his only Son for intercessor:
If he petition for a lawful thing,
He Is very like to be thereof possessor.
Christus cum patre, particeps ^st imperii.
Christ is in The Empire partner with his Father,
His favorites are sure to speed the rather.
119.
Of old constant Martyrs.
What moved our Lord so often to repeat,
And urge this point, of suffering for his sake?
Whence comes it that so long, and with such heat,
This prayer to his Father he did make?
By greatness of the approaching persecution,
He knew his men had need of resolution.
120.
Nero the Tyran^.
To him that bloody Tyrants heart was seen,
Who turning Natures course clean up side-downe
His mothers womb ript-vp with Razor keen,
Who made a bone-fire of th'Emperiall town,
Then on the Christians laid that imputation,
Thereby to make them odious to the Nation.
121.
Peter and Paul.
Who with the prime Apostles first began,
In one hours space made riddance of them twain,
Then wreakes his wrath on woman, child, and man,
Takes great delight to see them put to pain,
Thus to his Idols sacrific'de the Saints,
And beastly pleased himself with their complaints.
122.
The rest of those accursed persecutors,
Which had their seat within that fatal City,
Our Lord foresawe with all their coadiutors,
Who on tormented Martyrs took no pity:
But of their grievous tortures made a sport,
In Theaters for people to resort.
123.
An ordinary death served not the turn,
Strange kind of executions are invented:
Some softly fri'de that they might slowly burn,
Some cut with Sawes as if they were indented:
Some rent with Bears, wild Bulls, and hungry Dogs,
And other some, de^our'd by filthy Hogs.
124.
Had not these Martyrs need of Christ his aid,
To make them patient in so great afflictions?
Would not mere flesh and blood have been affrayde,
Against fierce Tyrants threatening interdictions,
To hold their Creed, and constantly confess it,
When they by rigor labored to repress it?
125.
Christ's, prayer had efficacy in all Confessors and Mar^yrs and ever will have.
With help from heaven (no doubt) they were relieved,
The efficacy of Christ's intercession,
Instills new comfort when they most are grieved,
Confirms belief, emboldens to confession.
Weak in our selves, through him we are made strong,
Bold for his cause, to suffer any wrong.
126.
I take this prayer of so strange effect,
So powerful to obtain what it requires:
That God the Father bears it such respect,
If we, for whom't was made, join our desires:
The virtue of it to us now extends,
And so will do until the world ends.
127.
These were the preparations to the fight,
Then our Great Champion comes within the lists:
Matthew. 26. 31.
First he foretells his Soldiers of their flight,
(Though one more forward then the rest, resists)
As when the Shepherd is beat off, and smitten,
The Sheep are scatterd, caught by Woolues, and bitten,
128.
Here Peter speaks for one before them all;
(As usually he did at other place)
Though every man besides do from thee fall,
Yet I will be exempted in this case.
Ioh. 33. 37.
Be sure of me (my Lord) I for thy sake,
Am full resolved, to lay my life at stake.
129.
Doubtless he spoke no more then what he meant,
He loved too well, to make a show with glozing:
His heart was good, and so was his intent,
(Of what we purpose God has the disposing.)
The man too much on his own strength depended,
And for his rashness soon was reprehended.
130.
Will thou (says Christ) lay down thy life for me?
It Is fair and friendly spoken with a trice,
Thy heart will fail: mark what I say to thee,
The Cock crows not, till thou deny me thrice.
A rare example of man's imperfection,
When God once leaves him, to his own direction.
131.
The beginning of his Palsion, with his agony and bloody sweat in the garden,
at Mount Oliuet.
Now enters he into Mount Oliuet,
Wherein the Garden was, or very near it:
His Passions-first-encounters here he met,
So strong they were, that he confessed to fear it.
With grief and sorrow he was so oppressed,
His Soul within him could not be at rest.
132.
Antithesis betwixt the 'vision on Mount Tabor, and the agony on Mount Oliuet.
Look Stan. 23.
Three of his choice Disciples him attended,
The same who on Mount Tabor saw the vision:
They were well pleased there, but here offended,
This agony, unlike that apparition:
That place they wished for their habitation,
Here they were drowzie, void of consolation.
133.
He in his wonted manner falls to pray,
Commanding them with him awhile to watch:
And parting therehence but a little way,
They slumbering, a nap begin to fetch:
Whilst he lies prostrate flat upon his face,
And humbly to his God commends his case.
134.
He prayed with his face flat on the ground.
His agony we may conceive was great,
Expressed by prayers threefold repetition:
By humble gesture, and by bloody sweat,
By sticking to it without intermission:
Only for his Disciples, care he takes,
From sleep, with admonitions, them awakes.
135.
He prays his Father take from him this Cup,
The Cross, which he perceau'd so near at hand:
Entreats that he may not drink it up,
Yet gladly does to this condition stand.
If it accord so with his Fathers will,
Which for his part he is ready to fulfill.
136.
A lesson for all Christen men to learn,
R^m. 8. 26.
Because we know not how aright to pray,
What Is fit, what not, unable to discern,
By ignorance do often walk astray:
Whenever to our God we make petition,
Let it be done upon the same condition.
137.
Judas with his train,
Now comes the Traitor with his Judas kiss,
(The reading of it makes me fear, and blush.)
His troop a rablement of rake-hells is,
The sign once given, upon our Lord they rush.
Sent by the Priests.
With swords and staves, as 'twere to take a Thief;
These acted, yet the Priests and Scribes were chief.
138.
Peter strikes with his sword;
Here Peter his late promise to make good,
(Like him that meant not bulged) draws out his sword:
He strikes at one who amongst that Rabble stood
Cut off his ear, which Christ healed with a word:
Rebuked him for zeal used out of season,
Proves that his doing wanted ground of reason.
139.
Reprehended for so doing.
Thou need'st not draw thy sword in my defense,
Were I disposed to rid me of their hand:
Most speedily I could convey me hence,
Pass through the midst of them as here they stand.
Even with a word I can them all confound,
And lay them prostrate flat upon the ground.
140.
Ioh. 18. 6. 9.
Have thou forgot, when they came first to take me,
My voice no sooner sounded in their ear:
But they fell backwards ready to forsake me,
All daunted and astonished with fear:
Till by my second speech I showed assent,
They might perform the deed 'bout which they went.
141.
Or think thou, were I disposed to fight,
I stand in need of Iron, or of Steel?
No: Legions wait on me of Angels bright,
One of them could make all this troop to reele:
But since the Scriptures say, Thus it must be,
I am content they have their will on me.
142.
He. and all the rest of the Apostles fly.
Then all the Apostles turn their backs, and fly:
He (with the rest) who lately 'gan to fight,
Few hours before, who vowed with Christ to die:
(Too much it seems they trusted their own might.)
Both he and they proved constant afterward,
And of their sufferings, now enjoy rewards.
143.
Nor fled they till their Lord forbid them fighting,
So long as they expected his assistance,
They knew his power, and lived in hope of righting:
But when they saw he would use no resistance,
Then every man begins to shift for one,
And left their Master with his foes alone.
144.
Christ led bound to Caiphas.
As yet they had not used violence,
His Person seized on, he straight is bound,
Hence forth begins their rage and insolence:
First, search is made what witness may be found,
Some false were had, but they appeared such,
As disagreeing him they would not touch.
145.
False witnesses suborned.
At last came two, who under show of troth,
Misconstruing words which long before he spoke,
Auouch't alie, and made it good by oath,
That he the Temple could destroy and make
An other in three days as good as that:
The Counsel seemed well satisfied thereat.
146.
Simple proof to condemn one to death.
The Priest lays hold on this poor allegation,
As of a point that touched him somewhat what nie,
Whereon he grounds a fresh'examination:
But Christ to it vouchsaft not a reply.
Had it been so just as the witness spoke,
An upright Judge thereof could nothing make.
147.
Like Judge, like Witness.
But Judge and Witness here were much alike.
What hope of Justice in so bad a Court?
They judge, accuse, and for false witness seek,
Proof or no proof, Christ needs must suffer for it.
Ioh. 11. 50.
The Priest vnweeting did so prophecy,
That he of force must for the people die.
148.
They condemn him upon his own words, for speaking the truth.
Yet Caiphas casts about another way,
Those proofs of men suborned, fell out but od:
He charge Christ in brief the truth to say,
There to adiures him by the living God,
To tell him whether he be very Christ,
The true Messiah, Son unto the highest.
149.
Matthew. 26. 64.
He wayues it not, but does the thing auerre,
And thereto adds a fearful commination,
Which might them from their wickedness deter:
You shall (says he) once see strange alteration,
Me coming in the clouds with majesty,
And all the powers of the Deity.
150.
They judge him a blasphemer, and worthy to die.
Now from this time the scene begins grow hot.
Those words put Caiphas half out of his wits,
He rents his clothes, and does he knows not what,
But like a Bedlam taken in his fits,
Cries out, This man has spoken blasphemy,
What think ye often? They say, he is fit to die.
151.
They spit on him, beat and abuse him.
Then in his face they all begin to spit,
(A fashion only fitting for a Jew)
Some with their fists, some with their rods him smit,
And thus our Lord among this cursed crew,
Was used with all the vilde indignities,
That wit and malice against him could deuize.
152.
The Traitor seeing how the cause succeeded,
Christ thus condemned through his treachery:
His heart with shame, and horror freshly bleeded,
Repents himself, though but dispayringly;
Brought back the money to the Priests, and said,
In sinning I have guiltless blood betrayed.
153.
The wretch, in this hard state of desperation,
Repaires to those who set him on to do it,
Hoping to find with them some consolation:
What Is that to us (quoth they) look thou unto it.
This harsh reply his conscience so entangled,
That pressed with shame and grief, himself he strangled.
154.
The passages about Peter's denial.
It Is said, how Peter followed Christ afar,
His purpose was to see, and note the end:
Not thinking to have found so hot a war,
The issue does his virtue more commend.
All Is well, that ends well. True it is indeed:
As Peter sped, I wish we all may speed.
155.
Note yet the frailty of this holy Saint,
Among all his fellows taken for the chief:
What small occasions moved him to faint,
Deny his Lord, and fail in his belief.
Two seely wenches made him say and swear,
He knew him not. (A matter strange to hear.)
156.
Anon again, a little further pressed,
By men who gave some tokens to discrie him:
With oaths and curses, worse then all the rest,
He faceth out, that they do all belie him.
So crows the cock, Christ back on him does look,
To bitter tears then he himself betook.
157.
We fall from Christ, though not by flat denial,
By slips that differ little in effect:
And like it is, if most were put to trial,
In constancy there would be found defect.
Yet if for faults with Peter we would weep,
The wounds will soon be cured, though they be deep.
158.
Bare weeping in this case suffices not,
1. Cor. 7. Heb. 12. 17.
All sorrow makes not truly penitent:
The sorrow which our sins does cleanly blot,
Is joined with faith, and lives amendment.
The Traitor sorrowing, had nor faith, nor hope,
But in despair prouides himself a rope.
159.
The pattern of a true penitent, in the person of Saint Pete(...)
The blessed Apostle hastens from the Hall,
Forsakes the concourse of that hellish crew:
Retired alone, down on his knees does fall,
Thrice knockes his breast, salt tears his cheeks bedewe,
With sighs and sobs his heart begins to swell,
His soul so vexed, as if'twere then in hell.
160.
His eyes and hands he up to heaven does hold,
But shame forth with constraines him cast them down:
As fearing least therein he were too bold,
And thinks the God of hea(...)'n does on him frown:
Till mindful of his Masters gracious glaunce,
Begins with hope his hanging head t'aduaunce.
161.
Then thus he says: unhappy wretched man,
No sooner were his lips set open to speak,
In vain he strives: For do what e're he can,
With throbbings fresh, his heart is ready break.
New showers of tears descended down so fast,
They brought him near the point to breathe his last.
162.
A Comparison.
Much like a gentle Virgin, tender hearted,
Linkt to a noble pheere in true affection;
If by some sad disaster they be parted,
The doubting of her modest loves reiection,
Lives only by the hope of reobtayning
Her honored mate, all comfort else refraying.
163.
This holy man, thus passionate a while,
Recounting with himself his great offense,
In hope his injured Lord to reconcile,
Resolves to wayue all color of defense,
And meekely prostrate at his Throne of Grace,
Repenting sues for pardon in that place.
164.
First here my fault I humbly do confess,
A fault for which thou justly may st reject me,
Doom me to hell, (Since I deserve no less)
Yet in thy mercy (gentle Lord) respect me:
Restore me to thy favor as before,
Vp-hold me with thy Grace, from falling more,
165.
Too much I trusted late to my own strength,
Presumed no persecutions blasts should ouer-blow me
From thy sweet side: But I have proved at length,
That puffes of maidens mouths did overthrow me:
It rents my heart to think so weak a trial,
Should force thy servant to so strong denial.
166.
I see, when man unto himself is left,
No power he has to keep himself from sliding:
The great'st and best, Once of thy grace berest,
Can find no place of rest, or sure abiding:
Those only stand, whom thou by grace do stay,
Without thy saving Grace, they fall away.
167.
What do thou (Lord) of sinful men require,
But from hearts-bottome, true vnfeyn'd confession?
Lo, I confessing, pardon do desire,
My heart, thou know, is humbled with contrition:
To satisfy the Justice, I Am not able:
With mercy wash me white, now wholly sable.
168.
My fall shall be a warning unto others,
Not in their might, but in thy aid to trust:
Not to think of themselves above their brothers:
Since all offenders are, thou only just.
From Justice to thy mercy I appeal,
Give balm of grace, my wounded Soul to heal.
169.
Then in thy saving health I shall rejoice,
Endeavor still thy holy Laws to keep:
To yield thee praise and thanks, with heart and voice,
And follow thee my Pastor, I thy sheep:
Confirming others, when I am made strong,
And die a Martyr (through thy grace) ere long.
170.
Oftrue and false repentance here we find,
Two rare examples, written for our learning:
They both repented in a different kind,
From the one comes comfort, from the other warning.
The one repenting gat increase of grace,
Acts 1. 20;
The other lost his office, and his place.
171.
Return we to our blessed Saviors story,
To note the passages anent his passion:
Weeleft him in the (...)ewish Consistory,
Where th(...)y g(...)ue (...)entence for his condemnation.
The cause with them long hangs not in debate,
Job. 11. 50.
They doomed him dead ere they in judgment sat.
172.
They bring Christ bound to Pilas:
Early next morn with speed they led him bound,
Before the civil Roman Magistrate:
The Priests and Elders stood in compass round,
To work the surer on him with their hate:
As men resolved by malice, or by might,
To g(...)t him nailed on the Cross ere night,
173.
Two heads I note of Jewish accusation,
From whence they seek to hasten his destruction:
First against the Law of God, and of their Nation,
His blasphemy: (made so by their construction.)
Upon this point, They for their parts decreed,
There Is no release, but he must die with speed.
174.
The next is affectation of the Crown,
Wherein they hoped of the Romans aid:
Job. 19. 12.
And that was it in fine which bare him down,
When Pilat to condemn him, stood afraid.
He treated with the Jews for his discharge,
And gladly would have let him go at large.
175.
Pilats wives dream.
His wife affrights him with this allegation,
The man and cause are just, pray deal not in it,
I know it by a kind of Divination.
For this last night I in my dream have seen it.
So thought he of a way to let him loose,
But left it to the Priests and Scribes to choose.
176.
They chose Bara^a^.
'Twas used in this feast, That by their choice,
One Pris' nor should be set at liberty:
Of Christ and Barabas he asks their voice,
The Priests, and People (moved by them) all cry,
Let Barabas the thief come on our side,
And as for Christ, let him be crucifide,
177.
Monsters of men! What Canibals were here,
Or rather Devils in a humane shape!
An innocent to quell, a thief to clear,
Condemn the Just, and let a Murderer escape!
Though Pilat did condemn him, yet he acknowledged him to be innocent. They
cry three times, Crucifige
Whom Judas, Pilat, and his Wife acquitted,
Against their conscience, falsely they indicted.
178.
Once Crucifige could not so prevail,
But that the Judge persuades them to relent:
The second time more hotly they assail,
On Crucifige all their breath is spent:
Luke 23. 22.
Thirdly with voices strayn'd more loud they cry,
Whereon the Judge gave sentence he should die.
179.
Pilars hypocrisy in washing his hands.
This wrongful sentence fearfully pronounced,
Before he moved out of the Judgment Hall:
He seems as if the doing he renounced,
And washes clean his hands before them all.
This man (says he) was Just, and I am free
From guiltless blood: Therefore to it So said they before to Judas
see ye,
180.
One dreadful Judgment rests yet behind,
That curse, Or rather cursed execration,
Which to this day the Jewish people find,
Full heavily it hangs upon their Nation:
Sanguis eius super nos, and super filios nostros.
His blood on us, and on our children be.
They had their wish, as all the world may see.
181.
A race of people runnagates on earth,
A man may say, a nationlesse Nation:
Some place they find (as casual) for their birth,
No certain country for their habitation,
That guiltless blood as yet for vengeance cries,
And as their fathers prayed, upon them lies,
182.
In evil howr's some use themselves to curse,
It Is strange a man should take therein delight:
Though all in doing so seem not the worse,
I wish my friend to do himself more right,
To curse no other man, himself much less.
I would advise him rather, both to bless.
183.
Straight after judgment follows execution.
First then the thief and murderer is enlarged,
To freedom he obtayneth restitution;
Our Lord committed to the Soldiers charge,
The Governor commands him to be whipped,
In scorn the Soldiers cause him to be stripped.
184.
The Roman Soldiers deride and mock Christ.
The whole pretorian band together flock
To Pil^tes house, within the common Hall,
To sport themselves, and make of Christ a mock,
Like flies about him they begin to fall:
Or purple.
A scarlet Robe, such as by Kings are worn,
They put upon him, for the greater scorn.
185.
And more to make him counterfeit a King,
A crown of thorns they set upon his head:
For Scepter, they a reed unto him bring;
Thus King-like when they have him furnished,
With bended knee, this taunting speech they use,
All Hail to thee thou Christ King of the Jews.
186.
As did the Jews before, some on him spit,
Some from his hand the reeden scepter take,
Therewith upon the head they do him hit,
And thus of him a ieasting-stocke they make.
Disrobing him, with his own clothes they dress him,
Then to the place of execution press him.
187.
An Amplification by way of Comparison, expressing the perfection of Christ's
passion.
The Chartre-Pardon granted long ago,
To him who first rebelled against heavens King:
Has ever since been tossed to and fro,
Ere to the Great-seale suitors could it bring:
Types, Ceremonies and Sacrifices.
Some privy seals, and signets set unto it,
Yet wanting force effectually to do it.
188.
Genesis 3.
By paroll past this grant in Paradise,
To our great-grandsire Adam and his Wife:
Whom that Arch-Traitor slilie did entice,
To breed betwixt their Lord and them a strife.
It has been long engrossing, now at length
It Is perfected, and fully has its strength,
189.
Gods Son and Heir apparent to the Crown,
Who only had the pow're to make it good:
To perfect it, from heaven, descended down,
And for our sakes has sealed it with his blood.
To this Free-pardon every man has right,
That sues it out. (The charges is but light.)
190.
He by his latest Will and Testament,
Bequeathes to all the Largis of this pardon:
His coming hither was to that intent,
To give all true belieuers that rich guerdon.
It Is had of course, in forma pauperis,
You pay no gold, nor silver see for this.
191.
Lo, now the Lord of life is come to die,
They crucisie him.
To 'byde the pains that we should have endured:
From blessed state to feel all misery,
By Satan and his instruments procured.
His willingness excuses not their fault,
Though he did well, their purposes were naught.
192.
Sundry circumstances aggravating the Passion, and justifying the story.
To circumstances all as they ensue,
With care and heed my reader must attend:
Some do convince the story to be true,
Some are recorded to an other end;
To aggrauate the greatness of the Passion,
Endured in such an ignominious fashion.
193.
The place of dead men's skuls.
Among heaps of dead men's skulls, and scattred bones,
(To strike more terror by that uncouth sight)
The cross was set, it seems for the nonce,
The Jews did all they could to show their spite.
They know not what they do (says he) O Father,
Therefore I pray thee pardon them the rather.
194.
(So prayed Saint Steven for his persecutors,
A fair example for our imitation,
Matthew. 5. 44.
A special lesson 'twas of this great Tutors,
Who taught no cursing, neither execration.
1. Sam. 17. 43.
The proud Philistin fell to curse, and ban,
What time he should have showed himself a man.)
195.
They hang him between two The^ues.
They hanged him up between two Malefactors,
Still seeking how to make him more despised:
As if in thef^ they had been all joint Actors.
Say, was not this maliciously deuiz'd?
They give him vinegar and gall.
For drink they gave him Vinegar and Gall.
Cold charity to comfort one withal.
196.
They part his garments.
His garments into quarters they divide,
'Monst four of them, each man a part does take:
Cast lots for his ^at.
For th'vnseam'd coat they otherwise provide,
To try for that, a lotterie they make.
These things long time before were prophecy'de,
And unawares by them here verify'de.
197.
The superscription, upon his Cro^e.
Upon his Cross is writ a superscription,
In Hebrew letters, Latin, and in Greek.
Of Him and of his Cause a short description,
That all might read, and know it, if they would seek.
To all the world that Title told the news,
Matthew. 27. 37.
That This is Jesus the King of the Jews.
198.
Wherein appeared the^ hand of God.
In this, Gods finger pow'refully was seen;
The Priests were much displeased with the writing,
And wished that somewhat altered it had been:
But God led Pilates hand in that inditing.
By accident here nothing came to pass,
B^ as in heaven before decreed it was.
199.
"A hatred more then deadly, men call that
"Which ouer-liues the death of him that is hated.
In Jewish hearts such endless malice sat,
As by our Saviors death was not abated.
Some Heathens pitied him, whilst Jews reuil'd;
The greater were his pains, the more they smiled.
200.
The Jews revile and rail at him even as he was dying.
Some, wagging heads in scoffing wise did cry,
Thou that the Temple threatnedst to destroy,
And in three days to rear it up as hie,
Now save thy self, defend thee from annoy.
Descend down from the Cross, if thou be able,
Then will we hold thy Doctrine for no fable.
201.
The Priests, the Scribes and Elders thus him taunted:
Others he saved, himself let him reprieue,
If he be Isr'els King as erst he vaunted,
Let him come from the Cross, so we will believe.
He put his trust in God: if God will have him,
(Whose Son he said I am) let God now save him.
202.
Note the odd^ betwixt the two Thieves.
One of the Thieves likewise began to rail,
His Mate thus roundly checks him for his error:
Cannot the fear of God with thee prevail,
Nor thy just judgment strike in thee a terror?
For our ill deeds we rightly suffer this,
But he has wrong, who did nothing amiss.
203.
Then with a faith never enough admired,
Directs his speech unto our blessed Savior:
A boon of him he heartily desired,
His faith encouraged him to that behavior:
Lord, to thy Kingdom when thou come, said he,
Though wretched I be here, remember me.
204.
A Simile: or rather a dissimile.
He sped not like a Suitor in some Court,
Who happ'ning well to put in his petition,
Expecting answer wayteth so long for it,
(Lacking the means to pay for expedition)
As in the end he swears by his gaynes,
And only gets his labor for his pains.
205.
But this Petitioner had a quick dispatch,
A word of comfort to his full content:
For thy preferment long thou shall not watch,
Before this very day be fully spent,
Thy state shall be transmuted in such wise,
As thou shall rest with me in Paradise.
206.
"Sweet solace! Not for that good man alone,
"But for all such as do him imitate:
"The Example s^rues for all, though proved by one,
"For, true repentance never comes too late,
Matthew. 20.
"Much less too soon: when God each man does call,
"Even then to come, is fittest time for all.
207.
Wonders and miracles at the death of Christ. Great darkness.
From twelve a clock till three at afternoon,
A strange eclipse appeared where they did stand:
The Sun gave not his light, nor never shoone,
But darkness ouer-shadow'd all the Land.
The Lord of Life, then at the point to die,
To God allowd with strayned voice did cry.
208.
His Spirit to his Father he commends,
Act. 7.
(Did not the Protomartyr do like wise?)
With Consummatum est his life he ends;
Then fully ended all the prophecies,
The office of Messiah was perfected,
All types and figures after that rejected.
209.
The Temple cleaues in two.
At his departure wonders strange appeared.
From top to foot the Temple cleaues in twain,
(To show that we from Jewish Rites were cleared.)
The Rocks are rent.
The Rocks are rent, the Earth does quake amayne:
Yet Jews were moved therewith no more then stocks,
Their hearts were harder then the flintie Rocks.
210.
The Graves do open.
The Graves and Tombs of Saints long dead, flew open:
The Bodies rose, that many years lay sleeping:
Saints long agone dead arise and appear.
The Resurrection this did well betoken,
That soul and body both are in Gods keeping.
And cause no doubt thereof should rest in any,
Within the City they were seen of many.
211.
It makes me half forget my self with wonder,
To think how much those stubborn Jews were blinded:
What held their hearts from bursting quite asunder,
What passion made the men so grossly minded,
That these great signs and tokens never moved them,
Where senseless things, and Heathen men reprou'd them.
212.
The Centurions conversion, and confe^sion: with his soldiers.
The Captain or Centurion of the band,
With Soldiers for the watch attending there:
At those strange sights did all amazed stand,
Extremely moved in their hearts with fear:
Confessed that this was certainly Gods Son,
For whom so many miracles were done.
213.
See before at Stan. 161.
These were the men that some few hours before,
Derided, scoft, and scorned him in the Hall:
It seems now they were agrieu'd therefore,
By this confession which they here let fall.
Matthew. 21. 11.
It Is like that diverse of them were converted,
Though some by Jewish Rulers were perverted.
214.
Holy women.
Of holy Jewish Women not a few,
(Some named in honor of their memory)
Attended thereabouts in modest show,
To do their duties at his obsequie.
Luke 23. 56.
Of Spice and Ointments they prepared store,
T'embalme that body which they loved before,
215.
To bring him to the grave in decent-wise,
As well beseem'd a man of no mean place,
According to his native country guise:
Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus. Ioh. 19. 38.
Two men of special note did him that grace.
Yet, ere his body taken from the tree,
One thing deserves well observed to be.
216.
Not a bone of him broken, but his side pierced.
Of both the Thieves we read the legs were broken,
Only his side they pierced with a spear:
By holy Prophets so it was fore-spoken,
The prophecies were full accomplished here.
Thus wrapped in Spice, and rowll'd in linen clothes,
Unto the Tomb that Sacred body goes.
217.
His new tomb
What kind of Tomb? not dig'd in sand or clay,
But neat and cleanly, hew'ne out of a rock:
The Tomb was new, wherein no man ere lay;
To take from Priests and Scribes all cause of mock,
That some good man interred there of yore,
And not our Lord, to life God did restore.
218.
A Comparison.
His body coming from a Virgins womb,
Wherein no body ever came, but it:
Was aptly buried in a Mayden-tombe,
Th'analogie therein does finely fit.
Here leave we this blessed body, for three days:
Then sing how God to life the same did raise.
The end of the sixth Classis.
DIVINE POEMS. The seventh Classis.
THE ARGUMENT.
Jews Priests decyphred by a short digressing.
The story of Christ's glorious Resurrection,
Each circumstance the verity expressing,
Against Sadduces and Epicures suggestion.
Th'Ascension proved: Doomes-day laid open to view*
The Bliss of Saints; Woes of the damned crew.
Christ's body l^y intombed from the evening on friday to Sunday morning: viz
part of two days, and one whole Sabbath.
Muse, stop the source of thy divine narration,
Whilst that our Lord within his Tomb lies sleeping:
Betake thee to some holy Meditation,
Spend one whole Sabbath in laments, and weeping.
A solemn Jewish feast, and Sabbath day,
In which that Sacred Body sprightlesse lay.
2.
A Sabbath, yet in truth no day of rest:
A day in name, more properly a night:
Despair and fear the faithful hearts possessed,
Their Sun eclipst, imparts to them no light.
Blind Jewish Rulers, of their damned deed vaunted,
When Christ's Disciples woefully were daunted.
3.
Me thinks I see, as pictured in a Table,
(That day in which the Lord of Life lay dead.)
A crew of Rabbis seeming venerable,
Walk arm in arm, each one the other led:
Joyous they seemed, for what they late had done,
In killing Christ the Carpenters poor Son.
4.
Jewish Priests decyphered, insulting over Christ crucified.
How did the man (quoth one) our state abuse,
So poor in port, so mean in his condition:
To claim this Royal Style, King of the Jews,
A testimony of his vain ambition!
Well are we now from that poor King set free,
For our Messiah must a Conqueror be.
5.
The famous Prophet Moses long ago,
Foretold our Fathers, such a one as he
God would raise up, to save us from our foe,
And crown us with perpetual victory.
As for this Christ, he had no heart to fight,
But rather suffer wrong and lose his right.
6.
The simple people thickly to him flockt,
To see some works of his, and hear him preach:
Their ignorance he much abused, and mocked,
The depth of his deceits they could not reach:
Our learned Priests, and Rulers found him out,
None claue to him, but of the vulgar rout.
7.
With Publicanes and Sinners he conuerst,
Did many works upon the Sabbath days:
The Law of Moses he would have reuerst,
And led our Tribes into his crooked ways:
Though thus he did, yet some so sottish were,
As to his newfound doctrine lend their ear.
8.
It Is true, he wrought some wonders now and then,
That might be wrought by favor of the Devil:
As curing lunatikes, and such like men
Possessed by spirits wicked, foul and evil.
A holy man of God he could not be,
Whom he prouokt with open blasphemy,
9.
Vaunting himself to be Gods only Son,
A fellow-partner in the Deity,
Equal with God: None since the world begun,
Assumed it to himself, but only he.
Say, was not this a cursed child of Cham,
That lift himself above father Abraham?
10.
We saw him gasping yield his latest breath,
Others he help, himself he could not save:
His Godhead like a man endured death,
Now lies his body senseless in the grave.
Then let us see if he will rise to morrow,
And rid his poor Disciples from their sorrow.
11.
They might (perhaps) by night have stolen him thence,
So drawn the people to a further error:
But we have set a watch for our defense,
A guard to us, and unto them a terror.
Let others talk their pleasure for a spurt,
Dead men (say I) will never do us hurt.
12.
Did we not well in dooming him to die,
Who being poor, aspired unto the Crown?
A mortal man, challenged divinity?
'Twas more then time to pull this fellow down,
Thus in the Temple as they walk, and jet,
Each one the others saying does abet.
13.
These and such like discourses there they held,
In triumph sang before the victory:
In malice swim'd, in pride lift-vp they swelled,
The end turned to their shame, and infamy.
"So men that in their neighbors fall do glory,
"Shall see him glad, when they themselves be sorry.
14.
The heaviness and mourning of the Disciples and other Belieuers.
Meanewhile, the sad Disciples of our Lord,
And holy Women, such as loved him living,
Assembling in one place with joint accord,
Consume their eyes with tears, their hearts with grieuing:
They hang their heads, sighing one with another,
As tender children robbed of their mother.
15.
A Sabbath day 'twas, and a solemn feast,
But all their mirth was turned into mourning:
Their restless sorrows yielded them no rest,
Cold fear seaz'd some, with zeal some hearts were burning.
All comfortless, none comforted his mate,
Like men aston'd by Basiliskes they sat.
16.
Some, first their own faint-heartednesse accuse,
Some, Pilat and the Romans do condemn:
All jointly blame the Rulers of the Jews,
For murthring him who did no hurt to them.
Not one remembered what Christ often had said,
To comfort them when they were most dismayed.
17.
How he was borne to suffer grief and pain,
As in the Psalms and Prophets it is writ:
To suffer death, yet soon to rise again,
Then mount to heaven, and their in glory sit.
This lesson often taught them, they forgot,
Or scarce belieu'd, or understood it not.
18.
Mark 16. 10.
Thus that whole day, and all the night they spent,
As mourners use, for dearest friends departed:
The men their clothes, their hair the women rent,
Sad in their faces, yet more sable-hearted.
Early next morn before the break of day,
Some holy women hye themselves away.
19.
Their errand was, the Sepulcher to see,
The place, for love of him that in it lay:
To do on Christ a work of piety,
Their latest duty to the dead to pay.
Of sweet and costly spices they brought store,
To do it well once, which could be done no more.
20.
Here was that blessed Mary Magdalen,
Which in his life time did on him such cost:
As made the Traitor Judas to repine,
And wretchedly complain, that all was lost.
Once more this holy Woman does her best,
To show her zeal to Christ among the rest.
21.
This was indeed a holy Pilgrimage,
A pious Christian work of pure devotion:
If all the Pilgrims in this later age,
Did ground their iournies on so good a motion:
With slender errors men might well dispense,
Nor at the civil custom take offense.
22.
The Author prays briefly
Here my devotions, Lord I humbly tender,
Upon the Altar of a contrite heart:
A sacrifice I offer, poor and slender,
Yet such as thou acceptest in good part:
Hos. 14. 2.
The calves of lips prepared thee to praise,
For thy great Grace, and mercies many ways.
23.
But chiefly for thy precious Death and Passion,
The means that frees us from the Devils thrall:
Consummate by thy strange Resuscitation,
1. Pet. 1. 3.
The root of lively hope in Christians all.
So make us die to sin, and live to thee,
That to good works disposed we may be.
24.
Now mark the story of the Resurrection,
Each circumstance deserves deep attention:
Let ears, and hearts with reverent subjection,
Yield full assent. (it is no feyn'd invention.)
The truth in every point appears so plain,
To amplify upon it, were but vain.
25.
The women's coming to the Sepulcher. Matthew. 28.
When first the women came unto the place,
What formerly befell, the Text does show:
Aglorious Angel with bright-shining face,
His garments whiter then the driven snow,
Descending strangely made the earth to quake,
For fear of whom, the armed watchmen shake.
26.
A band of Roman soldiers well provided,
Were set to keep the body from surprising:
Their policies the Lord of Hosts derided,
This guard confirms our Saviors powr'full rising.
In their own craft Iew-Statists were 'ore-reach't,
Christ's godhead more confirmed, which they impeacht.
27.
A Simile or Comparison.
"There Is no disaster like i'th'warres to that,
"As when a Chiefetaine, trusting by his wit,
"To cheat his foe-man with a cunning plat,
"Is caught himself, and sowley foiled in it.
So here this subtle Jewish stratagem,
Made more for Christ, and quite confounded them.
28.
The watch amazed with that glorious vision,
Dead stricken in a swound upon the place,
Reviving with some little intermission,
Advisedly bethink them on the case:
The fact was clear, and not to be concealed,
By us (said they) 'twere best to be revealed.
29.
Classis. 6. St. 189.
It Is like enough, as lately at the Passion,
The miracles there done, converted some:
So, things here hap'ning in so strange a fashion,
Caused many to the Christian Faith to come.
Only some of them posted to the Jews,
And freely opened to them all the news.
30.
Perhaps they told it to asayre intent,
Pricked in their hearts with such an heavenly sight,
Not well fore-casting what might be the event,
Nor that the Priests informed of the right,
Would offer to oppose a truth so clear,
But feel remorse when they thereof did hear.
31.
Yet who could hope for any true compunction,
I'th'hearts of Jewish Priests, in whom Christ's warkes,
When amongst them he discharged his holy function,
Could not beget the smallest fiery sparks
Of burning zeal to Truth, by him affirmed,
And fully out of holy writ confirmed.
32.
The Priests corrupt the soldiers with money.
No, no: Those ghostly fathers soon assemble,
With Elders, Scribes, and others of that rabble:
Against their knowledge falsely they dissemble,
To blurre the truth, devise an idle fable,
That Christ's Disciples closely thither crept,
And stole him thence, the whilst the watchmen slept.
33.
To gain some credit to this truthlesse tale,
The soldiers were entic't, and won with bribes,
To set their faith and honesty at sale:
(A shameless pranke of Priests, and learned Scribes)
Those men of war with large rewards thus hired,
Consent to say as th'Elders had conspired.
34.
Avarice. 1. Tim. 6.
"Oh what a cursed crime is Avarice?
"The root from whence springs many a damned deed:
"A covetous man has share in every vice,
"His money he adoreth in Gods stead.
"His soul for money he consents to sell,
"His Counting House, is heaven: the Church, his hell,
35.
It Was money first made Judas to deuize,
Against his Lord, that plot of treachery:
It Was money made the Soldiers bolster lies,
Against the truth, and known verity:
The Devil taught those Jewish Priests the skill,
For crossing Christ, to work their wretched will.
36.
Strange was the cancred malice of these Jews,
Who rather then confess their fault, and mend:
Would yield, themselves thus grossly to abuse,
With all their race, even to the later end.
For as the Fathers taught the watch to say,
So do their children prattle at this day.
37.
What happened to the Women at the Scpulere.
But note what to those holy Women fell.
The watchmen mazed, half frighted of their wits:
The Angel cheered, and used the women well,
Upon the Tomb dore-stone he sweetly sits:
Pluck up your hearts, (says he) he not afraid,
Come see the place whereas the Lord was laid.
38.
He Is risen from the dead, as often he told you,
With speed to his Disciples make it known:
Be strong in Faith, let no suspicion hold you,
Himself ere long in person will be shown:
Him, you and they in Galile shall see,
Lo what I speak, will sure fulfilled be.
39.
In fear and joy they parted thence apace,
To make relation of the Angels errant:
Ere far they were removed from the place,
(Their faith to strengthen by a further warrant)
Upon the way, their Lord directly meets them,
And with a gracious salutation greetes them.
40.
As Soon as they beheld him with their eyes,
Amazed at the strangeness of the thing:
To free their hearts from doubt of fantasies,
Straight with their hands to feel him they begin:
Yet humbly as for such a Lord was meet,
Matthew. 28. 9^
Pressing to touch him only by the feet.
41.
Those feet, for which a Bath as salt as bryne,
Blessed Magdalen prepared at a dinner,
With tears distilling from her blubbred eyne:
Luke 7. 39.
(Now holy Woman, Once a noted sinner.)
Kissing them with her lips incessantly,
And wiped them with her hair, till they were dry.
42.
Those feet, which lately nailed to the tree,
Gave drops of blood, all precious baulmes excelling
To cure the wounded souls of thee and me,
And purchase pardon for our foul rebelling
Against heavens King: which none else could have done.
But only he, Gods sole begotten Son.
43.
With reverence they coupled adoration,
Now well assured of his divinity:
On him they fix the hope of their salvation,
Who over death and hell, gat victory.
Blessed Women Saints, selected first to see
Their Savior, in his state of Majesty.
44.
Has not God chosen things of small esteem,
^. Cor. 1. 27.
And foolish in appearance, to confound
Such as in the eyes of worldlings glorious seem?
Examples daily proving this, abound.
Christ's birth to simple shepherds first made known,
His Resurrection first to women shown.
45.
He comforts them, as th'Angell late had done:
Take courage now, there is no cause of fear:
^ob. 20. 17.
Unto my brethren (O sweet words!) go run,
Tell them the truth of all that is happened here.
Command them hasten into Galilee,
For there my self in person shall they see.
46.
Ioh. 20.
Next witnesses are Peter, and Saint John,
Who pricked with zeal upon the first relation,
With all their might unto the place they ran.
To testify their holy emulation.
Shrowd-clothes within the Sepulcher they find,
The body gone, those only left behind.
47.
Verse 10.
The sight whereof begets in them belief,
Remembering then what Scriptures did contain:
That he must suffer death, oppressed with grief,
Yet triumph over death, and rise again.
Thus settled in their faith, home they return
Repleat with joy, and cease thenceforth to mourn,
48.
Luke 24. 13. and Mar. 16. 12
Twice more he showed himself that very day,
Desirous soon to put them out of fear.
As two of them to Emaus held their way,
In shape (at first) unknown he did appear.
By Scriptures proving how it ought to be,
And breaking bread, They saw that it was he,
49.
Whereas before they rested in despair,
Luke 24. 21. Note it.
(Their words to Christ himself imply no less)
Ere he was dead (forsooth) their hopes were fair
He should have saved them: (so they confess)
Inferring thus, since he was dead and slain,
That now their further hope in him was vain.
50.
"An error deeply rooted in the heart,
"Requires great pain and skill to move it thence.
Christ to his Scholars often did impart,
A doctrine whereat still they took offense:
He preached of sufferings, persecutions, crosses,
Yet they corrupt the Text with carnal glosses.
51.
Their Christ must be a powerful earthly King,
The Priests and Scribes therein at first misse-led them:
We find them always harping on that string,
With such gross food their fleshly motions fed them:
But when he rose from death, and showed his glory,
Then they believed aright the sacred story.
52.
Thus yeildeth he to their infirmities,
Nor leaves them till in faith he makes them sound:
To all their senses he himself applies,
That in the end with him they might be crowned,
1. Pet. 1. 9.
And of their precious faith receive the pay,
Their souls salvation at the later day.
53.
That evening when they altogether met,
For fear of Jews within a private place:
Even in the midst of them where they were set,
When doors were shut, he stands before their face:
Salutes them, shows his hands, and pierced side,
Wherewith all present there were satisfi'de.
54.
That day, three times, at Morning, Noone, and Even,
Himself he offered to be seen, and felt.
Could any fairer proof then this be given?
For our behoof the Lord thus freely dealt.
And so he made his dear Disciples glad,
Who ever since his Passion had been sad.
55.
The Apostle Thomas absent in that season,
Informed by his fellows of the troth,
Would not believe a thing so far past reason,
Unless by seeing, and by feeling both
The nailed hands, and gored feet and side,
With fingers thrust therein, it might be tried.
56.
Hereby the Truth received more confirmation,
Christ yiedling to our imbecilitie:
Ioh. 20. 26.
Some eight days after in the self same fashion,
(Thomas then sitting in their company)
Comes in among them, bids him see, and feel him:
Who forthwith for his Lord and God does style him.
57.
No sooner had Saint Thomas so confessed,
The Lord his faiths confession did accept:
Yet with more emphasis pronounced them blessed,
In whom true faith should work as full effect,
Though him in person they had never seen,
Nor ever with him conversant had been.
58.
A gracious, sweet, and heavenly consolation,
To all who firmly with a steadfast faith,
Embrace The Word which guides us to salvation,
And freely yield assent to what Christ says.
Romans 10.
Our faith by hearing comes, and not by sight;
Is fruitful in good works, if it be right.
59.
More signs and tokens yet then these, were wrought,
For full assurance of the Resurrection:
To write them all, it was not needful thought,
Th'Euangelists had not their own election,
But wholly guided by the holy Sprite,
As much as was expedient, did write.
60.
It Is written, how he asked of them meat,
They gave him honey-combe, and broyled fish:
Then in their presence he thereof did eat,
And forthwith quits them with a better dish;
A heavenly food, their hungry souls to cherish;
Who soundly feeds thereon, shall never perish.
61.
The words which he before his Passion told them,
He freshly calls unto their memory:
That fast in mind they afterward might hold them,
The substance of the sacred History
Concerning Him, his Passion, and his Rising,
To cause them stand on Faith, not on surmizing.
62.
Their wits were dull, and slow of apprehension,
Which he vouchsaft by grace so to enlighten,
As that to the holy Text they gave attention,
And so their former errors all, do righten;
Fully confirmed in this point of their Creed,
Their minds from doubts and scruples wholly freed,
63.
Most gross had been their incredulity,
If seeing proofs far cleerer then the Sun,
All jumping with the sacred History,
With unbelieving Rabbis they had run,
Shutting their eyes through malice, or of spite,
And loving darkness rather then the light.
64.
Yet for their better satisfaction,
1. Cor. 15.
Five hundred men and more in open view,
All at one time were witness to the action:
What needed more to prove the story true?
Where two or three confirm a thing by oath,
Amongst honest men it is taken for a troth.
65.
Let Infidels blasphemously deride,
And scorn this doctrine of the Resurrection;
The story here so clearly iustifi'de,
Affoords to all, but Atheists, satisfaction:
"Yet faith, though furthred by such helps as these,
"Is Gods free gift, bestowed where he does please.
66.
The 'article of our Creed touching the Resurrection, by Christ proved; and
Sadduces consuted. Matthew. 22.
The Sadduces, in sooth mere Epicures,
Who in this life placed all felicity,
Devoted wholly to their worldly pleasures,
Supposed the soul did with the body die:
They pressed our Savior with a weak objection,
Intending to confute the Resurrection.
67.
Of all the cauills used against our Lord,
By Jews or Gentiles to oppose the Truth,
(Whereof the sacred Writers make record)
There Is none so fond as this which here ensu'th:
By gross conceiting in that blessed life,
A carnal coupling of the Man, and Wife.
68.
In Socrates, or Platoes heathen schools,
Had these men such a sottish question moved,
I guess they had been hissed out for fools,
No answer to so fond a iost behou'd.
Verse. 33. 34.
Yet he by Scriptures does them so confute,
That others wonder, and themselves stand mute.
69.
You err (says he) through Scriptures ignorance:
(Of errors all in faith, the chiefest ground.)
For, Saints possessing heavens inheritance,
To marriage Rites and duties are not bound:
But Angell-like do live in full perfection,
To carnal Laws no longer in subjection.
70.
Of Abr'ham, Isak, and of Israel
I am the God. (Says God who lives for aye.)
Is he a God of dead, or living? Tell.
The men were dumb, and had no more to say.
A shallow question answered most profoundly,
The Resurrection thence confirmed soundly.
71.
The general resurrection further proved and described out of Scriptures.
Psalm. 16. 2. Hos. 6. 2. 1. Cor. 15. 20.
By sundry places of the elder Writ,
The Resurrection plainly taught we see:
David the King directly points at it,
So do some Prophets else as well as he.
These properly relate to Christ our Head,
Whom Scriptures call, the first fruits of the dead.
72.
As he is first, and sanctifies the rest,
So shall the members with their head partake:
If Christ his resurrection be confessed,
For rising of our bodies, it does make.
We must acknowledge both, or both deny:
For Scriptures both alike do justify.
73.
Good Job, a righteous man of special note,
Job 19. 25.
Most clearly of this point did prophecy:
His Creed in this behalf he plainly wrote,
That in his flesh, and with that very eye,
He should see God, through his Almighty power,
Though worms his earthly carcass did deuowre.
74.
2. Mac. 7.
Such was the hope of those renowned Jews,
Whose constancy deserves admiration,
Whom shamefully Antiochus did use,
And urge them to have done abomination:
Verse. 9.
With joy they suffered death in bitter pain,
Assured that God would raise them up again.
75.
What gives men courage in a cause that is good,
Expose their persons freely to all dangers:
For King and Countries sake to spend their blood,
Upon this earth account themselves as strangers:
Heb. 11.
But full assurance of those future joys,
Whereto all earths delights compared, are toys?
76.
Yea some, in life and manners most profane,
Who seem to care for neither God, nor Devils:
With sudden terrors oftentimes are taken,
Their conscience them accusing of their evils:
Confounded in their hearts, are forced to tremble,
Unable longer closely to dissemble.
77.
Eze. 37.
Mark how an heap of bones dry'de-vp, and withred,
With flesh and sinews clothed were of new:
In troop like armed men on sudden gathred,
To shadow-out what lastly shall ensue,
When as the Archangels trumpet shrill will sound,
Revel. 20. 13.
The Sea yield up her dead, and so the ground.
78.
3. Esd. 2. 42.
A noble Jewish Scribe, a man of fame,
Beloved of God, of Kings a favorite:
Revealed to him in vision saw the same;
And for our comfort in his Book does write,
The Resurrection full of state, and glory,
Observe that parcel of his worthy story.
79.
A people numberless stood on Mount Sion,
Praising the Lord of heaven in Psalms, and Hymns:
One taller then the rest (as 'twere a Lion
Among lesser beasts) much fairer in his limbs,
Put crowns upon their heads, palms in their hands,
Whereat this holy man amazed stands.
80.
An Angel tells him, these men mortal were,
Now are they clothed with immortality:
The Son of God is he whom thou see there,
Which gives them crowns, and palms for victory:
Since they his name once manfully confessed,
Now in his Kingdom he esteems them blessed.
81.
Chap. 14. 34.
So in another place he gives us warning,
Our hearts and understanding to reform:
(A godly lesson, short, and worth the learning)
That after death we may escape the storm,
Which down to hell all wicked men will drive:
For good and bad, must after death revive.
82.
Esaias 26. 19.
The Son of Amos, Prophet most divine,
None spoke of things to come more plain then he,
As if they had been set before his eyne:
He says, that dead to life restored shall be.
A wake ye that in dust now lie, and sing:
For as the watered herb, so shall you spring.
83.
To thee sweet lovely Daniel was revealed
This mystery, most needful to be known:
Thou laidst open that, when others close were sealed,
Dan. 12. 2.
This doctrine in our ears by thee is blown:
That such as sleep in dust, shall yet awake,
Some in great glory, some in shame partake.
84.
Note the vanity of worldlings and E. pi^ur^s described. Wisd. 2.
Well does the wise King, wicked men upbraid,
Their sottishness and foolerie deride:
Who with the shortness of this life dismayed,
And thinking on none other like beside;
Exhort each other here whilst they have leisure,
To spend their days in vanity, and pleasure.
85.
Edamus and Bibamus, cras moriemur. 1. Car. 15.
Our time (say they) is short, and full of care,
There Is no returning back ward from the grave:
Our breath is as a smoke, or subtle air,
A small assurance of our life we have:
Our bodies breathless made, will soon be rotten,
We and our names be suddenly forgotten.
86.
Come on, let us enjoy the present time,
Let Us frolike freely in our ages spring:
Anoint our selves with costly oil, quaffe wine,
Refresh our hearts with each delightful thing.
Let Us leave some tokens to posterity,
Of our voluptuous sports, and jollitie.
87.
Let Us grind the poor, widow, and the just,
Our will (when we have power) esteem for Law:
Looze all the reins of liberty to our lust:
What need we of our Elders stand in awe?
From mirth and pleasures they seek to restrain us,
In crabbed ways of virtue they would train us.
88.
Their ends to ours are merely opposite,
The ways which we walk in, to them are grievous:
They think we all run wrong, themselves go right,
Of youthful sports they study to bereave us:
They call themselves Gods children: let us prove,
What good in fine betides them by his love.
89.
These be the doctrines of the damned crew,
Whom scornefully the Wiseman reprehendeth:
From Epicures those principles they drew,
Their life and precepts hereto solely tends,
The Resurrection flatly to deny,
Think souls and bodies both together die.
90.
wisd. 5.
But when in Hell these wretches feel their torment,
Fear and amazement will their souls oppress:
Then all too late they shall begin repent,
Their former error, urged with grief, confess.
Beholding blessed Saints, whom once they scorned,
Sitting on seats, with glorious crowns adorned.
91.
Lo, these be they whom whilom we derided,
Their virtuous life, we reck'ned to be madness:
Now God for them has graciously provided,
Converted all their mourning into gladness.
Woe worth the time, when we so grossly erred,
And our amendment totally deferred.
92.
Would cursed Atheists, and loose Libertines
(Of whom so many in these days abound)
Often ruminate and think on this by times,
If in this point of Creed, their faith were sound,
That souls and bodies in the Judgment day,
Shall both be joined, and jointly have their pay:
93.
A Simile.
(As friends or linked mates that mischief plot,
In felony, or treason do conspire;
Convicted of the crime, have both one lot,
Offending both alike, receive like hire:
Like fault, like forfeit Justice does decree,
She Is blind, and never can the parties see.)
94.
Then would not vice and lewdness be so rife,
Nor plain and honest dealing laid aside:
More faith and love would be t'wixt man and wife,
Less surfeiting in riot, and less pride.
For either hope of heaven, or fear of hell,
Would force such as believe them, to live well.
95.
More proofs of the resurrection. By Christ, and his Apostles, and others.
This Article ought not so strange to seem,
If former things with future we compare:
We read, some dead restored to life have been,
Admit examples in this case be rare;
Yet if some have been so, why may not more?
And all in the end, as well as few before?
96.
3. Cor. 15. 19.
If good men in this life alone have hope,
Above all else most wretched were their state:
Gods Justice therefore seems to have this scope,
Both good and bad, once to remunerate.
Luke 16. 25.
Some here, with all delights have full refection,
Some others find it in the resurrection.
97.
No man confessing God, doubts of his pow're.
As all things by his Word, of naught were made;
So all again in minute of an hou're,
At will he can consume, and cause them fade:
That thing which once was, he can soon restore,
As well as make it, when 'twas not before.
98.
The seed which plow'men bury in the earth,
As do our bodies in the grave, so dies it:
But dying, it receives an other birth,
Which death adornes it more, and dignifies it.
So shall our bodies rise the very same,
But much more glorious, and with greater fame.
99.
Not as at first, their substance corruptible,
But in a perfect state of incorruption:
Not as at first, vile, base, and contemptible,
But qualifi'de to honor, and promotion:
Not weak, nor out ward helps (as lately) needing,
But sprit-like, wanting neither clothes, nor feeding.
100.
Had Adam in his innocence remained,
He should have lacked much of that perfection;
Which God out of his goodness has ordained,
For Saints made glorious in the Resurrection:
Though Epicures and damned Atheists scoff it.
Men fearing God, are most assured of it.
101.
The members shall be like unto their head,
Phil. 3. 21^
Our bodies changed, and fashioned like to his:
Not to return again where they were bred,
But joined unto their souls, to live in bliss.
As he up to the heavens did ascend,
All that be his, with him must thither wend.
102.
A Comparison.
What boots it him, who combats for a crown,
His Rival slain, himself to lie in durance?
If having won the field, he is still kept down,
Of state and life eniouing small assurance?
Our Combatant o'recomming, takes the Crown:
Enioyes the Kingdom solely as his own.
103.
By rising from the dead, he death subdude,
Else by his Passion nothing could we gain:
If still in grave his body had been mewed,
Our faith and hope in him, had all been vain.
Es. 25. 8.
But death he swallowed up in victory,
As was foreshew'd us by sure prophecy.
104.
Act. 1. 3. Luke 24. 50.
His resurrection proved so many ways,
By signs and tokens not to be denide,
He lived among The Apostles forty days,
Then taking them to Bethanie aside,
He there bestowed his blessing on th'eleuen,
The Ascension of our Savior.
And in their sight was carried up to heaven.
105.
A Simile.
As when a father tendering in his heart,
His children bred-vp ever in his sight:
Enforced from them in the instant to depart,
Bequeathes them for a all his right
In what he has, which may be for their good;
Just so the case with Christ's Apostles stood.
106.
So they like Orphans of a loving Sire,
By some surprisall suddenly bereft.
To manifest their love and hearts desire,
Stand gazing all amazed, as if by theft
They had been robbed: Their eyes full fixtare are bent,
The way through which that precious booty went.
107.
Two holy Angels suddenly appear
Attired in white; (a badge of innocence)
Ye men (quoth they) why stand you gazing here?
This Jesus who from you is taken hence,
In sort as you have seen him up ascend,
So shall he come again in the worlds end.
108.
Ps. 68. and Ephesians. 4
And thus trimphant mounting up on hie,
(As long before the sacred Psalmist chaunted)
Captive with him he led Captivity,
His foe men all were put to flight, and daunted.
The Devil, Death and Hell with all their trains,
Like captives fettred fast in Iron chains.
109.
No Roman in the highest of their state,
So justly triumphed on their canqu'red foes.
They eftsoons lost, what formerly they gate,
What Christ once won, he never more can lose.
His servants from those Tyrants he set free,
Restored them to perpetual liberty.
110.
Now sits he seated in his heavenly Throne,
Millions of Angels waiting at his beck:
His foes to punish, to protect his own,
To cherish these, but give to those a check.
Matthew. 28. 18.
All pow're is his in earth, and so in heaven,
Both in his right, and by his father given.
111.
Exhortations to suffer afflictions with Christ. Reu. 2. 10.
By lawful conquest he this honor won,
His life a warfare was, so should ours be:
His soldiers must go on, as he begone,
Persevere to the death, and never flee.
For those a Crown of glory he prepared*
Such seruitors are sure of their reward.
112.
A Comparison.
Christ as a King sits on a high Theater.
His men of War march always in his sight:
To know their valors he needs no Relater,
But sees who turns his back, and who does fight.
Perseverance makes men with his accepted,
Back-sliders from his presence are rejected.
113.
Another Comparison^.
Who can behold his Sovereign without blushing,
That placed at a breach to make defense:
When the enemy runs fiercely thither rushing,
Then he for fear of danger flies thence?
Romans 8. 18.
No place shall he have in the Church Triumphant,
That proves false hearted in the Militant.
114.
Has not our Chiefetaine bravely led the way?
His sole example may suffice to move us.
Since he commands ought not we obey?
It Is for our good that he is pleased to prove us.
His servants whom he tries, he keeps from falling,
2. Cor. 12. 8. 9.
His Grace confirms them surer in their calling.
115.
All sufferings in this life, and all oppressings,
How great soever they seem to flesh and blood:
Are but flea-bitings to those great rich blessings,
(If they by us were rightly understood)
Which he hoords up, and keeps for us in store,
So we walk on, as he has done before.
116.
A Simile.
Who would not gladly with his Prince partake,
In deepest dangers of the shapest wars:
Expose himself to perils for his sake,
His body load with wounds, his face with scarres:
Assured in fine the victory to gain,
Romans 8. 17.
And fellow-heire with him in state to reign:
117.
Heb. 12.
"Those Sons whom Fathers love, they most correct:
"And chastic'd children love their parents best:
"Our sons whom least we love, we most neglect,
"Best Soldiers to the hard'st assaults are pressed.
"A General makes like account of dastards,
"As most reputed fathers do of bastards.
118.
Act. 14 23.
In at heavens Gate no entrance can be found,
But only through many tribulations:
The Saints that now live there in glory crowned,
Good men, and virtuous in their generations,
From trialls and afflictions were not free.
And if not they, then tell me why should we?
119.
Aimile.
What man is he that combats for a Crown,
But bends his thoughts directly to the prize?
When in the lists he once has set him down,
No dangers do appear before his eyes:
All hazards seem but strawes cast in his way,
He never looks on them, but at the prey.
120.
Heb. 12.
Look to our Faiths first Author and Perfector:
The hope of made him despise all shame,
Endure the Cross: (therein he is our director.)
We must, as he did, strive for that best game.
Matthew. 16. 24.
(What gains the man who all the world should win,
And lose his soul to Satan by his sin?)
121.
Examples each-where in Gods book abound,
With precepts many thereunto exciting:
Heb. 11. and 12
Among the ancient Hebrews may be found
A Catalogue, against Affictions fighting:
A cloud of Witnesses for imitation,
To make us partners with them in salvation.
122.
With sundry sorts of torments they were frighted,
To change their Faith, and alter their Profession:
Chap 12. 35.
In midst thereof, if seems they were delighted,
Refusing when 'twas offered them, remission:
Of bitter crosses making their election,
In hope to find a better resurrection.
123.
With scornful taunts and ieastings some were mocked,
Made gazing-stocks for men at them to wonder:
Impris'ned, then their brains with stones out-knock't,
And others in their middles sawed asunder:
With fire and sword were put to execution,
By cursed Caitiffes full of all pollution.
124.
Some walked about in skins of goats and sheep,
Of worldly comfort wholly destitute:
In mountains, dens, and hollow caves did keep,
Assured by faith, that God would retribute,
Rewarding those who wrongfully did suffer,
And plaguing them that injuries do offer.
125.
Of Christian Martyrs stranger things are told,
Whilst Roman heathnish Tyrants proudly swaid
That crushing Scepter: Each sort young and old,
The ancient Matrone, and the tender Maid,
Endured all that tyrants could invent,
Yet taking comfort in their punishment.
126.
Of Christ's coming to Judgment in his glory. 2. Pet. 3.
They knew their Lord in glory would return,
That th'heau'ns which are (like smoke) should pass away:
That the earth with all the works therein must burn,
At his appearance in the later day:
A better place for them was kept in store,
Where they should taste of pain and grief no more.
127.
Mala. 4.
That wicked men which did them vex and trouble,
Puft-vp in pride, against Gods people swelling:
In that great Day shall be consumed like stubble,
And evermore in Hell to have their dwelling:
To weep and gnash their teeth through cold and heat:
To freeze, yet frying grievously to sweat.
128.
Reu. 6. and Math. 24. 36.
That Day at unawares shall ouer-take them,
As in the time when Noah built the Arc:
Then sudden fear and dread shall sorely shake them,
They Will seek to hide in caves, and corners dark;
Desire the rocks and mountains them to cover.
There from the Judges face unseen to houer.
129.
But none out of his presence may abide
Reu. 1. 7.
All eyes must needs behold, and on him look,
Yea the eyes of him who pierced his precious side:
Each one shall have his judgment by a book,
His Conscience wherein his deeds are writ,
The same must him condemn, or else acquit.
130.
How can a worldling wallowing in his vice,
Addicted all to sensuality,
Making this Earth his only Paradise,
Who never did one deed of piety.
Think on that day, and not resolve t'amend,
Or in despair, his wretched life to end?
131.
Matthew. 25. 41.
Their wicked works in order shall be cited,
What ill they did, what good they left undone:
Thus standing of those crimes at bar indicted,
The sentence of the Judge they will seek to shun:
But proofs against them pregnant will appear,
So then their final Judgment they shall hear.
132.
The heavy sentence against the damned, at the last Judgment.
Go hence ye cursed to eternal fire,
For damned devils, and their Angels kindled:
With them for ever to receive your hyre.
Thus in a moment out they shall be singled,
Thrust down into the pit of endless pain,
From whence all hope of coming out is vain.
133.
A Comparison.
Who has been present at Assize or Sessions,
With heed upon the prisoners cast his eyes:
Men charged with gross crimes, and foul oppressions,
With treasons, murders, thefts, and robberies:
All capital offenses by just rigor,
If countries laws be left to have their vigor.
134.
To one, the Prince himself a pardon brings,
Leaves others to the Justice of the Land:
Note how that one cheeres up himself and sings,
The rest all heartlesse like dumb Idols stand.
Yet much more horror shall possess their heart,
Who from that bar must down to hell depart.
135.
There Atheists with Idolaters shall meet.
Loose Libertines and Epicures join hands:
Arch-heretickes each other sowrly greet,
All linked fast in Iron chains and bands:
The thought whereof would drive to desperation,
Men lacking helps of ghostly consolation.
136.
There Is then no time of pardon, or of grace,
'Twil be too late to think upon repenting:
Mercy is fled, and Justice come in place,
The Judge implacable with out relenting.
Fierce fiends, the Iaylers, 'pointed to torment,
On rigor with extremity all bent.
137.
Atwo-fold punishment augments their anguish,
Poena sensus. Poena damni.
The sense of hellish pains, is but the least:
Loss of heavens joys constraines them fret and languish,
Hereby their torments chiefly are encreas't.
Their envy at the others blessed state,
Makes them both God, and all his Saints to hate.
138.
The joyful and comfortable speech of our Savior to the Elect, at that day.
Then shall the godly triumph and rejoice,
Beholding Christ their Lord in Majesty:
Encouraged with that comfortable voice,
Where with loud in their hearing he will cry,
Come blessed Children of my heavenly father,
All you into my Kingdom I will gather.
139.
For you it was prepared longagoe,
A gift of God, no purchase of your own:
Like gracious children you have lived so,
Such works of mercy on my members shown,
That now your virtuous deeds shall be rewarded,
Your selves from Satan's claws securely guarded,
140.
M^. 9. 41.
One cup of water for my sake bestowed,
(A gift of slender value in its kind.)
If that from faith and charity it flowed,
Shall never fail a recompenee to find.
To clothe the naked, hungry folk to feed,
Are works for which the donour has his meed.
141.
Come fellow-heires, the Crown with meinherit:
(For you with my heart-bloud I dearly bought it.)
Romans 6. 23.
Receive it as my gift, not as your merit;
'Twas offered all, but godless men never sought it.
Come you my Sheep, here by my right side stand,
Let Goats withdraw themselves to the left hand.
142.
Matthew. 25.
You good and faithful servants enter in,
Be partners with your Master in his pleasures:
Since you in smaller things have trusty been,
I set before you all my heavenly treasures:
Take every one as much as may content you,
Your fullness only, nothing else, shall stint you.
143.
Though some have had sieve talents, some but twain,
And like good Stewards frugally employed them:
Since either sort have used them to my gain,
Not closely for their own behoof enjoyed them:
Both have their hire, yet not in equal rank,
Such as best do, the better is their thank.
144.
Kings, Princes, Prophets, Prelates, Magistrates,
Who had your places high above the rest:
Chief men in Church, in Kingdoms, and in States,
Who in your seu'rall callings did your best.
More then the lesser Stars your light shall shine,
Your seats be placed nearer unto mine.
145.
You nursing Fathers to the Church my Spowse,
Her childrens Patrones, and he Faiths Defenders:
You that (when Tyrants raged, and bent their brows)
Maintayn'd her Rights against all false Pretenders:
You must excel in her triumphant state,
As in her militant you did of late.
146.
The Author to his Patron.
(Lo you (Great Prince) joint with your Royal Sire,
Partaker in these heavenly benedictions,
Ought boldly to go on, and not retire:
Though passing thorough manifold afflictions,
Maintain Gods Cause, then God will you defend,
And richly recompense you in the end.)
147.
You painful Pastors, Preachers of Gods Word,
Who in my warfare stoutly did aduenter,
Heb. 4 12. Revel. 19. 15.
Still fighting with that sharpe-two-edged Sword,
Which through the soul and spright does quickly enter,
Whose chief endeavor was, men's souls to win,
To set up virtue, and to beat down sin:
148.
Whose lives and doctrine fairly did agree,
Who practiced that your selves, which you taught others:
Whose faith brought forth good fruits abundantly,
Who lived in love and concord with your brothers:
Among the blessed Angels rest you here,
Beloved of me, and unto them most dear.
149.
Come all at once that did True Faith embrace,
Matthew. 5. 16.
Whose shining works redounded to my glory:
Now in my heavenly Kingdom take your place,
Where you shall joy, and never more be sorry.
2. Tim. 4. 7. 8.
The battell's ended, all our foes cast down,
Of everlasting life enjoy the Crown.
150.
The Author concludes, and craves pardon for his' lowly style, upon so
lofty a subject.
Thus on a lofty Theme in lowly strain,
A silly Shepherd country Carolls sings:
Asubiect fitter for a purer brain,
Or for a Muse borne-vp with nimbler wings.
Ours waxen been: so fearing they would fry,
She keeps below, and durst not soar too hie.
151.
High mysteries (whereof this Theme has store)
With reverence and silence she omitteth:
Singing of what she knows, and of no more,
Her Rimes unto her understanding fitteth.
Affects to be perspicuous and plain,
Shunning of purpose an heroike vain.
FINIS.
Soli Deo Trino and Vni, Omnis laus, honor, and gloria in aternum.
An Epitaph for the happy memory of our late Renowned Sovereign, King JAMES.
To his Royal Son, our dread LIEGE LORD, King CHARLES.
Often have we heard an old-said-saw,
Voucht by great Masters of the Law,
As a clear case: The King never dies.
What then mean all these watrie eyes?
These sable suits? These heavy looks?
The Example ouer-rules their books.
For JAMES, of late the King domes Head,
(Living the body) here lies dead.
Why? headless bodies have no life!
To solue this doubt, and end the strife:
Know, Kings do only change the name,
The Style and State remain the same.
For, just as King IACOBVS died,
God save King CHARLES, the people cry'de.
So soon as the one breat h'd-out his last,
The Crown on the others head was cast.
Then, as the L^wsayes, so say I,
(Conceive it right.) Kings never die.
In other sense it may be sed
Of good King JAMES, he is not yet dead,
The while that Royal CHARLES here lives,
Life to renowned JAMES he gives.
Of whom he first received his breath,
Him now he vindicates from death.
Thrice happy Sire in such a Son,
A David after a Solomon:
Both, in his Person, fast combined,
With gifts of Body, and of Mind.
I judge the World a body fit,
On which so brave a Head should sit.
Thou little World, Great Britain, sing:
That Art made blessed with such a King.
Now faithful Subjects cease your mourning,
Your Sorrows into Prayers turning:
That they in their Posterity,
May always live, and never die:
But sway the Scepter of these Lands,
Which GOD has put into their hands.
So prays Your Majesty's zealously devoted Beadsman, IOH. STRADLING.

Errata.
Page 12. lin. 14. for be, read do. p. 86. l. 12. for Cela, r. eela. p. 111.
l. 20. for counterfeit, r. counterfets. p. 121. l. 12. and l. 23. for make, r.
made. p. 132. l. 14. for truth, r. troth. p. 139. l. 21. read the reins. p.
201. l. 22. for with, r. worth. p. 207. l. 3. for then, r. they. p. 201. l. 5.
for wiser, r. worser. p. 251. l. 22, for The, read She.


