A SVRVAY OF LONDON.

Containing the Original, Antiquity, Increase, Modern estate, and description
of that City, written in the year 1598. by John Stow Citizen of London.

Also an Apology (or defense) against the opinion of some men, concerning that
City, the greatness thereof.

With an Appendix, containing in Latin, Libellum de situ and nobilitate
Londini: Written by William Fitzstephen, in the reign of Henry the second.

Imprinted by John Wolf, Printer to the honorable City of London: And are to
be sold at his shop within the Popes head Alley in Lombard street. 1598.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Lord Mayor of the City of London, to the
communaltie, and Citizens of the same, John Stow Citizen, wishes long health
and felicity.
SInce the first publishing of the perambulation of Kent, by that learned
Gentleman M. William Lambert Esquire, I have heard of sundry other able
persons to have (according to the desire of that author) assayed to do
somewhat for the particular Shires and Connties, where they were borne, or
dwelt, of which none that I know (saving M. Norden, for the Counties of
Middlesex, and Hertford) have vouchsafed their labors to the common good in
that behalf. And therefore concurring with the first, in the same desire to
have drawn together such special descriptions of each place, as might not
only make up an whole body of the English Chronographie amongst our selves:
but also might give occasion, and courage to M. Camdin to increase and beutifie
his singular work of the whole, to the view of the learned that be abroad. I
have attempted the discovery of London, my native soil and Country, at the
desire and persuasion of some my good friends, as well because I have seen
sundry antiquities my self touching that place, as also for that through
search of Records to other purposes, diverse written helps are come to my
hands, which few others have fortuned to meet withal, it is a service that
most agrees with my professed trauelles. It is a duty, that I willingly ow to
my native mother and Country. And an office that of right I hold my self
bound in love to bestow upon the politic body and members of the same: what
London has been of ancient time, men may here see, as what it is now every
man does behold: I know that the argument, being of the chief and principal
City of the land, required the pen of some excellent Artisen, but fearing
that none would attempt, and finish it, as few have assayed any, I chose
rather (amongst other my Labors) to handle it after my plain manner, then to
leave it unperformed. Touching the Dedication, I am not doubtful where to
seek my patron, since you be a politic estate of the City, as the walls
and buildinges be the material parts of the same. To you therefore, do I
address this my whole labor, as well that by your authority I may be
protected, as warranted by your own skill and understanding of that which I
have written, I confess that I lacked my desire to the acco^plishment of some
special parts; but I trust hereafter that shall be supplied, and I profess (if
more touching this work come unto me) to afforde it, in all duty. In the
mean time, I recommend this to your view, my labors to your consideration,
and my self to your service, (as I have professed during life) in this or any
other.

A Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
OF the antiquity of London. fol. 1. The wall about the City of London, fol.
6. Of the ancient and present rivers, Brooks, Boornes, Pooles, Wels, and
Conduits of fresh water, serving the City, as also the ditch compassing the
wall of the same. fol. 10 Of the bridges of this City fol. 19 Gates in the wall
of this City. fol. 25 Of Towers and Castelles. fol. 37. Of Schools and other
houses of learning. fol. 53. Houses of students of the Common Law. fol. 58. Of
Orders and Customs of the citizens. fol. 60. Sportes and pastimes of old time
used in this city. fol. 67. Watches in London. 74. Honor of citizens and
worthiness of men in the same. fol. 78 The City of London divided into parts.
fol. 82. Portsoken Ward. fol. 85. Towerstreet Ward. fol. 94. Ealdgate Ward.
fol. 102. Limestreete Ward. fol. 114. Bishopsgate Ward, fol. 126. Brodestreet
Ward. fol. 136. Cornehill Ward. fol. 146 Langborne ward and Fenny about.
fol. 156. Billinsgate ward. fol. 165. Bridge ward within. fol. 167.
Candlewike street ward. fol. 170 Walbrooke ward. fol. 176 Downegate ward.
fol. 182 Vintry ward. 189 Cordwainer street ward. 195 Cheap ward. 207
Colemanstreete ward. 220 Bassinges hall ward. 225 ^ripplegate ward. 230
Aldersgate ward. 242 Faringdon ward infra, or within. 248 Bredstreete ward.
279 Queen Hith ward. 286 Castle Baynarde ward 295 The ward of Faringdon,
extra or without. 303 Bridge ward without (the 26. in number) consisting of the
Borough of Southwarke in the county of Surrey. 329. The Suburbs without the
walls of the city, briefly touched, as also without the Liberties more at
large described. 346 Liberties of the Duchy of Lancaster without Temple
Bar. 365 The City of Westminster, with the Antiquities, Monuments, Bounds
and Liberties thereof. 370 Spiritual, or ecclesiastical government. 395 Parish
Churches in the City of London, the Borough of Southwarke, the suburbs, and
City of Westminster. 407 Hospitalles in this City, and Suburbs. 412. Of
Leprose people and Lazar houses. 414. Temporal government of this City. 415.
An Apology or defense against the opinions of etc. 467. Singularities in the
same expressed. 470. An Appendix, containing an ancient Author, who wrate in
the reign of Henry the second, his book entitled, Libellum de situ and
nobilitate Londini, never before imprinted.
A Suruay of London, containing the original, antiquity, increase, modern
estate, and description of that City.
AS Rome the chief City of the world to glorify it self, drew her original
from the Gods, Goddesses, and demi Gods, by the Trojan progeny. So this famous
City of London for greater glory, and in emulation of Rome, deriueth it self
from the very same original. For (as Ieffery of Monmoth, Geffery Mommoth.
the Welche Historian reports Brute descended from the demi god Eneas, the
son of Venus, daughter of Jupiter, about the year of the world 2855. the
year before Christ's nativity, 1108. builded a City near unto a river now
called Thames, and named it Troynouant. or Trenouant. Trinouantum has the
written Copies.


King Lud afterward not only repaired this City, but also added fair
buildings, Towers, and walls, and called it after his own name Caire-Lud
Caire-Lud, the City of Lud, but Luds town is a Saxon word.
or Luds town, and the strong gate which he builded in the west part of the
City, he likewise for his own honor named it Ludgate.

This Lud had issue two sons, Androgeus, and Themantius, who being not of age
to govern at the death of their Father: their Uncle Cassibilan, took upon
him the crown, about the eight year of whose reign, Julius Caesar arrived in
this land with a great power of Romans to conquer it, the manner of which
conquest I will summarily set down out of his own Commentaries, which are of
far better credit, then the relations of Geffery Monmouth. Cesars
Comentaries. liber. 5.


The chief government of the Britons, and ordering of the wars, was then by
common advice committed to Cassibilan, whose Signiorie was separated from the
Cities toward the sea coast, by the river called Thames, about fourscore
miles from the sea, this Cassibilan in times past, had made continual war
upon the Cities adjoining, but the Britons being moved with the Romans
invasion, had resolved in that necessity to make him their Sovereign and
General of the wars (which continued hot between the Romans and them) but
in the mean while, the Trinobantes Trinobants Citizens of London
which was then the strongest City well near of al those countries (and out
of which City a young gentleman called Mandubrace, upon confidence of Celars
help, came unto him into the maine land of Gallia now called France, and
thereby escaped death, which he should have suffered at Cassibilans hand,)
sent their Ambassadors to Caesar, promising to yield unto him, and to do what
he should command them, instantly desiring him, to protect Mandubrace from the
furious tirannie of Cassibilan, and to send him into their City, with
authority to take the government thereof upon him. Caesar accepted the offer,
and appointed them to give unto him 40. Hostages, and withal to find him
grain for his army, and so sent he Mandubrace Ma^dubrace and the Trinobants
yield to Caesar, and he defended them.
unto them.

When others saw that Caesar had not only defended the Trinobantes against
Cassibilan, but had also saved them harmeles from the pillage of his own
soldiers, then did the Conimagues, Segontians, Ancalits, Bibrokes, and
Cassians, likewise submit themselves unto him, and by them he learned that not
far from thence was Cassibilans town, Cassibilans town west from London for
Caesar says 80. miles from the sea, Cities of the Britains were combersom
woods fortified.
fortified with woods, and marish ground, into the which he had gathered a
great number both of men and cattle.

For the Brittons call that a town (says Caesar) when they have fortified a
combarsom wood with a ditch and rampire, and thither they resort to abide the
approach of their ennemies, to this place therefore marched Caesar, with his
Legions, he found it excellent^ie fortified both of nature, and by man's
advice: nevertheless he resolved to assault it in two several places at once,
whereupon the Brittons being not able to endure the force of the Romans, fled
out at an other part, and left the town unto him: a great number of cattle
he found there, and many of the Britons he slew, and other he took in the
chase.

Whilst these things were a doing in these quarters, Cassibilan sent
messengers into Kent, which lies upon the sea, in which there reigned then 4.
particular kings, named Cingetorix, Car^il, Taximagul, and Segonax, whom he
commanded to raise all their forces, and suddenly to set upon, and assault the
Romans, in their trenches, by the sea side: the which when the Romans
perceived, they salied out upon them, slew a great sort of them, and taking
Cingetorix their noble Captain prisoner, retired themselves to their Camp in
good safety.

When Cassibilan hard of this, and had formerly taken many other losses, and
found his country sore wasted, and himself left almost alone by the defection
of the other Cities, he sent Ambassadors by Connius of Arras, to Caesar, to
entreat with him, concerning his own submission, the which Caesar did accept,
and taking Hostages, assessed the Realm of Britain, Britain sessed to pay a
yearly tribute to the Romans.
to a yearly tribute, to be paid to the people of Rome, giving straight
charge to Cassibilan, that he should not seek any revenge upon Mandubrace or
the Trinobantes, and so withdrew his army to the sea again.

Thus far out of Cesars Commentaries concerning this History, which happened
in the year before Christ's nativity 54. in all which process there is for
this purpose to be noted, that Caesar names the City of Trinobantes, which
has a resemblance with Troy noua or Trinobantum, which has no greater
difference in the Orthographie, then changing b. into v. and yet makes an
error which I will not argue, only this I will note that diverse learned men do
not think ciuitas Trinobantum Trinobant, new London.
to be well and truly translated, the City of the Trinobantes: but it should
rather be the state, comonalty, or Signiory, of the Trinobantes: for that Caesar
in his Comentaries uses the word ciuitas, only for a people living under
one, and the self same Prince and law but certain it is that the Cities of
the Britains, Cities of the Britans not artificially builded with houses nor
walled. with stone
were in those days neither artificially builded with houses, nor strongly
walled with stone, but were only thick and combarsom woods plashed within
and trenched about: and the like in effect do other the Roman and Greek
autors directly affirm, as Strabo Pomponius Mela, and Dion S^rabo, Pomponius.
Mela, Tacitus. Dion.
a Senator of Rome, which flourished in the several reigns of the Roman
Emperors, Tiberius Claudius, Domitian, and Seuerus, to wit that before the
ariuall of the Romans, the Britons had no towns but called that a town which
had a thick entangled wood, defended as I said with a ditch and bank, the
like whereof the Irishmen our next neighbors do at this day call Paces, but
after that these hither parts of Britain were reduced into the form of a
Province by the Romans, who sowed the seeds of ciuilit^e over all Europe,
this City whatsoever it was before, began to be renowned, and of fame.

For Tacitus, who first of all Autors names it Londinum, says that in the 62.
after Christ it was albeit, no Colonie of the Romans, yet most famous London
most famus for Marchantes and intercourse.
for the great multitude of Marchantes, provision, and intercourse. At which
time in that notable reuolte of the B^itons from Nero, in which 70000. Romans
and their leager fellows were slain, this City with Verulam nere S. Albons,
and Maldon, then all famous: were ransacked and spoiled.

For Suetonius Paulinus then Lieftennant for the Romans in this Isle,
abandoned it: as not then forseyied, and left it to the spoil.

Shortly after, Julius Agricola, the Roman Liefetennant, in the time of
Domitian, was the first that by adhorting the Britains, The Britons had no
houses, but cottages.
publicly, and helping them privately, wun them to build houses for
themselves, temples for the Gods, and courts for Justice, to bring up the
noblemens children in good letters and humanity, and to apparel themselves
Roman like, whereas before (for the most part) they went naked, painting
their bodies etc. as all the Roman writers have observed. The Britons went
naked their bodies painted.


True it is I confess, that afterward many Cities and Towns in Britain under
the government of the Romans, were walled with stone, and baked bricks, or
tyles, as Richborrow, or Ryptacester, in the Isle of Thanet, til the channel
altered his course, besides Sandwitch, in Kent, Verulamium Richborow in Kent
Verulamium. Cilcester Roxcester Kenchester. Keyland. Of the wall, about London.
besides S. Albones, in Hartfordshire, Cilcester, in Hampshire, Roxcester in
Shrop shire, Kenchester in Herefordshire, three miles from Hereford town,
Ribchester, 7. miles above Preston, on the water of Rible, Aldeburge a mile
from Borrowbridge, or Wathelingstreet, on Ure River and others, and no doubt
but this our City of London, was also walled with stone, in the time of the
Roman government here, but yet very lately, for it seems not to have been
walled in the year of our Lord 296. because in that year when Alectus the
Tyran was slain in the field, the Frankes easily entered London, and had sacked
the same, had not God of his great favor, at the very instant brought along
the river of Thames, certain bands of Roman Soldiers, who slew those
Frankes in every street of the City.

In few years after, as Simeon of Durham, Simeon of Durham.
an ancient writer reports, Hellen the mother of Constantine the great, was
the first that inwalled it about the year of Christ 306. howsoever those walls
of stone might be builded by Helen, yet the Bri^o^s, (I know) had no skill of
building with stone, as it may appear by that, which follows about the year
after Christ, 399, when Arcadius and Honorius the sons of Theodosius Magnus,
governed the Empire, the one in the East, the other in the West, for Honorius
having received Britain, the City of Rome was invaded and destroyed, by the
Gathes after which time the Romans left The Romans left to govern Britain.
to rule in Britain, as being, employed in defense of their Territories nerer
home, whereupon the Britains not able to defend themselves against the
invasions of their enemies, were many years together under the oppression of
two most cruel nations, the Scots and Pictes, The Scots and Picts invade this
land.
and at the length were forced to send their Ambassadors with letters and
lamentable supplications, to come, requiring aid and succor from thence, upon
promise of their continual fealty, so that the Romans would rescue them
out of the hands of their ennemies. Hereupon the Romans sent unto them a
Legion of armed Soldiers, which coming into this Island, and incountering with
the ennemies, overthrew a great number of them, and drove the rest out of the
frontiers of the country, and so setting the Britains at liberty, counseled
them to make a wall, extending all along between the two seas, which might be
of force to keep out their evil neighbors, and then returned home with
great triumph: But the Britains Britains unskillful of building with stone
wanting Masons builded that wall not of stone as they were advised, but made
it of turfe, and that so slender, that it served little or nothing at al for
their defense: and the ennemie perceiving that the Roman Legio^ was returned
home, forthwith arrived, out of their boats, invaded the borders, overcame the
country, and as it were, bare down all that was before them.

Whereupon Ambassadors were eftsoons dispatched to Rome, lamentably beseeching
that they would not suffer their miserable country to be utterly destroyed:
then again an other Legion was sent, which coming upon a sudden, made a
great slaughter of the ennemie, and chased him home, even unto his own
country. These Romans at their departure, told the Britains plainly, that
it was not for their ease or leisure to take upon them any more such long and
laborious iournyes for their defense, and therefore ^ad them practice the use
of armor and weapons, and learn to withstand their ennemies, whom nothing
else did make so strong as their faint heart, and cowardice, and for so much as
they thought that it would be no small help and encouragement unto their
Tributary friends whom they were now forced to forsake, Witichindus.
they builded for them a wall of hard stone from the west sea to the east sea,
right between those two Cities, which were there made to keep out the
ennemies, in the self same place where Seuerus before had cast his Trench. Wall
of ston builded by the Romans. bewtixt the Britans, and Scots.
The Britains also putting to their helping hands as laborers.

This wall they builded 8. foot thick in breadth, and 12. foot in height,
right as it were by a line, from east to west, as the ruins thereof remaining
in many places til this day, do make to appear. Which work thus perfected,
they give the people straight charge to look well to themselves, they teach
them to handle their weapons, and they instruct them in warlike feats. And
lest by the sea side southwardes, where their ships lay at harbor, the ennemie
should come on land, they made up sundry Bulwarks each some what distant from
the other, and so bid them farewell as minding no more to return. This
happened in the days of the Emperor Theodosius the younger almost 500. years
after the first ariuall of the Romans here, about the year after Christ's
incarnation, 434.

The Britains after this, continuing a lingering and doubtful war with the
Scots and Pictes, made choice of Vortiger, to be their king and leader, which
man (as says Malmesbery, Malmsbery. Bid.
) was neither valorous of courage, nor wise of counsel, but wholly given over
to the unlawful lusts of his flesh: the people likewise in short time, being
grown to some quietness gave themselves to gluttony, The Britains given to
gluttony, dronkennes, pride and ^ontention.
and drunkenness, pride, contention, envy, and such other vices, casting from
them the yoke of Christ. In the mean season a bitter plague fell among them,
consuming in short time such a multitude, that the quick were not sufficient
to bury the dead, and yet the remnant remained so hardened in sin, that
neither the death of their friends nor fear of their own danger, could cure
the mortality of their souls, whereupon a greater stroke of vengeance insued
upon the whole sinful nation. The Britains plagued for their sinful life.
For being now again infested with their old neighbors the Scots, and Pictes,
they consult with their king Vortiger, and send for the Saxons, who shortly
after arrived here in Britain, where says Bid, Witichendus^ Bid.
they were received as friends: but as it proved they minded to destroy the
country as ennemies for after that they had driven out the Scots and Pictes,
they also drove the Britains some over the seas, and some into the waste
mountains of Wales and Cornewell, and divided the country into diverse
kingdoms amongst themselves. The Saxons sent for to defend the Britains, but
they drove the^ into the mountains.


These Saxons were likewise ignorant of the Architecture or building with
stone, Saxons unskillful of building with stone.
until the year of Christ 680. for then it is affirmed that Bennet Abbote of
Wirall, Master to the reverend Bid, first brought Masons and Workmen in
stone into this Island amongst the Saxons, Benet a monk brought masons into this
land amongst the Saxons.
(he I say) brought hither Artificers of stone houses, Paynters and Glasiers,
arts before that time unto the Saxons unknown, who before that time used but
wodden buildinges.

Thus much be said for walling, not only in respect of this City, but
generally also of the first, within the Realm. Now to return to our
Trinouant, Trinoua^t since called London.
(as Caesar has it) the same is since by Tacitus, Ptolomeus, and Antoninus
called Londinium, Longidinum, of Amiamus, Lundinum, and Augusta who calls it
an ancient City of our Britains Lundayne, of the old Saxons, Lundonceaster,
Londonbeig, of strangers, Londra and Londres, of the inhabitants, London,
whereof you may read a more large and learned discourse, and how it took the
name in that work of my loving friend M. Camden Camden. the city of London
destroye^ by the Danes, and again repaired.
now Clarenciaulx which is called Britania.

This City of London having been destroyed and bren ^ by the Danes and other
Pagan ennemies about the year of Christ, 839. was by Alfred king of the west
Saxons, in the year 886 repaired and honorably restored, and made again
habitable. Who also committed the custody thereof unto his son in law,
Ethelrod Earl of Merci^, unto whom before he had given his daughter
Ethe^fled.

And that this City was strongly walled, may appear by diverse accidents,
whereof I have read some, namely William of Malsmebery, W. Malmesbery. Assure.
Marianus Florentius,
has that about the year of Christ, 994. the Londoners, shut up their gates
and defended their king Ethelrod, within their walls against the Danes, in the
year 1016. Edmond ^ronside reigning over the west Saxons Canute the Dane
bringing his navy into the west part of the bridge, cast a Trench about the
City of London, and then attempted to have won it by assault, but the Citizens
repulsed him and drove him from their walls. Also in the year 1052. Earl
Godwin with his navy sailed up by the south end of the bridge, and so
assailed the walls of this City, and Wiliam Fitzstephen W. Fitzstephe^ The
City of London walled round about by the River of Thames. Walls of London
repaired
writing in the reign of king Henry the second, of the walls of this City,
has these words. The wall is high and great, well towred on the Northside with
due distances between the towers. On the southside also the City was walled
and towred, but the fishful river of Thames with his ebbing, and flowing has
long since subverted them.

This may suffice for proof of a wall, and form thereof, about this City,
and the same to have been of great antiquity, as any other within this
Realm, and now touching the maintenance and repayring the said walls, I find
that in the year 1215, the 16. of King John, the Barons entering the City by
Ealdgate, Roger of Windouer. Matthew Paris, Randulph Cocshall.
first took assurance of the Citizens, and then they brake into the houses of
the Jews, and searched their coffers, and after with great diligence repaired
the walls, and the gates of the City of London with stone, taken from the Jews
broken houses. In the year 1257. Henry the 3. caused the walls of the City of
London, which were sore deca^ed and destitute of Towers, to be repaired in more
seemly wise then before, at the common charges of the City. Also in the year
1282. Matthew Paris
King Edward the first granted to H. VValleis Mayor, and the Citizens of
London, the favor, to take toward the making of the wall, and enclosure of the
City, certain customs, as appears by his grante. This wall was then to be
made from Ludgate to Fleet bridge, and along by the water of Fleet, unto the
river of Thames. Moreover in the year 1310. Edward the 2. commanded the
Citizens to make up the wall already begun, and the Tower, at the end of the
same wall, within the water of Thames near unto the black Friars etc. It was
also granted by king Richard the socond in the 10. of his reign that a Toll
should be taken of wares, sold by land and by water for 10. years, toward
the repayring of the walls and clensing of the ditch about London. In the 17.
of Edward the 4. Ralfe Ioceline, Mayor, caused part of the wall about the
City of London, Pattent.
to be rapayred, to wit, betwixt Aldgate and Aldersgate he also caused the
Morefielde to be searched for clay, and willed brick to be made, and brent
there, he likewise caused chalk to be brought out of Kent and to be brent
into lime in the same Morefield, for more furtherance of the work. Then the
Skinners, to begin in the East, made that part of the wall, betwixt Algate and
Buries mark toward Bishopsgate, as may appear by their arms in three
places fixed there, the Mayor with his company of the Drapers made all that
part, betwixt Bishopsgate and Alhallowes Church in the same, and from
Alhallowes toward the Posterne. A great part of the same wall called Moregate
was repaired by the executors of Sir John Crosby, late Alderman, as may appear
by his Arms, standing in two places there. Other Companies repaired the rest
of the wall to the Posterne of Criplegate. The Goldsmiths repaired from
Criplegate, toward Aldersgate, and there the work ceased. The circuit of the
wall Circuit of the Wall from the east to the west.
of London on the lands side, to wit from the tower of London in the east,
unto Aldgate, is 82. perches: from Aldgate to Bishopsgate, 86. perches: from
Bishopsgate in the north to the Postern of Criplegate 162 perches, from
Criplegate to Ealdersgate 75. perches, from Eldrichgate to Newgate, 66.
perches, from Newgate in the west to Ludgate, 42. perches, in all 513. perches
of assize. From Ludgate again to the Fleet dike, west, about 60. perches:
from Fleet bridge south to the river of Thames, about 70. perches, and so the
total of these perches amounts to 643. every perch, consisting of 5. yeardes
and a half, which do yield 3536. yardes and a half, containing 10608 foot,
which make up two english miles and more by 608. foot.

Of the Ancient and Present Rivers, Brooks, Boorns, Pooles, wels, and
Conduites of fresh water, serving the City, as also of the ditch, compassing
the wall of the same.
AUnciently until the Conquerors time, and 200. years after, the City of
London was watered besides the famous River of Thames, on the South part, with
the river of the wels, as it was then called on the west, with a water called
walbrooke, running through the midst of the City into the river of Thames
serving the heart thereof. And with a fourth water or Boorne, which ran within
the City, through Langboorne ward, watering that part in the East. In the
west Suburbs was also an other great water, called Oldborne, which had his
fall into the River of wels: then was there 3. principal Fountains, or wels
in the other Suburbs, to wit Holly well, Clements well, and Clerks well. Near
unto this last named fountain, were diverse other wels, to wit Skinners well,
Fags well, Tede well, Leders well, and Radwell. In west Smithfield there was a
Poole, in records called Horsepoole, And one other Poole near unto the parish
Church of S. Giles without Criplegate. Besides all which they had in every
street and lane of the City diverse fair wels, and fresh springes: and after
this manner was this City then served, with sweet and fresh waters, which
being since decayed, other means have been sought to supply the want, as
shall be showed, but first of the aforenamed Rivers and other waters, is to be
said, as follows.

Thames River of Thames.
the most famous River of this Island, begins a little above a village called
winchcombe in Oxfordshire, and still increasing passes first by the
university of Oxford, and so with a marvelous quiet course to London, and
thence breaks into the French Ocean by maine tides, which twice in 24. hours
space does eb and flow, more then 60. miles in length, to the great commodity
of Travelers, by the which all kind of Merchandise be easily conveyed to
London, the principal store house, and staple of all Commodities within this
Realm: so that omitting to sp^ake of great ships, and other vessels of
burden, there perteyneth to the Cities of London, westminster and Borough of
Southwarke above the number as is supposed of 2000. Wherryes and other small
boats, whereby 3000. poor men at the least be set on work and maintained.

That the River of the wels whirries on the Thames. River of wels
in the west part of the City, was of old time so called: it may be proved
thus, william the Conqueror in his Charter, to the College of S. Martin, le
Grand in London, has these words: I do give and grant to the same church all
the land and the Moore, without the Posterne, which is called Criplegate, on
either part of the Posterne, that is to say, from the North corner of the wall,
as the river of the wels, there near running departs the same More from the
wall, unto the running water which enters the City, this water has been
since that time called Turnemill Brook: yet then called the river of the Wels,
which name of River continued: and it was so called in the reign of Edward the
first: as shall be showed, with also the decay of the said river, Decay of the
River of the Wels.
in a fair book of Parliament records, parliament record.
now lately restored to the Tower, it appears that a par^iament being holden
at Carlisle in the year 1307, the 35. of Edward the first, Henry Lacy Earl of
Lincoln, complained that whereas in times past the course of water, running at
London, under Oldeborne bridge, and Fleet bridge into the Thames, had been of
such breadth and depth, that 10. or 12. Ships, Nauies, at once with
Marchandizes, were wont to come to the foresaid bridge of Fleet, and some of
them to Oldborne bridge: River of wels b^re shipes.
now the same course by filth of the Tanners and such others, was sore decayed:
^so by raising of wharses, but specially by a diuersion of the water made by
them of the new Temple, for their milles standing without Baynardes Castle, in
the first year of King John, patent record Mils by Baynardes castle made in
the first of King John.
and diverse other impedimentes, so as the said ships could not enter as they
were wont, and as they ought, wherefore he desired that the Mayor of London
with the Sheriffs, and other discrete Aldermen, might be appointed to view the
course of the said water, and that by the oaths of good men, all the
aforesaid hindrances might be removed, and it to be made as it was wont of
old: whereupon Roger le Brabason, the Constable of the Tower, with the Mayor
and Sheriffs were assigned to take with them honest and discrete men, and to
make diligent search and inquiry, how the said river was in ^lde time, and that
they leave nothing that may hurt or stop it, but keep it in the same estate,
that it was wont to be: so far the record. Whereupon it followed that the
said river, River socalled in the year 1307.
was at that time cleansed, these mils removed, and other things done for the
preservation of the course thereof, notwithstanding never brought to the old
depth, and breadth, whereupon the name of river ceased, and it was since called
a Brook, namely Turnmil or Tremill Brook, Turnemill brook.
for that diverse mils were erected upon it, as appears by a fair Register
book, containing the foundation of the Priorie at Clarken well, and donation of
the lands, thereunto belonging, as also by diverse other records.

This brook has been diverse times since cleansed, namely and last of all to
any effect. In the year 1502. the 17. of Henry the 7. the whole course of
Fleet dike, then so called was scowred (I say) down to the Thames, so that
boats with fish and fuel were rowed to Fleet bridge and to Oldborne bridge,
as they of old time had been accustomed, which was a great commodity to all
the inhabitants in that part of the City.

In the year 1589. was granted a fifteen, by a common Council of the City,
for the clensing of this Brook or dike and the money amounting to a thousand
marks was collected, Fleet dike promised to be clensed^ the money collected,
but the Citizens dece^ ued.
and it was undertaken that by drawing diverse springes about Hampstid hea^h,
into one head and course, both the City should be served of fresh water, in
all places of want, and also that by such a follower, as men call it the
channel of this brook should be scowred into the River of Thames, but much
money being therein spent, she effect failed, so that the brooks by means of
continual incrochments upon the banks gyttying over the water, and casting of
soilage into the stream, is now become worse cloyed and choken then ever it
was before.

The running water so called A running water called Walbrooke.
by William the Conqueror in his said Charter, which enters the City etc.
before there was any ditch between Bishopsgate and the late made Posterne
called Moregate, entered the wall and was truly of the wall called Walbrooke not
of Gualo as some have far fetched: it ran through the City with diverse
windinges from the North toward the South into the river of Thames, and had
over the same diverse Bridges, along the Streets and Lanes, through which it
passed. I have read in an old writing book entitled the customs liber
custom^
of London, that the Prior of the Holy Trinity within Aldgate ought to make
over VValbrooke in the ward of B^edstreete, against the stone wall of the
City, vz. the same Bridge that is next the Church of Al Saints, at the wall.
Also that the Prior of the new Hospital, S. Marie Spittle, without Bishopsgate
ought to make the middle part of one other Bridge next to the said Bridge
toward the North: And that in the 28. year of Edward the first, it was by
inquisition found before the Mayor of London that the parish of S. Stephen
upon walbrooke, ought of right to cover the course of the said Brook, and
therefore the Shieriffes were commanded to distrayne the said Parishioners so
to do in the year 1300. the keepers of those Bridges at that time were
William Jordan, and John de Bauer. This watercourse having diverse Bridges, was
afterward v^ulted over with Brick, and paued leuill with the streets and
lanes, where through it passed, and since that also houses have been builded
thereon, so that the course of VValbrooke Walbrooke vaulted and paued over.
is now hidden under ground, and thereby hardly known. Langborne water so
called of the length thereof, was a great stream of water breaking out of the
ground, in Fan Church street, which ran down with a swift course, west,
through that street, thwart Grastreet and down Lombardestreete, to the west
end of S. Mary VVolnothes Church, and then turning the course South down
Shareborne lane, Sharebourne lane.
so termed of sharing or dividing, it brake into diverse rilles or rillets to
the River of Thames, of this Bourne that ward took the name, and is till this
day called Langborne ward, Langbourne ward.
this Bourne also is long since stopped up at the head and the rest of the
course filled up and paued over, so that no sign thereof remains more then
the names aforesaid, Oldeborne or Hilborne was the like water, breaking out
about the place where now the bars do stand, and it ran down the whole
street till Oldebourne bridge, and into the River of the Wels, or Turnemil
Brook: this Bourn was likewise long since stoped up at the head, and in other
places where the same has broken out, but yet till this day, the said street
is there still called high Ouldebourn hill, and both the sides thereof together
with all the grounds adjoining that lie betwixt it, and the river of Thames
remain full of springes, so that water is there found at hand, and hard to be
stopped in every house.

There are (says Fitzstephen Fitzstephen. Holywell
) near London, on the North side special wels, in the Suburbs: sweet,
wholesome, and clear, amongst which Holywel, Clerks well, and Clementes well,
are most famous and frequented by Scholars, and youths of the City in summer
euenings, when they walk forth to take the air. The first, to wit, Holywel
is much decayed and marred with filthiness, purposely laid there, for the
heighthening of the ground, for garden plots: the fountain called S. Clements
well, Clements well.
North from the Parish church of S. Clements, and near unto an Inn of
Chancery, called Clements Inn, is thereof yet fair curbed square with hard
stone, and is always kept clean for common use: it is always full, and never
wants water, the third is called Clarks well, Clerks well
or Clarken well, and is also curbed about square with stone. Not far from the
west end of this Clerks well Church without the stone wall that incloseth the
Church, the other smaller wels that stood near unto Clerks well, to wit
Skinners well, Skinners well
Fagges well, Todwell, Loders well, and Redwell, are all decayed and so filled
up. that their places are now hardly discerned: somewhat North from Holywell is
one other well curbed square with stone, and is called Dame Annis the clear,
Dame Annis the clear.
and not far from it but somewhat west, is also one other clear water called
Perilous Pond, Perilous pond
because diverse youths by swimming therein have been drouned, and thus much
be said for fountains and wels.

Horsepoole Horsepoole.
in West Smithfielde was sometime a great water, and because the inhabitants
in that part of the City did there water their Horses, the same was in old
records called Horsepoole, it is now much decayed, the springs being stoped up
and the land water falling into the small bottom, remaining enclosed with
Brick, is but foul: and is called Smithfielde Ponde.

The Poole poole without Cripplegate.
by S. Giles Churchyard was a large water in the year 1244. for it is read
that Anne of Lodbury was drouned therein, this Poole is now for the most part
stopped up, but the spring is preserved, and it was coopped about with stone by
the Executors of Richard VVhittington.

The said river of the Wels, the running water of Walbrooke, the Bournes
aforenamed, and other the fresh waters that were in and about this City,
being in process of time by incrochment for buildinges and otherwise utterly
decayed, and the number of Citizens mightily increased, they were forced to
seek sweet waters abroad, whereof some at the request of king Henry the
third, in the 21. year of his reign, were for the profit of the City, and
good of the whole Realm thither repayring, granted to the Citizens and their
Successors by one Gilbert Sanford, Patent 1236.
with liberty to convey water from the town of Teiborne, by Pypes of lead
into their City, and the first Cesterne of lead castellated with stone in the
City of London was called the great Conduit in west Cheap, and was begun
to be builded in the year 1285. Henry Wales being then Mayor: the water
course from Padington to James head has 510. rods, from James head on the hill
to the Mewsgate, 102. rods, from the Mewsgate to the cross in Cheap 484.
rods.

The Tonne upon Cornhil was Cisterned in the year 1401. John Chadworth then
being Mayor.

Bosses of water, at Belinsgate, by Powles wharfe, and by S. Giles Church
without Cripplegate made about the year 1423.

Water conveyed to the Gaoles of Newgate and Ludgate, 1432.

Water procured to the Standarde in west Cheap about the year 1431. king
Henry the sixth in the year 1442. granted to John Hatharley, Mayor license to
take up 200. fodar of Lead for the building of Conduites of a common Garnery
and of a new Cross in west Cheap, for honor of the City.

The Conduit in Aldermanbury and the Standarde in Fleet street were made and
finished by the executors of Sir William Eastfielde in the year 1471. a
Sesterne was added to the standerd in Fletestreete, and a Sesterne was made at
Fleet bridge, and one other without Criplegate in the year 1478.

Conduite in Grastreete in the year. 1491.

Conduite of Oldbourne Cross about 1498. again new made by William Lamb,
1577.

Little Conduite by the Stocks market about. 1500.

Conduite at Bishopsgate about 1513.

Conduite at London wall about 1528.

Conduite at Aldgate without, about, 1535.

Conduite in Lothbury, and in Colemanstreete. 1546.

Conduite of Thames water, at Dowgate. 1568,

Thames water conveyed into men's houses Thames water conveyed into men's houses,
in the east part of the City.
by pypes of lead from a most artificial forcier standing near unto London
bridge and made by Peter Moris Dutch man in the year 1582. for service of the
City, on the East part thereof.

Conduites Conduites in old fishstreet.
of Thames water by the parish churches of S. Marie Magdalen, and S. Nicholas
Cold Abbey near unto old Fishstrete, in the year 1583.

One other new Forcier was made near to Broken wharfe, to convey Thames water
Thames water conveyed into the west part of the City.
into men's houses of west Cheap, about Powles, Fleetestreete etc. by an
English Gentleman, named Beuis Bulman, in the year 1594. Thus much for waters,
serving this City, first by Rivers, Brooks, Boornes, Fountains, Pooles, etc.
And since by Conduites partly made by good and charitable Citizens, and
otherwise by chardges of the comm^naltie, as shall be showed in description of
Wards wherein they be placed.

And now some Benefactors to these Conduites shall be remembered.

In the year 1236. certain Merchants strangers, Benefactors toward the
water condu^es.
of cities beyond the Seas, to wit Amiens, Corby, and Nele for privileges
which they enjoyed in this City, gave 100. ^. toward the charges of
conueying water from the town of Teyborne. Robert Large then Mayor 1439. gave
to the new water Conduites then in hand, forty Marks, and toward the vaulting
over of Walbrooke 200 marks.

Sir Wiliam Eastfielde conveyed water from Teyborne and from Highbery.

Wiliam Combs Sheriff 1441. gave to the work of the Conduits. x.^. Richard
Rawson one of the Sheriffs 1476. gave, xx ^. Robert Revel one of the Shiriffes
1490. gave, x.^. John Matthew Mayor 1490. gave xx.^. William Bucke Tailor in the
year, 1494. gave 100. marks toward repayring of Conduites. Dame Thomason
widow, late wise to John Perciuall Tailor, Mayor in the year 1498. gave toward
the Conduit in Oldbourne, xx.marks. Richard Shore one of the Shiriffes 1505.
gave to the Conduit in Oldborne. x ^. The Lady Ascue widow to Sir Christopher
Ascue, 1543. gave toward the Conduites, C.^. David Wodren, Shiriffe, 1554.
gave toward the Conduit at Bishopsgate xx.^. Edward Iackman one of the
Shiriffes 1564. gave toward the Conduites. C.^. Barnarde Randolfe common
Sarieant of the City 1583. gave to the water Conduits. 700. ^
Thus much for the Conduits of fresh water to this City.

The ditch which partly now remains, Liber Dunstbl^.
and compassed the wall of the City, was begun to be made by the Londoners in
the year 1211. and was finished in the year 1213. the 15. of king John, this
ditch being then made of 200. foot broad, Ditch about London 20^ foot broad.
Liber Trinie^
caused no small hindrance to the Canons of the holy Trinity, whose church
stood near unto Aldgate: for that the said ditch passed through their
ground, from the Tower of London, unto Bishopsgate. This ditch being
originally made for the defense of the city was long together carefully
cleansed and mainteyned as need required, but now of late neglected and forced
either to a very narrow and the same a filthy channel, or altogether stopped up
for gardens planted, and houses builded thereon even to the very wall, and in
many places upon both ditch and wall, to what danger of the city, I leave to
wiser consideration: and can but wish, that reformation might be had.

In the year of Christ, 1354. the 28. of Edward the third, the ditch of this
city flowing over the bank into the Tower ditch the king commanded the said
ditch of the city to be cleansed, and so ordered, that the ouerflowing thereof,
should not force any filth into the Tower ditch. Anno 1379. John Filpot Mayor
of London caused this ditch to be cleansed and every household to pay v.^. which
was for a days work toward the charges thereof. Richard the 2. in the
tenth of his reign, granted a Tole to be taken of wares sold by water, or by
land for 10. years toward repayring of the wall and clensing of the ditch.

Thomas Fawconer Mayor 1414. caused the ditch to be cleansed. Ralf Ioceline,
Mayor 1477. caused the whole ditch to be cast and cleansed, and so from time to
time it was cleansed and otherwise reformed.

In my remembrance also the same was cleansed, namely the Moore ditch, when Sir
Wiliam Hollies was Mayor in the year 1540. And not long before or after, from
the Tower of London, to Aldgate. It was again cleansed in the year 1549. Henry
Amcotes being Mayor, Plenty of fish in the town ditch.
at the charges of the companies at which time the said ditch lay open without
either wall or pale, having therein great store of very good fish of diverse
sorts, as many men yet living who have taken and tasted them, can well witness:
but now no such matter the charge of clensing that ditch is saved and great
profit made by letting out the banks with the spoil of the whole ditch. I am
not ignorant of two fifeteenes granted by a common counsel in the year 1595.
for the reformation of this ditch, and that a small portion thereof, to wit,
betwixt Bishopsgate, and the Posterne called Moregate, was cleansed and made
somewhat brother: but filling again very fast, by reason of over raising the
ground near adjoining, therefore never the better: and I will so leave it.

Of the Bridges of this City.
THe original foundation of London bridge, London brid^ first of timbe^
by report of Bartholomew Linsled, alias Foul, last Prior of S. Marie Oueries,
Church in Southwarke was this: a Ferrie being kept in place where now the
Bridge is builded, at length the Ferrimar and his wife deceasing, A fire over
the Thames between London and Southwarke
left the same Ferrie to their only daughter, a maiden named Marie, which with
the goods left by her Parents, as also with the profits rising of the said
Ferrie, builded a house of Sisters in place where now stands the east part of
S. Marie Oueries church above the Quier, where she was buried, unto the which
house the gave the oversight and profits of the Ferrie, but afterward the
said house of Sisters being converted into a college of Priests, the
Priests builded the Bridge (of Timber) London bridge builded of timber.
as all other the great bridges of this Land were, and from time to time kept
the same in good reparation, till at length considering the great charges of
repayring the same there was by aid of the Citizens of London and others a
bridge builded of stone as shall be showed.

But first of the timber bridge, the antiquity thereof being uncertain, but I
remember to have red, that in the year of Christ, 994. William Malmsebery.
Sweyn king of Denmark besieging the city of London, both by water and by land,
the Citizens manfully defended themselves, and their king Ethelred, so as part
of their ennemies were slain in battle, and part of them were drouned in
the River of Thames, because in their hasty rage, they took no heed of the
Bridge.

Moreover in the year 1016. Canute the Dane with a great navy came up to
London, and on the south of the Thames, caused a Trench to be cast, through
the which his ships were towed into the west side of the bridge, and then with
a deep Trench and straight siege he compassed the city round about.

Also in the year 1052. Earl Godwin with the like navy, taking his course up
the River of Thames, and finding none that offered to resist on the bridge, he
sailed up by the southside of the said river. Furthermore about the year
1067. Wiliam the Conqueror in his Charter, to the church of S. Peter at
westminster, confirmed to the Monks serving God there, a gate in London, then
called Buttolphes gate, with a wharfe which was at the head of London bridge.
^ went ^ryshod under London bridge Liber barmond.
We read likewise that in the year 1114. the 14. of Henry the first, the river
of Thames was so dried up, and such want of water there was that between the
Tower of London, and the bridge, and under the bridge, not only with horse,
but also a great number of men, women and children, did wade over on foot.
In the year 1122. the 22. of Henry the first. Thomas Arden gave to the Monks
of Barmondsey, the church of S. George in Southwarke, and v.^.rent by the year,
out of the land perteyning to London bridge, I also have seen a Charter under
seal to the effect following. Henry king of England to Ralfe B. of Chichester.
and all the Ministers of Sussex sends greeting, know ye etc. I command by my
kingly authority that the Manor called Alcestone, which my Father gave with
other Lands, to the Abbey of Battle, be free and quiet from shieres and
hundredes, and all other Customs of earthly servitude, as my father held the
same, most freely and quietely, and namely from the work of London bridge, and
the work of the Castle at Penansey: and this I command upon my forfeyture,
witness William de Pontlearche at Byrry, the which Charter with the Scale
very fair remains in the custody of Joseph Holland Gentleman.

In the year 1136. the first of king Stephen, Liber barmond. Liber trinitate.
a fire began, in the house of one Ailewarde, near unto Londonstone which
consumed east to Aldgate and west to S. Erkenwals shrine, in Powles Church: the
bridge of timber over the river of Thames, was also burnt, etc but afterward
again repaired. For Fitzstephen writes that in the reign of king Stephen and
of Henry the second, when pastimes were showed on the river of Thames, men
stood in great numbers on the bridge, wharfes, and houses to behold.

Now in the year 1163. the same bridge was not only repaired, but new made of
Timber as before by Peter of Cosechurch, Priest and Chaplain.

Thus much for the old timber bridge maintainde partly by the proper lands
thereof, and partly by the liberality of diverse persons 215. years before the
bridge of stone was finished.

Now touching the foundation of the stone bridge, London bridg^ of stone
four^ded.
it follows thus. About the year 1176. the stone bridge over the river of
Thames, at London, was begun to be founded by the foresaid Peter of
ColeChurch, near unto the bridge of timber, but some what more toward the
west, for I read that Buttolfe wharfe was in the Conquerors time, at the head
of London bridge. The king assisted this work: A Cardinal then being Legate
here, Liber wauer^.
and Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, gave one thousand marks, toward the
foundation, the course of the river for the time was turned an other way about
by a Trench cast for that purpose beginning as is supposed East, about
Rodriffe, and ending in the West about Patricksey now termed Batersey, this
work, to wit, the Arches and stone bridge over the river of Thames, at London,
having been 33. years in building London brid^ 33. years in building.
was in the year, 1209. finished by the worthy Merchants of London, Serle
Mercer, Wiliam Almaine, and Benedict Botewrite, principal masters of that
work, for Peter of Cole Church deceased four years before this work was
finished, and was buried in the Chapel builded on the same bridge in the
year 1205.

King John gave certain void places in London to build upon, the profits
thereof to remain toward the charges of building and repayring of the same
bridge: a Mason being master workemam of the bridge, builded from the
foundation, the Chaple on London bridge, Chaple on London bridg^
of his own^ proper expenses, it was endowed for two Priests, four Clerks
and other. There was also a Chantrie for John Hatfielde etc. So that in the
year 23. of Henry the 6. there was 4. Chaplens in the said chapel, after
that example sundry houses were thereupon shortly after erected, the first
action on this bridge was lamentable, for within 3. years after the finishing
thereof, to wit, in the year 1212. on the 10. of July at night, a marvelous
terrible chance happened, for the city of London upon the south side of the
river of Thames as also the church of our Lady of the Canons in Southwarke
being on fire, Liber dunmew. Gualter Covent.
and an exceeding great multitude of people passing the bridge, VV. packenton,
London bridge perished with Fire.
either to extinguish and quench it, or else to gaze at and behold it, suddenly
the north part, by blowing of the south wind was also set on fire, and the
people which were even now passing the bridge, perceiving the same, would have
returned, but were stopped by fire, and it came to pass, that as they stayed,
or protracted time, the other end of the bridge also, namely the South end,
was fired, so that the people thronging themselves between the two fires, did
nothing else but expect present death: then came there to aid them many ships
and vessels, into the which the multitude so unadvisedly rushed that the ships
being drowned, they al perished: it was said that through the firs and
shipwreck there were destroyed about three thousand persons whose bodies were
found in part, or half burned, besides those that were wholly burnt to ashes,
and could not be found. About the year 1282. through a great frost and deep
snow, 5. Arches of London bridge, were borne down 5. Arches of London bridge
borne down
and carried away. In the year 1289. the bridge was so sore decayed, for want
of reparations, that men were afraid to pass thereon, and a Subsidy was
granted toward the amendment thereof, Sir John Britain being Custos of
London. In the year 1395. on S. Georges day, was a great iusting on London
bridge, betwixt David Earl Craforde of Scotland, and the Lord Wels of
England: in the which, the Lord Wels was at the third course borne out of the
saddle, which history proves, that at that time the bridge being coaped on
either side was not replenished with houses builded thereupon, as since it has
been and now is. The next year on the 13. of November, the young Queen
Isabell, commonly called the little, for she was but 8. years old, was
conveyed from Kenington besides Lamhith, through Southwarke to the, Tower of
London, and such a multitude of people went out to see her, that on London
bridge. 9. persons were crowded to death, 9. persons crowded to death on London
bridge Tower on London bridge builded.
of whom the Prior of Tiptre a place in Essex was one, and a Matron on Cornhil
was an other. The Tower on London bridge, at the north end of the draw bridge,
for that bridge was then readily to be drawn up, as well to give passage for
ships to Queen hith, as for the resistance of any foreign force, was begun
to be builded in the year 1426. John Reinwell being Mayor.

An other tower there is on the said Bridge over the gate at the South end
toward Southwarke, whereof in an other place shall be spoken.

In the year 1481. an house called the common stage on London bridge fell
down An house o^ London bri^ fell down.
into the Thames: through the fall whereof 5. men were drouned: to conclude I
affirm of this bridge over the said river of Thames, as in other my
descriptions, that it is a work very rare, having with the draw bridge, 20.
Arches made of squared stone, of height 60. foot, and in breadth 30. foot
distant, one from an other, 20. foot, compact and joined together with vaultes
and sellers: upon both sides be houses builded, so that it seems rather a
continual street then a bridge for the continual fortifying, whereof against
the incessant assaults of the river, it has overseers and Officers, vz.

Fleet bridge Fleet brid^^
in the west without Ludgate, a bridge of stone fair coaped, on either side
with iron piked, on the which toward the south be also certain Lanthornes of
stone, for lights to be placed in the winter eueninges, for commodity of
travelers. Under this bridge runs a water sometimes called (as I have said)
the river of the Wels, since Turnemill brook, now Fleet dike, because it
runs by the Fleet, and so under Fleet bridge, into the river of Thames.
This bridge has been far greater in times past, but has been lessened, as
the water course has been narrowed. It seems, this last bridge to be made
at the charges of John Wels Mayor in the year, 1431. for on the coping is
engraven Wels embraced by Angels, like as on the Standarde in Cheap, which he
also builded: thus much of the Bridge: for of the water course and decay
thereof I have spoken in an other place.

Oldebourne bridge Oldbourne bridge.
over the said river of the Wels more toward the North was so called, of a
Bourne that sometimes ran down Oldborne hill into the said River, this
bridge of stone like as Fleet bridge, from Ludgate west, serves for passengers
with carriage or otherwise from Newgate toward the west and by North.

Cowbridge Cowbridge.
more north over the same water by Cowbridge street or Cowlane: this bridge
being lately decayed, an other of timber is made, somewhat more North, by
Chicke lane, etc.

Bridges over the Town ditch, Bridge over the town ditch
there are diverse: to ^weete without Aldgate, without Bishopsgate, the Posterne
called Moregate, the Posterne of Cripplegate without Aldersgate, the Posterne
of Christ's Hospital, Newgate and Ludgate, all these be over paued likewise
with stone leauell with the streets. But one other there is of Timber over the
river of wels, or Fleet dike between the precinct of the Black Friars, and
the house of Bridewel.

There have been, of old time also diverse bridges in sondrie places, over the
course of Walbrooke. Bridges over the course of Walbrooke.
I read that every person having lands on either side of the said walbrooke,
should vaulte, or bridge, and cleanse the same so far as his lands extended.
The 11. of Edward the third, the inhabitants upon the course of this Brook
were forced to pile and wall the sides thereof. In the third of Henry the
fifth, this watercourse having had many bridges, (as ye have heard) I have
read of one by the name of Horshew bridge, Horshew bridge.
by the Church of S. John Baptist now called S. John's upon walbrooke, which
has been since vaulted over with brick, and the Streets and Lanes where
through it passed so paued, that the same watercourse or brook is now hardly
discerned. Order was taken the 2. of Edwaarde the fourth, that such as had
ground on either side of walbrooke, should vaulte and paue Walbrooke vaulted
and paued.
it over so far as his ground extended. And thus much for Bridges may
suffice.

Gates in the wall of this City.
GAtes Gates of London 4 north, south, east and west.
in the wall of this City of old time were 4 to wit, Aldgate for the east,
Aldersgate for the North, Ludgate for the West, and the Bridgegate over the
river of Thames, for the South, but of later times for the ease of the Citizens
and Passengers, diverse other gates and Posterns have been made as shall be
showed. In the reign of Henry the second (says Fitzstephen) there were seven
double gates in the wall of this City, but he names them not. It may be
supposed he meant for the first, the gate next to the Tower of London, which
then served as a Posterne for Passengers out of the East: from thence through
Towerstreete, Eastcheape, and Candleweekestrete, to Londonstone, the middle
point of that high way: then through Budgerow, wathelingstreete, and leaving
Paul's Church on the right hand, to Ludgate in the west, the next be Aldgate,
Bishopsgate, Criplegate, Aldersgate, Ludgate, and the Bridgegate, over the
Thames. Since the which time has been builded Newgate, the Posterne called
Moregate, a Posterne from Christeshospital, toward S. Bartelmewes Hospital
in Smithfielde etc. Of every of these gates and Posterns as also of certain
watergates severally somewhat may be noted, as I find authority to warrant
me.

The first was the Posterne gate next unto the Tower of London Posterne by the
Tower ^^ London.
which at the length fell down in the year 1440. the 18. of Henry the 6. and
was never reedified again of stone, but an homely cotage with a narrow passage
made of timber, lath, and loame: has been in place thereof set up, and so
remains. The ruin of the said Posterne began in the year 1190. the second
of Richard the first, william Longshampe Bishop of Ely and Chauncelor of
England, caused a part of the city wall, to wit, from the said gate toward
the river of Thames to be broken down for the enlarging of the Tower, which
Tower he compassed far wi^e about with a wall, and is now the utter wall of the
Tower, he also caused a broad and deep ditch to be made without the same
wall, intending to have derived the river of Thames, to have flowed about it.
By means of this ditch the foundation of that gate being loosed and greatly
weakened, fell at the length, as ye have hear^e and so remains.

The next in the East in Aldgate Aldgate.
of old time so called of the antiquity or age thereof. It appears by a
Charter of king Edgar to the Knights of Kinghtone Guilde, that in his days
the said Port was called Aldgate. Also Matilde the Queen, wife to Henry the
first, in the eight year of his reign, having founded the Priorie of the Holy
Trinity within Aldegate, gave unto the same church, to Norman the first Prior,
and the Canons that devoutly served God therein, the Port of Aldegate, and
the Soke or Soke or Court
Franchise thereunto belonging with all customs, as free as she held the same,
etc. In the which Charter, she names the house Christ's church, and reports
Aldegate to be of her demaine. The next toward the north, is called
Bishopsgate, Bishopsgate.
for that, as it may be supposed, the same was first builded by some Bishop
of London, the certaynty whereof is unknown, but true it is that this gate was
first builded for the ease of the passengers toward the East and by North, as
into Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, etc. The Travelers into which parts
before the building of this gate were forced, passing out at Aldegate, to go
east till they came to the Miles end, and then to turn on the left hand to
Blethenhal green now called Bednal green, to Cambridge heath, and so North, or
East and by North, as their Journey lay. If they took not this way, by the
East out at Aldgate, they must take their way by the North out at Aldersgate
through Aldersgate street, and Goswelstreete toward Iseldon, and by a cross
of stone on their right hand, set up for a mark by the North end of Golding
lane to turn Eastwarde through a long street until this day called
Aldestreete, to an other cross standing, where now stands a Smithes Forge by
Sewers ditch church, and then to turn again North toward Totenham,
Endfield, Waltham, Ware, etc. The eldest note that I read of this Bishopsgate,
is that wiliam Blund one of the Sheriffs of London in the year, Liber
trinitati.
1210. sold to Serle Mercer, and William Almaine^ procurators, or Wardens, of
London bridge, all his land with the garden, in the Parish of S. Buttolph
without Bishopsgate, between the land of Richard Casiarin toward the north,
and the land of Robert Crispie toward the South, and the high way called
Bearewardes lane Bishopsgate street without, of old time called Bearewardes
lane.
on the East etc. Next I read in a Charter Charter.
dated the year 1235. that Walter Brune Citizen of London, and Rosia his wife
founded the Priorie or new Hospital of our blessed Lady, since called S. Mary
Spittle, without Bishopsgate, for Canons regular the 19. of Henry the third.
Also in the year 1247. Simon Fitzmarie, one of the Sherifes of London, the 29.
of H. the third, founded the Hospital of S. Marie, Record.
called Bethlem without Bishopsgate. Thus much for Antiquity, now for
repayring of this gate. I find, that Henry the third granted or confirmed to
the Marchantes of the Haunce, Liber custom, London.
that had an house in the city called Guildhalla Theutonicorum, certain
Liberties and Privileges. Edward the first also confirmed the same. In the
10. year of whose reign, it was found that the said Marchantes ought of
right so repair the said gate called Bishopsgate. Whereupon Gerarde Marbod,
Alderman of the Haunce and other, then remaining in the City of London: for
themselves, and al others Merchants of the said hance, granted, 210. marks
sterling to the Mayor and Citizens. And couenanted that they and their
successors should from time to time repair the same gate. Bishopsgate repared
by the Merchants of the Haunce Bishopsgate was builded.
This gate was again beutifully builded in the year 1479. in the reign of
Edward the 4. by the said Haunce Marchantes: Mor^uer about the year 1551.
these Haunce Marchantes having prepared stone for that purpose, caused a new
gate to be framed, there to have been set up, but then their. Liberties
through suite of our English Marchantes, were seized into the Kings hand, and
so that work was stayed, and the old gate yet remains.

Touching the next Posterne, called Moregate, Bishopsgate, provided to have
been new builded Posterne, called Moor^^ gate.
I find that Thomas Faulconer Mayor, about the year one thousand four
hundred and fifeteene, the third of Henry the fifte, caused the wall of the
City to be broken near unto Colemanstreete and there builded a Posterne, now
called Moregate, upon the Moore side where was never gate before. This gate he
made for ease of the Citizens, that way to pass upon causewaies into the
field, for their recreation: For the same field was at that time a Marrish.
This Posterne was reedified by William Hampton Fishmonger Mayor, in the year
1472. In the year also, 1511. the third of Henry the eight. Roger Achely
Mayor, caused Dikes and Bridges to be made, and the ground to be leuiled, and
made more commodious for passage since which time the same has been
heighthened. So much that the Ditches and Bridges are covered, and if it be
made leuill with the Battlementes of the City wall: yet will it be little the
drier, such is the Moorish nature of the ground. The next is the Posterne of
Cripplegate posterne of Criplegate. Abba Floriensis. Burcharde.
so called long before the Conquest. For I read in the History of Edmonde
King of the East Angles, written by Abba Fl^riacensis, and by Burchard sometime
Secretar^e to Offa king of Marcia. That in the year ^0^0. The Danes spoiling
the kingdom of the East Angles, Alwyne Bishop of Helmeham, caused the body of
king Edmonde the Martyr to be brought from Bedrisworth, (now called Bury S.
Edmondes) through the kingdom of the East Saxons, and so to London in at
Cripplegate, a place (says mine Author) so called of Criples begging there: at
which gate, (it was said) the body entering, miracles were wrought, as some
of the Lame did go upright, praising God. The body of King Edmond rested for
the space of three years in the Parrish church of Saint Gregory, near unto
the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul. Moreover the Charter of William the
Conqueror, confirming the foundation of the College in London called S. Martin
the great, has these words. I do give and grant to the same Church and
Cannons, serving God therein. All the land and the Moore without the Posterne,
which is called Cripplegate, on either part of the Posterne. Liber S
Bar^tilmew.
Besides this Alfune builded the parrish church of S. Giles nigh a gate of the
city called Porta contractorum, or Criplesgate about the year 1090.

This Posterne was sometime a prison, whereunto such Citizens and others, as
were arrested for debt, Criplesgate a prison for t^espassors.
or common trespasses were committed, as they be now to the Compters, which
thing appears by a writ of Edward the first in these words: Rexvic.
London, salutem: ex graui querela B. capt. and detent. in prisona nostra de
Criples gate pro x.^, Record.
quas co^am Radulpho de Sandwico tunc custod, Ciuitatis nostrae London, and I.
de Blackwell ciuis recognit. debit. etc. This gate was new builded by the
Brewers of London in the year 1244. as says Fabians Manscript. Criplesgate
new builded.


Edmond Shaw Goldsmith, Mayor, in the year 1483. at his decease appointed by
his testament his executors, with the cost of 400. Marks, and the stuff of
the old gate, called Criples gate, to build the same gate of new, which was
performed and done, in the year 1491. The next is Aldresgate or Aldersgate,
Aldersgate.
so called not of Aldrich, or of Elders, that is to say, ancient men, builders
thereof, Beware the Cat.
nor of Eldarne trees growing there more abundantly, then in other places, as
some have fabuled, but for the very antiquity of the gate it self, as being
one of the first four gates of the city, and serving for the Northern
parts, as Aldegate did for the East, which two gates being both old gates, are
for difference sake called, the one Aldegate, and the other Aldergate. This
gate has at sundry times been increased with buildinges, namely, on the south
or innerside, a great frame of timber has been added and set up, containing
diverse large rooms, and lodgeinges: also on the East side, is the addition of
one great building of timber, with one large floor paued with stone, or tile,
and a Well therein curbed with stone, of a great depth, and rising into the
said room, which is two stories high from the ground: which Well is the only
peculiar note belonging to that gate, for I have not seen the like in all this
City, to be raised so high. John Day Stationer, a late famous printer of many
good books, in our time dwelled in this gate, and builded much upon the wall
of the city toward the parish Church of Saint Anne. Then is there also a
Posterne gate made out of the wall on the North side of the late dissolved
cloister of Friars minors, commonly of their habit called Gray Friars, now
Christ's Church, and Hospital. A Postern out of Christ's Ho^pitall,
This Posterne was made in the sixth year of Edward the sixth, to pass from the
said Hospital of Christ's Church, unto the Hospital of Saint Bartlemew in
Smithfield.

The next gate on the west, and by North, is termed Newgate, Newgate.
as latelier builded then the rest. This gate was first erected about the
reign of Henry the second, or Richard the first, upon this occasion. The
Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, being burnt about the year 1086. in the
reign of William the Conqueror, Mauritius then Bishop of London, rapayred
not the old^ church, as some have supposed, but began the foundation of a new
work, such as men then judged would never have been performed, it was to them
so wonderful for height, length, and breadth, as also in respect it was raised
upon arches or vaults, etc. After Mauritius, Richard Beamore did wonderfully
advance the work of the said Church, purchasing the large streets, and lanes
round about, wherein were wont to dwell many lay people, which grounds he began
to compass about with a strong wall of stone, and gates. By means of this
increase of the Church territory, but more by enclosing of ground, for so
large a cemitorie, or church yard: the high and large street stretching from
Aldegate in the East, until Ludgate in the West, was in this place so crossed
and stopped up, that the carriage through the city Westwarde, was forced to
pass without the said churchyard wall on the North side, through Pater
noster row: and then south down Aue Mary lane, and again West through Bowiar
row to Ludgate: or else out of Chepe, or Wathelingstreet to turn South through
the old Exchange, then West through Carter lane: again North up Creed lane,
and then West to Ludgate. Which passage, by reason of so often turning, was
very combersome, and dangerous both for horse and man. Newgate first builded,
and the cause why.
For remedy whereof, a new gate was made, and so called, by which men and
cattle with all manner of carriages, might pass more directly (as before) from
Aldegate, through West Cheap by Paul's on the North side, through Saint
Nicholas Shambles, and Newgate market to Newgate, and from thence to any part
Westwarde over Oldborne bridge, or turning without the gate into Smithfielde,
and through Iseldon to any part North and by West. This gate has of long time
been a Gayle, Close role. Newgate a ^ayle or prison house. The king repaired
it.
or prison, for fellons and trespassors, as appears by records in the reign
of King John, of which amongst other I find one testifying that in the year
1218. The third of King Henry the third, the King writes unto the Sheriffs
of London, commanding them to repair the Gaile of Newgate, for the safe
keeping of his prisoners, and that the charges which they should lay out,
should be allowed unto them upon their account in the Exchequer. Moreover in
the year 1241. the Jews of Norwich were hanged for circumcising a Christian
child, their house called the Thor, was pulled down and destroyed, Aron the
son of Abraham a Jew, at London, and the other Jews were constrained to pay
twenty thousand marks at two terms in the year, or else to be kept perpetual
prisoners in Newgate of London and in other prisons. 1255. King Henry the
third lodging in the Tower of London, upon displeasure conceived toward the
City of London, for the escape of John Offrem a prisoner being a Clearke
convict, out of Newgate, which had killed a Prior that was of alliance to the
King, as cosen to the Queen, he sent for the Mayor and Sheriffs to come
before him, to answer the matter: the Mayor laid the fault from him to the
Sheriffs, The Shiriffes of London prisoners in the Tower for escape of a
prisoner out of Newgate.
for so much as to them belonged the keeping of all prisoners within the city,
and so the Mayor returned home, but the Sheriffs remained there prisoners, by
the space of one Month and more, and yet they excused themselves in that the
fault chiefly rested in the Bishops Officers: for whereas the prisoner was
under custody, they at his request had granted license to imprison the
offender within the Gaile of Newgate, but so as the Bishops Officers were
charged to see him safely kept. The King notwithstanding all this, demanded of
the city 3000. marks for a fine. In the year 1326. Robert Baldoke, the
kings Chancellor was put in Newgate. The kings Chauncellor prisoner in New
gate.
In the year 1337. S. John Poultney gave four marks by the year, to the
relief of prisoners in Newgate. In the year 1385. William Wallwoorth gave
somewhat to relieve the prisoners in Newgate so have many others since also. In
the year 1414. the Gaylors of Newgate and Ludgate dyed, and prisoners in
Newgate to the number of 64. In the 1418. The Parson of Wrotham in Kent was
imprisoned in Newgate. The year 1422. the first of Henry the sixth, license was
granted to John Couentre, Ianken Carpenter, and William Grieve, Newgate new
builded.
executors to Richard Whittington, to reediste the Gaile of Newgate, which they
did with his goods. Lastly Thomas Knowles Mayor, by license of Reynold Prior
of S. Bartlemewes, in Smithfield, and also of John Wakering Master of the
Hospital of S. Bartlemewe, and his brethren, conveyed the waste of water at
the cesterne near to the common fountain and Chapel of S. Nicholas,
(situate by the said Hospital) to the Gailes of Newgate, and Ludgate, for
relief of the prisoners, and this may suffice for Newgate.

Ludgate Ludgate.
in the West is the next, and is called Ludgate as first builded (says Geffrey
Monmouth) by King Lud a Briton, about the year before Christ's nativity 66 Of
which building, and also of the name, as Ludsgate, or Fluds gate, has been of
late some question amongst the learned, wherefore I over pass it, as not to my
purpose, only referring the reader to that I have before written, out of
Cesars commentaries, and other Roman writers concerning a town or City
amongst the Britains. This gate I suppose to be one of the most ancient: and
as Aldgate was builded for the East, Roger VVinde^ar. Matl^ew Paris.
so was this Luds gate for the west. I read as I told you that in the year
1215. The 17. of King John the Barons of the Realm, being in arms against the
King entered this City, and spoiled the Jews houses, to fill their own purses
which being done, Robert Fitzwater, and Geffrey de Magna villa Earl of Essex,
and the Earl of Gloucester chief leaders of the Army, applied all diligence
to repair the gates and walls of this City, with the stones of the Jews
broken houses, especially (as it seems) they then repaired or rather new
builded Ludgate. Ludgate new builded.
For in the year 1586. when the same gate was taken down to be new builded,
there was found couched within the wall thereof, a stone taken from one of the
Jews houses, wherein was engraven in Hebrewe Caracters these words following,
(...) Jews houses spoiled.
Haec est statio Rabbi Moses, ^ insignis Rabbi Isaac: which is to say, this is
the Station, or Ward of Rabby Moses, the son of the honorable Rabby Isaac,
and had been fixed upon the front of one of the Jews houses as a note, or
sign that such a one dwelled there. In the year 1260. this Ludgate was
repaired and beautified with images of Lud and other Kings, as appears by
letters pattents Patent.
in the Tower, of license given to the citizens of London, to take up stone
for the making of those images, dated the 45. of Henry the third. These images
of Kings in the reign of Edward the sixth had their heads smitten off, and
were otherwise defaced, by unadvised folks, and in the reign of Queen Marie
were repaired, as by setting new heads on their old bodies, etc. All which so
remained until the year 1586. Ludgate again new builded.
The 28. of Queen Elizabeth, when the same gate being sore decayed was clean
taken down, the prisoners in the mean time remaining in the large Southeast
quadrant to the same Gate adjoining, and the same year, the whole gate was
newly and beautifully builded with the images of Lud, and others, as before, on
the East side, and the picture of her Majesty, Ludgate enlarged in the reign
of H. the sixth.
Queen Eilzabeth on the West side.

Al which was done at the common charges of ye citizens, amou^ting to 1500. ^.
or more. Ludgate a fre^ prison.
This gate was made a free prison in the year 1378. the first of Richard
Record Guild. hall.
the second, Nicholas Brembar being Mayor. The same was confirmed in the year
1382. John Northampton being Mayor, by a common counsel in the Guild hall: by
which it was ordained that all free men of this City should for debt,
trespasses, accomptes, and contempts, be imprisoned in Ludgate, and for
treasons, fellonies, and other criminal offenses be committed to Newgate. etc.
In the year 1439 the tenth of King Henry the sixth, John Wells being Mayor,
and court of common counsel established ordinanances, (as William Standon and
Robert Chicheley, late Majors before had done) touching the guard and
government of Ludgate, and other prisons.

Also in the year 1463. the third of Edward the fourth, Matthew Philip being
Mayor, in a common counsel, at the request of the well disposed, blessed, and
devout woman, Dame Agnes Forster, widow, late wife to Stephen Forster
Fishemonger, sometime Mayor, for the comfort and relief of all the poor
prisoners, certain Articles were established. Inprimis, that the new works
then late edified by the same Dame Agnes, for the enlarging of the prison of
Ludgate, from thenceforth should be had and taken, as a part and parcel of
the said prison of Ludgate, so that both the old and new work of Ludgate
aforesaid, be one prison, gaile, keeping, and charge for evermore.

The said Quadrant strongly builded of stone, by the before named Stephen
Forster, and Agnes his wife, contains a large walking place by ground, the
like room it has over it for lodgings, and over all a fair leads to walk
upon, well imbattayled, all for ease of prisoners, to the end they should have
lodging and water free without charge: as by certain verses graven in Copper,
and fixed on the said Quadrant, I have read in form following. Old verses on
Ludgate.


Devout souls that pass this way,
for Stephen Forster late Mayor, heartily pray,
And Dame Agnes his spouse, to God consecrate,
that of pity this house made for Lo^doners in Ludgate.
So that for lodging and water prisoners here naught pay,
as their keepers shall answer at dreadful domes day.
This plate, and one other of his Arms, taken down with the old gate, I
caused to be fixed over the entry of the said Quadrant, but the verses being
unhappily turned inward to the wall, the like in effect is graven outward in
prose, declaring him to be a Fishmonger, because some upon a light occasion
(as a maidens head in a glass window) had fabuled him to be a Mercer, and to
have begged there at Ludgate, etc. Thus much for Ludgate.

Next this, is there a breach in the wall of the City, A breach in the wall
against Bridewell.
and a bridge of timber over the Fleet dike, betwixt Fleet bridge and Thames,
directly over against the house of Bridewel.

Of the water gates of name, on the bank of the river of Thames. The first
from the West toward the East, is called Ripa Reginae, the Queens bank, or
Queen Hith, Watergates Queens hith
which may well be accounted a water gate, and the very chief of this city,
being a common strand or landing place, yet equal with, and of old time as far
excelling Belins gate, as shall be showed in the ward of Queen Hith.

The next is Down gate, Down gate.
so called (as may be supposed) of the sudden descending, or down going of
that way from S. John's Church upon Walbrooke unto the River of Thames, whereby
the water in the channel there has such aswift course, that in the year
1574. on the fourth of September after a strong shower of rain, a lad (of the
age of 18. years) A lad of 13. years old. drowned in a channel at downegate.
minding to have leapt over the channel, was taken by the feet and borne
down with the violence of that narrow stream, and carried toward the Thames
with such a violent swiftness, as no man could rescue or stay him, till he
came against a cart wheel, that stood in the water gate, before which time he
was drowned, and stark dead.

This was sometime a large water gate, frequented of ships and other vessels,
like as the Queen Hith, and was a part thereof, as does appear by an
Inquisition made in the 28. year of Henry the third, wherein was found, that
as well corn as fish and all other things coming to the Port of Down gate,
were to be ordered after the customs of the Queens Hith, for the kings use,
as also that the corn arriving between the gate of the Guildhall of the
Merchants of Cullen: the (Styleyarde) which is East from Down gate, and the
house then pertaining to the Archbishop of Canterbury, West from Baynards
castle, was to be measured by the measure and measurer of the Queens soke, or
Queen Hith. Merchants of the Haunce, landed their corn betwixt their house,
and the Black friars
I read also in the 19. of Edward the third, that customs were then to be
paid for ships and other vessels resting at Down gate, as if they road at
Queen Hith, and as they now do a Belingsgate. And thus much for Down gate
may suffice.

The next after Downgate (of old time) was called Wolses gate Wolses gate in
the Roperie. Liber Horn Liber S. Albon
in the reperie in the parish of Alhallowes the less, of later time called
Wolses lane, but now out of use: for the lower part was builded on by the
Earl of Shrewsburie, and the other part was stopped up, and builded on by the
Chamberlain of London.

The next is Ebgate, Ebgate Liber trinitate, Liber S, Albon Record E. the 3.
a Watergate, so called of old time, as appears by diverse records of
tenements near unto the same adjoining. It stands near unto the Church of
S. Laurence Pountney, but is within the parish of S. Marten Ordegare. In place
of this gate is now a narrow passage to the Thames, and is called Ebgate lane,
but more commonly the Old Swanne.

Then is there a water gate at the Bridge foot, called Oyster gate, Oystergate
of Dysters that were there of old time commonly to be sold, and was the
chiefest market for them, and for other shell fishes There stands now an
engine, or forcier, for the winding up of ter to serve the city, whereof I
have already spoken.

The next is the Bridge gate, Bridge gate.
so called of London Bridge whereon it stands: This is one of the four first
and principal gates of the city, and was long before the conquest, when there
stood a Bridge of timber: which Gate being weakly made, when the bridge was
builded of stone, has been often times since repaired. This gate with the
Tower upon it, in the 1436. fell down, and two of the farthest Arches
Southwards also fell therewith, and no man perished or was hurt therewith. To
the repayring whereof, diverse welthy citizens gave large sums of money,
namely Robert Large, sometime Mayor, gave to that work 100. marks, Stephen
Forster 20. l. S. John Crosby Alderman 100. l. etc. But in the year 1471. W.
Dunthorne
the Kentish Mariners under the conduct of Bastard Fauconbridge, burned the
said Gate, and xiij.honses on the Bridge, besides the Beer houses at S.
Katherines, and many other in the suburbs.

The next is Buttolphes gate, Buttolphes gate.
so called of the parish Church of S. Buttolph near adjoining. This gate was
sometime given, or confirmed by William Conqueror, to the Monks of Westminster
in these words: W. Rex Angliae etc. William King of England, sends greeting
to the Sheriffs and all his ministers, as also to all his loving subjects,
French and English of London, Know ye that I have granted to God, and S. Peter
of Westminster, and to the Abbot Vitalis, the gift which Almundus of the port
of S. Buttolph gave them, when he was there made Monk: that is to say, his
Lords court with the houses, and one Wharfe, which is at the head of London
bridge, and all other his lands which he had in the same city, in such sort
as King Edward more beneficially, and amply granted the same: and I will and
command, that they shall enjoy the same well and quietly and honorably with
sake, and soke etc.

The next is Belingsgate Belingsgate.
now used as an especial Port or harborow, for small ships and boats
coming thereto, and is now the largest water gate on the River of Thames, and
therefore most frequented, the Queens Hith being almost forsaken. Now this
Gate took that name, or of what antiquity the same is, must leave uncertain,
as not having read any ancient record thereof, more then that Geffrey
Monmouth Geffrey Monmouth.
writes, that Belin a King of the Britans, about 400. years before Christ's
nativity builded this gate, and named it Belins gate, after his own calling:
and that when he was dead, his body being burned, the ashes in a vessel of
brass, were set upon a high pinnacle of stone over the same Gate. But Caesar,
and other the Roman writers, affirm of cities, walls, and gates, as ye
have before heard, and therefore it seems to me not to be so ancient, but
rather to have taken that name of some later owner of the place, happily named
Belin, as Somars Key, Smarts Key, Froth wharfe, and others thereby took their
names of their owners: of this gate more shall be said when we come to Belins
Gate ward.

Then have you a Water gate Watergate by the custom house.
on the West side of Woolle wharfe, or Customers Key, which is now of late most
beautifully enlarged and built, This gate is commonly called the Watergate, as
being at the South end of Water lane.

One other Water gate there is by the Bulwark of the Tower, Watergate by the
Tower.
and this is the last and farthest water gate Eastward, on the River of Thames,
so far as the city of London extends within the walls: both which last
named water gates be within the Tower ward.

Besides these common Water gates were diverse private wharfes and Keys Wharfes
and Keys.
all along from the East to the West of this City, on the bank of the River
of Thames: Merchants of all nations had landing places, Ware houses, sellers
and stowage of their goods and marchandises, as partly shall be touched in
the Wards adjoining to the said River, and therefore concerning Gates let this
suffice.

Of Towers and Castles.
THe City of London (says Fitzstephens) has in the East a very great and a
most strong Palatine Tower, The Tower ^ London.
whose turrets and walls do rise from a deep foundation, the mortar thereof
being tempered with the blood of beasts. In the west part are two most strong
Castles etc. To begin therefore with the most famous Tower of London, situate
in the East, near unto the River of Thames, it has been the common opinion:
and some hans written (but of none assured ground) that Julius Caesar, the first
Conqueror of the Britains, was the original Author, and founder as well
thereof, as also of many other Towers, castles, and great buildings within this
Realm: but (as I have already before noted) Caesar remained not here so long,
nor had he in his head any such matter, In my Annals.
but only to dispatch a conquest of this barbarous country, and to proceed
to greater matters. Neither do the Roman writers make mention of any such
buildings erected by him here. And therefore leaving this, and proceeding to
more grounded authority, I find in a fair register book, of the acts of the
Bishops of Rochester, set down by Edmond of Hadenham, that William the first
(surnamed Conqueror) builded the Tower of London, Tower of London builded by
William Conqueror, namely the white Tower.
to wit, the great white and square Tower, there, about the year of Christ
1078. appointing Gundulph, then Bishop of Rochester, to be principal surueyer
and ouerseeer of that work, who was for that time lodged in the house of
Edmere a Burgess of London, the very words of which mine Author are these.
Gundulphus Episcopus mandato Willielmi Regis magni praefuit operi magnae Turris
London. quo tempore hospitatus est apud quenda^ Edmerum Burgen^em London. qui
dedit vnum were Ecclesiae Rofen. This was the great square Tower, which was
then builded, and has been since, at diverse times enlarged with other
buildings adjoining, as shall be showed hereafter. William Malmsebery. Matthew
Paris I. London, Castle by the Tower builded.
This Tower was by tempest of wind sore shaken in the year 1090. the fourth of
William Rufus, and was again by the said Rufus and Henry the first repaired.
They also caused a castle to be builded under the said Tower, to weete, on the
South side toward the Thames.

Othowerus, Acolinillus, Otto, and Geffrey Earl of Essex were four of the
first Constables of this Tower of London, by succession: all which held by
force a portion of land (that pertayned to the Priorie of the holy Trinity
within Aldgate) that is to say, East Smithfield, Eastsmithfield ^^ Vineyarde.
near unto the Tower, making thereof a Uyneyarde, and would not depart from
it, till the second year of King Stephen, when the same was adjudged and
restored to the said Church. Ex. Chart^.
This Geffrey Magnauille was Earl of Essex, Constable of the Tower, Sheriff
of London, Geffrey Magna Ville, Earl of Essex, Constable of the Tower and
Sheriff of London.
Middlesex Essex, and Hertford shires, as appears by a Charter of Maud the
Empress, dated 1141. He also fortified the Tower of London against King
Stephen, but the King took him in his court at S. Albons, and would not
deliver him till he had rendered the Tower of London, with the Castles of
Walden, and Pleshey in Essex. Roger VVindeuar.
About the year 1190. the second of Richard the first, William Longshampe
Bishop of Elie, Chauncellor of England, for cause of dissension betwixt him and
Earl John John Beuer.
the Kings brother, that was rebel, enclosed the Tower, The Tower of London
compassed about with a wall and a ditch.
and castle of London, with an outward wall of stone imbattailed, and also
caused a deep ditch to be cast about the same, thinking (as I have said
before) to have environed it with the River of Thames. By the making of this
ditch in Eastsmithfield, the Church of the holy Trinity in London lost half a
mark rent by the year, and the Mill was removed that belonged to the poor
brethren of the Hospital of S. Katherine, S. Katherines mill stood where now
is the Iron gate of the Tower.
and to the Church of the Trinity aforesaid, which was no small loss and
discommoditie to either part, and the garden which the King had hired of the
brethren for six marks the year, for the most part was wasted and marred by
the ditch. Recompense was often promised, but never performed, until King
Edward coming after, gave to the brethren five marks and a half for that part
which the ditch had devoured: and the other part thereof without, he yielded to
them again, which they hold: and of the said rent of five marks and a half
they have a deed, by virtue whereof, they are well paid until this day.

About the year 1239. King Henry the third caused the Tower of London to be
fortified with bulwarks, Bulwark without the Tower builded.
which after they were builded fell down, and therefore he caused it to be
reedified more strongly, to his cost of more then twelve thousand marks.
Matthew Paris.


In the year 1274. King Edward the first commanded the Treasurer and
Chamberlain of his Exchequer, to deliver out of his Treasorie, unto Giles of
Andwarp 200. Record. Tower. Ditch about the Towerres payred.
marks, of the fines, taken of diverse Merchants, or usurers of London,
toward the work of the ditch about the Tower of London.

Edward the fourth fortified this Tower, and made if strong.

And in the year 1532. King Henry the eight repaired the white Tower. Tower
repaired by Henry the eight,
Thus much for the foundation and building, increase and maintenance of this
Tower. Now somewhat of accidents in the same.

In the year 1196. Actions of the Tower.
William Fitzosbart, a citizen of London seditiously moving the common people
to seek liberty, and not to be subject to the rich, and more mighty, at
length was taken and brought before the Arrhbishoppe of Canterbury in the
Tower, Justices sat in the Tower of London.
where he was by the judges condemned, had judgment, and was by the heels
drawn thence to the Ealmes in Smithfield, and there hanged.

In the year 1220. all the Plees belonging to the crown, were holden in the
Tower: Plees of the Crown pleaded in the Tower.
and likewise in the year 1224. etc.

In the year 1222. the citizens of London having made a tumult against the
Abbot of Westminster, Hubert of Burgh, chief Justice of England, Matthew Paris.
came to the Tower of London, called before him the Mayor and Aldermen, of whom
he enquired for the principal authors of that sedition: amongst whom one
named Constantine Fitz Aelulfe Constantine Fitz Aelufe hanged
auowed, that he was the man, and had done much less then he ought to have
done: Whereupon the Justice sent him with two other to Falks de Brent, who with
armed men, brought him to the gallows, and there hanged him and other twain.

In the year 1244. Griffith Griffith of Wales fell from the Tower.
the eldest son of Leoline, prince of Wales, being kept prisoner in the
Tower, devised means of escape, and having in the night made of the hangings,
sheets, etc. a long line, he put himself down from the top of the Tower,
but in the slyding, the weight of his body, (being a very big and a fette
man) brake the rope, and he fell and brake his neck withal.

In the year 1253. King Henry the third, imprisoned the Sheriffs of London
in the Tower, Sheriffs of London prisoners in the Tower.
more then a month, for the escape of a prisoner out of Newgate.

In the year 1260. King Henry K. Henry landed in the Tower, and held his
Parliament there is.
with his Queen (for sear of the Barons) were lodged in this Tower. The next
year he sent for his Lords, and held his parliament there.

In the year 1263. when the Queen would have removed from the Tower by water,
toward Windsor, sundry Londoners got them together to the bridge, under the
which she was to pass, and not only cried out upon her with reproachful
words, but also threw mire and stones at her, by which she was constrained to
return for the time, but in ye year 1265. the said Citizens were feign to
submit themselves to the king for it, and the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs
were sent to diverse prisons, and a Custos also was set over the City, to wit,
Othon Constable of the Tower, etc.

In the year 1282. Leoline Prince of Wales Leoline prince of Wales his head
set on the Tower.
being taken at Blewth Castle, Roger Lestrange cut off his head, which Sir
Roger Mortimer caused to be crowned with Iuie, and set it upon the Tower.

In the year 1290. diverse Justices as well of the Bench, Justices of the Bench
sent to the Tower.
as of the assyses, were sent prisoners to the Tower, which with great sommes
of money redeemed their liberty.

In the year 1320. the Kings Justices sat in the Tower, Justices sat in the
Tower.
for trial of matters, whereupon John Gifors late Mayor of London, and many
other fled the City for fear of things they had presumptuously done.

In the year 1321. the Mortimers yielding themselves to the King, he sent them
prisoners to the Tower, where they remained long, and were adjudged to be
drawn and hanged. But at length Roger Mortimer Mortimer made an escape out of
the Tower. Citizens of London wrested ye keys of the Tower from the Constable.
Mortimer drawn from the Tower to the Elmes, and hanged
of Wigmore by giving to his keepers a sleepie drink, escaped out of the
Tower, and his uncle Roger being still kept there died about five years after.

In the year 1326. the Citizens of London wrested ye keys of ye Tower out of
the Constables hands, and delivered all the prisoners.

In the year 1330. Roger Mortimer Earl of March was taken and bronght to the
Tower, from whence he was drawn to the Elmes and there hanged.

In the year 1344. King Edward the third commanded Florences of gold to be
made and coined in the Tower, that is to say, a penie piece of the value of
six shillinges and eight pence, the half penie piece, of the value of
iij.^.and iiij.^.and a farthing piece worth 20. pence, Perciuall de Port of
Luke being then Master of the coin. And this is the first coining of Gold in
the Tower, A Mint in the Tower: Flore^ces of gold coined there.
whereof I have read, and also the first coining of Gold in England: for (that
I may a little digress by occasion hereof) I find that in times before passed,
Argent, and Pecunia after called Estarling.
all great sommes were paid by wayght of gold or silver, as so many pounds or
marks of silver, or so many pounds or marks of Gold, as I could prove by many
good authorities, which I ouerpasse. The smaller sommes also were paid in
starlings, which were pence, so called, for other coins they had none. The
antiquity of this starling penie usual in his Realm, is from the reign of
Henry the second: notwithstanding, the Saxon coins before the conquest were
pence of fine silver full the weight, and somewhat better then the latter
starlings, as I have tried by conference of the pence of Burghrede king of
Mercia, Aelfred, Edward, and Edelrod, kings of the West Sexons, Plegmond
Archbishop of Canterbury, and others. William the Conquerours W. Conqueror
Wear no beardes. W. Malmsbery
penie also was fine silver of the weight of the Easterling, and had on the one
side stamped an armed head, with a beardles face, (for the Normans did wear
no beardes) with a scepter in his hand: the inscription in the circumference
was this, Le Rei Wila^ on the other side a Cross double to the ring, between
four rowals of six points.

King Henry the first his penny was of the like weight, finenes, form of
face, cross etc.

This Henry in the eight year of his reign, ordained the penny which was
round, so to be quartered, by the cross, that they might easily be broken,
Roger Houeden.
into half pence and farthinges. In the first, second, third, fourth, and
fifth of king Richard the first his reign, and afterward I find commonly
Esterling money mentioned, and yet often times the same is called argent as before,
and not otherwise.

The first great sum that I read of to be paid in Esterlinges, was in the
fifth of Richard the first, when Robert Earl of Leycester being prisoner in
France, proffered for his ransom a thousand marks Esterlinges,
notwithstanding the Esterling pence were long before. The weight of the
Esterling penny Weight of starling penie 32. grains of Wheat.
may appear by diverse statutes, namely of weights and measures, made in the
51. of Henry the third in these words. Thirty two grains of Wheat, dry and
round, taken in the midst of the ear, should be the weight of a starling
penie, 20. of those pence should way one ounce, 12. ownces a pound Troy, It
follows in the statute eight pound to make a gallon of Wine, and eight
gallons a bushel of London measure; etc. Notwithstanding which Statute, I find
in the eight of Edward the first, Gregory Rokefley Mayor of London, being
thief Master or minister of the kings Exchange, or mintes, a new coin
being then appointed, the pound of Esterling money should contain as before 12.
ownces, to wit, fine silver, such as was then made into foil, and was commonly
called silver of Guthurons lane, 11. ounces, two Estarlings, and one ferling or
farthing, and the other 17. pence ob. q. to be lay. Also the pound of money
ought to weygh xx.^iij.^.by account, so that no pound ought to be over
xx.^.iiij.^.nor less the^ xx.^.ij.^. by account, the ounce to weigh twenty
pence, the penny weight, 24. graynes (which 24. by weight then appointed, were
as much as the former 32. graynes of weight) a penny force, 25. graynes and a
half, the penny deble, or feeble 22. grains and a half etc.

Now for the penny Esterling how it took that name, I think good briefly to
touch. The penie Esterling how i^ took the name.
It has been said that Numa Pompilius the second King of the Romans
commanded money first to be made, of whose name they were called Numi, and
when Copper pence, silver pence, and gold pence were made, because every silver
penny was worth ten Copper pence, and every Gold penny worth ten silver
pence, the pence therefore were called in Latin Denarij, and oftentimes the
pence are named of the matter and stuff of Gold or silver. But the money of
England was called of the workers and makers thereof: as the Floren of gold is
called of the Florentines, that were the workers thereof: and so the Esterling
pence took their name of the Esterlinges, which did first make this money in
England in the reign of Henry the second.

Thus have I set down according to my small reading in antiquity: these money
matters, omitting the imaginations of late writers, of whom some have said
Esterling money to take that name of a star, stamped in the border, or ring
of the penny: other some of a bird called a Stare or starling Starling money
when it took beginning in this land.
stamped in the circumference: and other (more unlikely) of being coined at
Siriuelin or Starling, a town in Scotland. etc.

Now concerning half pence, and Farthinges, Of halfepence and farthings.
the account of which is more subtiller then the pence, I need not speak of
them more, then that they were only made in the Exchange at London, and no
where else. The kings Exchange at London, The kings Exchange at London.
was near unto the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, and is to this day commonly
called the old Change, but in Evidences the old Exchange.

The kings Exchaunger, in this place, was to deliver out to every other
Exchaunger, throughout England, or other the kings Dominions, their Coining
irons, that is to say, one Standerde, or Staple, and two Trussels, or Punchons:
and when the same were spent and woorne, to receive them with an accounte, what
sum had been coined, and also their Pix, or Box of assay and to deliver
other Irons new graven, etc. Mints in England.
I find that in the 9. of king John, patent 9. John
there was besides the Mint at London, other Mints, at Winchester, Excester,
Chicester, Canterbury, Rochester, Ipswitch, Norwitch, Lenn, Lincoln, York,
Ca^lell, Northhampton, Oxforde, S. Edmonds bury, and Durham. The Exchanger,
Examiner, and Tryer, buyeth the silver, for Coynage: aunswering for every 100.
^. of silver, bought in Bolion, or otherwise, 98. l. 15. ^. for he takes 25.
^. for coynage. Deminishing. of Coin.


In the year 1351. William Edington Bishop of Winchester, and Treasurer of
England, a wise man, but loving the kings commodity, more then the wealth of
the whole Realm, and common people, (says mine Author) caused a new coin,
called a groate, and a half groate, to be coined and stamped, Thomas
Walsingham. First groates and half coined.
the groate to be taken for iiij.^.and the half groate for ij.^.not containing
in weight according to the pence called Easterlinges, but much less, to wit by
v.^.in the pound: by reason whereof, victuailes, and marchandizes became the
dearer, through the whole Realm. About the same time also, the old coin of
gold, Coins of gold enhaunced.
was changed into a new, but the old noble (then so called) was worth much
above the taxed rate of the new, and therefore the Marchantes iugrossed up the
old, and conveyed them out of the Realm to the great loss of the kingdom.
Wherefore a remedy was provided by changing of the stamp.

In the year 1464. king Edward the 4. caused a new Coin both of gold Coins
of gold allayed and also raised in value, Rose, Noble.
and silver to be made, whereby he gained much: For he made of an old Noble a
Royal, which he commanded to go for x.^.Nevertheless to the same Royal was put
8. ^. of Alay, and so weighed the more, being smitten, with a new stamp, to wit
a Rose. He likewise made half Angels of 5. ^. and Farthings, of 2. ^ 6. ^.
Angelets of 6. ^. 8. ^. and half Angels 3. ^. 4. ^. He made silver moneys of
3. ^. a groate, and so of other Coins after that rate, to the great harm of
the commons. William Lord Hastinges being Master of the kings Mintes.

Thus much for Mint and coynage in and by occasion of this Tower, where the
chief coining has long continued, under correction of other more skilful may
suffice: and now to other accidents here.

In the year 1360. the Peace between England and France, being confirmed,
King Edward came over into England, and straight to the Tower, to see the
French king then prisoner there, French king Prisoner in the Tower.
whose ransom he assessed at three millions of Florences, and so delivered
him from Prison, and brought him with honor to the Sea.

In the year 1381. the Rebels of Kent, Rebels of Ken^ enter the Tower.
drew out of the Tower (where the king was then loged,) Simon Sudbery,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chauncelor: Robart Hales Prior of S. John's, and
Treasurer of England: William Appleton Friar, the kings confessor, and John
Leg a Sargiant of the kings, and beheaded them on the Tower hill. etc.

In the year 1387. king Richard Richard the 2. prisoner in the Tower.
held his feast of Christmas in the Tower. And in the year 1399. the same king
was sent prisoner to the Tower.

In the year 1414. Sir John Oldecastle brake out of the Tower. And the same
year a Parliament being holden at Leicester, a Porter of the Tower was drawn,
hanged and headed, whose head was sent up, and set over the Tower gate, for
consenting to one Whitlooke, that brake out of the Tower.

In the year 1419. Friar Randulph was sent to the Tower, and was there slain
by the Parson of S. Peter's in the Tower.

In the year 1465. king Henry the 6. was brought prisoner to the Tower, where
he remained long. In the year, 1470. the Tower was yielded to the Mayor of
London, and his Brethren the Aldermen, who forthwith entered the same, and
delivered king Henry, but the next year he was again sent thither, and there
murdered.

In the year, 1478. George Duke of Clarence was drowned in the Tower: and
within 5. years after king Edward the 5. with his brother were murdered in
the Tower. King Henry the 6. murdered in the Tower
King Edward the 5. murdered in the tower.
In the year, 1502. Queen Elizabeth wife of Henry, the 7. died of childebirth
in the Tower. In the year 1512. the Chapel in the high white Tower was
burned. In the year 1536. Queen Anne Bullen was beheaded in the Tower. In the
year 1541. Lady Katheren Howarde wife to king Henry the 8. was also beheaded
there.

Thus much for these accidents: and now to conclude thereof in summarie. This
Tower Use of the Tower.
is a citadell, to defend or command the City: A royal palace for
assemblies, and treaties. A prison of Estate, for the most dangerous
offenders: The only place of coinage for all England at this present. The
Armorie for warlike provision. The Treasury of the ornaments and Jewels, of
the Crown, and general conseruer of the most ancient Records of the kings
Courts of justice at Westminster.

The next Tower on the river of Thames, is on London bridge at the North end
of the draw bridge. Tower at the north end of the draw bridge
This Tower was new begun to be builded in the year, 1426. John Reynwell Mayor
of London, laid one of the first corner stones, in the foundation of this
work, the other three were laid by the Shiriffes, and Bridgemaisters, upon
every of these four stones was engraven in fair Roman letters, the name of
Ihesus. And these stones, I have seen laid in the Bridge store house, since
they were taken up, when that Tower was of late newly made of timber. This gate
and Tower was at the first strongly builded up of stone, and so continued
until the year 1577. in the Month of April, when the same stone Arched gate,
and Tower being decayed was begun to be taken down, and then were the heads
of the Traitors removed thence, and set on the Tower over the gate at the
bridge foot, toward Southwarke. This said Tower being taken down a new
foundation was drawn: and Sir John Langley Lord Mayor laid the first stone in
the presence of the Shiriffes, and Bridge masters, on the 28. of August, and
in the Month of September, the year 1579. the same Tower was finished a
beutiful and chargeable piece of work, all above the bridge being of timber.

An other Tower there is on London bridge, to wit, over the gate at the South
end of the same bridge Tower at the south end of the bridge.
toward Southwarke. This gate with the Tower thereupon, and two Arches of the
Bridge fell down, and no man perished by the fall thereof in the year, 1436.
The south gate on London bridge burned
Toward the new building whereof, diverse, charitable Citizens gave large
sums of money: which gate being then again new builded, was in the year 1471.
burned by the Mariners and Saylors of Kent, Bastard Fauconbridge, being their
Captain.

In the west part of this city, (says Fitzstephen) are two most strong
castles etc. Also Garuasius Tilbery, in the reign of Henry the second, writing
of these castles, has to this effect. Two Castles (says he, are built with
walls and rampires, whereof one, is in right of succession, Baynardes:
Baynardes Castle. Fitzstephen. Garua. Tilbery
the other the Barons of Mountfitchet: the first of these castles bankying on
the river Thames, was called Baynardes Castle, of Baynarde, a noble man that
came in with the Conqueror, and then builded it and deceased in the year of
the reign of William Rufus: after whose decease Geffery Baynarde succeeded,
and then William Baynarde, in the year 1111. who by forfeyture for felony,
lost his Barony, of little Dunmow and king Henry gave if wholly to Robart Fitz
Richard the Son of Gilbarte Earl of Clare, and to his heirs together with
the honor of Baynardes castle. This Robart married Maude de Sent Licio, Lady
of Bradham and deceased 1134. was buried at S. Needs, by Richard Earl of
Clare, his Father. Walter, his son succeeded him, he took to wife, Matilde
de Becham, and after her decease Matilde de Lucy, on whom he begat Robarte and
other, he deceased in the year 1198. and was buried at Dunmow after whom
succeeded Robart Fitzwater a valiant knight.

About the year 1213. there arose a great discord betwixt king John, and
his Barons, because of Matilde, Liber Dunm^^.
surnamed the fair daughter, to the said Roberte Fitzwater, whom the king
unlawfully loved, but could not obtain her, nor her father would consent
thereunto, whereupon (and for other like causes) ensued war throughout the
whole Realm. The Barons were received into London, where they greatly
indamaged the king, but in the end the king did not only, (therefore) bannish
the said Fitzwater Robert Fitzwater banished.
(amongst other), out of the Realm: but also caused his Castle called
Baynarde, Baynardes castle destroyed.
and other his houses to be spoiled, which thing being done Matilde, the fair,
a Messenger being sent unto her, Virginity defended with the loss of worldly
goods and life of the body, for life of the soul
about the kings suite, whereunto she would not consent, was poisoned.
Robert Fitzwater, and some other being then passed into France, and some other
into Scotland. etc.

It happened in the year 1214. king John being then in France with a great
Army, that a truce was taken beewixt the two kings of England and France, for
the term of 5. years, and a river or arm of the sea being then betwixt
either Host. There was a knight in the English host, that cried to them of the
other side, willing some one of their knights to come and just a course or
twain with him, whereupon without stay Robert Fitzwater being on the French
part, made himself ready, ferried over, and got on horseback, without any
man to help him, and showed himself ready to the face of his challenger,
whom at the first course, he stroke so hard with his great Spear, that
horse and man fell to the ground, and when his spear was broken, he went
back again to the king of France, which when the king King John's oath.
had seen, by Gods tooth (quoth he) after his usual oath, he were a king
indeed, that had such a knight: the friends of Robert hearing these words,
kneeled down and said: O King he is your knight: it is Robert Fitzwater,
Robert Fitzwater restored to the kings favor.
and thereupon the next day he was sent for, and restored to the kings,
favor: by which means peace was concluded, and he received his liuinges, and
had license to repair his Castle of Baynarde Baynardes castle again builded.
and other Castles.

This Robert deceased in the year 1234. and was buried at Dunmow, and Walter
his son that succeeded him 1258. his Barony of Baynarde, was in the ward of
king Henry in the nonage of Robert Fitzwater. This Robert took to his second
wife Alienor, daughter to the Earl of Ferrars, in the year, 1289. And in the
year 1303. before John Blund Mayor of London, he acknowledged his service to
the same City for his Castle Baynarde, he deceased in the year 1305. and
leaving issue Walter Fitz Robert, who had issue Robert Fitzwater Richard
Fitzwater Castilian of London, and banner bearer.
who deceased in the year 1325. unto whom succeeded Robert Fitz Robert
Fitzwater, etc. More of the Lord Fitzwaters may ye read in my summary and
Annals in the 51. of Edward the 3.. But now how this honor of Baynardes Castle
with the appurtenances fell from the possession of the Lords Fitzwaters, I have
not read, only I find that Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester new budded Baynardes Castle. Richard Duke of York, honor of
Baynardes Castle. Richard of Gloucester in Baynardes Castle took on him the
Crown.
builded it of new, by whose death in the year of Christ, 1446. it came to the
hands of king Henry the sixth, and from him to Richard Duke of York, of whom
we read, that in the year 1457 he lodged there, as in his own house: and
true it is, that his son king Edward the fourth being dead, and leaving his
eldest son Edward and his second son Richard, both infantes: there
Richard Duke of Gloucester, then Protector, practiced for the Crown, and as it
were by election of the Commons, made in the Guild hall of London, took upon
him there the title of the Realm, as offered and imposed upon him: as ye may
read set down and penned, by Sir Thomas Moore. King Henry the 7. about the
year 1501. the 3. of his reign, repaired or rather new builded this house not
so imbattelled, or so strongly fortified castlelike, but far more beutifull and
commodious, for the entertainment of any Prince or great estate. In the 7. of
his reign he with his Queen were lodged there, and came from thence to
Paul's, where they made their offering: dined in the Bishops Palace, and so
returned. King Henry the first was lodged in Baynardes Castle.
The eighttenth of his reign he was lodged there and the Ambassadors from the
king of Romans were thither bronght to his presence, and from thence the King
came to Pawles and was there sworn unto the king of Romans, as the king had
sworn unto him. This Castle now belongs to the Earl of Pembrooke. The next
Tower, or Castle bankyng also on the River of Thames, was, as is before showed,
called Mountfiquites Castle, Tower of Montfiquit.
of a noble man, Baron of Mountfitcher the first builder thereof who came in
with William the Conqueror and was surnamed Le Sir Mountfiquit. This Castle
he builded in a place not far distant from Baynardes, toward the West. The
same William Mountfiquit lived in the Reign of Henry the 1. and was witness to
a Charter, then granted to the city for the Shiriffes of London. Richard
Montfiquit lived in king John's time: and in the year 1213. was by the same king
banished the Realm into France, when peradventure king John caused his Castle
of Montfiquit, amongst other Castles of the Barons to be overthrown: the
which after his return, might be by him again reedified, for the total
destruction thereof was about the year 1276. when Robert Kiliwarble,
Archbishop of Canterbury began the foundation of the house of the Friars
Preachers church there, commonly called the Black Friars as appears by a
Charter, the 10. of June, the 4, of Edward the 1. remaining of Record in the
Tower, wherein is declared that Gregory de Rocksley Mayor of London, and the
Barons Barons of London.
of the same City granted, and gave unto the said Archbishop Robert two
lanes or ways next the street of Baynardes castle and the Tower of
Montfiquit, to be applied for the enlargement of the said Church and place.

A third Tower there was also situate on the river of Thames Tower in the
Thames.
near unto the said Black Friars Church, on the west part thereof, builded
at the Citizens charges, but by license and commandment of Edward the 1. and
of Edward the 2. as appears by their grantes: which Tower was then finished
and so stood for the space of 300. years, and was at the last taken down by
the commandment of John Sha Mayor of London in the year 1502.

An other Tower or Castle Tower or Castle on the west of London by S. Brides
Church.
also was there in the west part of the City, perteyning to the king: For I
read that in the year 1087. the 20. of William the first, the City of London
with the Church of S. Paul. being burned, Mauritius then Bishop of London
afterward began the foundation of a new Church, whereunto king William (says
mine Author) gave the choice stones of this Castle standing near to the bank
of the river of Thames, at the west end of the City. After this Mauritius,
Richard his successor, purchased the streets above Paul's church compassing
the same with a wall of stone, and gates. ^ita Arken^ald
King Henry the first gave to this Richard so much of the Moate (or wall) of
the Castle, on the Thames side to the south, as should be needful to make the
said wall of the Churchyard, and so much more as should suffice to make a way
without the wall on the North side etc. This Tower (or Castle) thus destroyed
stood as it may seem, in place where now stands the house called Bridewel.
For notwithstanding the destruction of the said Castle or Tower, the house
remained large, so that the kings of this Realm long after were lodged there,
and kept their Courts: for in the 9. year of Henry the third the Court of
law and justice, were kept in the kings house, The kings house by S. Brides
in Eleetestreete.
wheresoever he was lodged, and not else where. And that the kings have been
lodged and kept their Law courts in this place, I could show you many
authorities of Record, but for plain proof this one may suffice. Haec est
finalis concordia, facta in Curia Domini regis apud Sanct. Brigid. London a die
Sancti Michelis in 15. dies, Anno regni regis Ioha^nis 7. cora^ G. Fill. Petri.
Eustacio de Fauco^berg, Iohanne de Gestlinge Osbart filio Heruey, Walter, de
Crisping, Iusticiar. and aliis Baronibus Domini regis. More (as Matthew Paris
Matthew Pari^ manuscript^. Parliament at S. Brides.
has) about the year 1210. king John in the 12. of his reign summoned a
Parliament at S. Brides in London, where he exacted of the Clergy and
religious persons the sum of 100000. pounds, and besides all this, the white
Monks were compelled to cancel their Privileges, and to pay 40000. pounds
to the king, etc. This house of S. Brides of latter time being left, and not
used by the kings: fell to ruin, insomuch that the very platform thereof
remained for great part wast, and as it were, but a laystall of filth and
rubbish: only a fair well remained there: a great part whereof, namely on
the west, (as has been said) was given to the Bishop of Salisbnry, the other
part toward the East remaining wast, until that king Henry the 8. builded a
stately and beutifull house thereupon, giving it to name Bridewell, Bridewell
builded by Henry the 8.
of the parish and well there: this house he purposely builded for the
entertainment of the Emperor Charles the 5. who in the year, 1522. came into
this City, as I have showed in my summary annals, and large chronicles.

On the northwest side of this City, near unto Redcrosse street there was a
Tower commonly called Barbican, or Burhkenning, Barbican or Burhkenning.
for that the same being placed on a high ground, and also builded of some good
height, was in the old time used as a Watch Tower, for the City, from whence
a man might behold and view the whole City toward the South, as also see into
Kent, Sussex, and Surrey, and likewise every other way east, north, or west.

Some other Burhkennings or (Watch Towers) there were of old time in and
about the city, all which were repaired, yea and others new builded, by
Gilbart de Clare earl of Gloucester, in the reign of king Henry, the third,
when the Barons were in Arms, and held the city against the king: but the
Barons being reconciled to his favor in the year 1267. he caused all their
Burhkenninges, watch towers, and Bulwarks made and repared by the said Earl,
to be plucked down, and the ditches to be filled up: so that naught of them
might be seen to remain: and then was this Burhkenning amongst the rest
overthrown and destroyed: and although the ditch near thereunto, called
Hounds ditch was stopped up, yet the street of long time after was called
Hounds ditch, and of late time more commonly called Barbican. The plot or
seat of this Burhkenning or watch tower, king Edward the third in the year
1336. and the 10. of his reign, gave unto Robert Efforde Earl of Suffolk, by
the name of his Manor of Base court, in the parish of S. Giles without
Cripple gate of London, commonly called the Barbican.

Tower Royal Tower Royal.
was of old time the kings house, but sithence called the Queens Wardrobe:
the Princess, mother to King Richard the 2. in the 4. of his reign was lodged
there being forced to fly from the tower of London, when the Rebels possessed
it: But on the 15. of June (says Frosarde) ^ohn Frosarde.
VVat Tylar being slain, the king went to this Lady Princess his mother, then
lodged in the Tower Royal, called the Queens Wardrobe, where she had tarried
2. days and 2. nights: which Tower (says the Record of Edward the 3. the
36. year) was in the Parish of S. Michaell de Pater noster, etc. Liber S. in
enborum. The king of Ermony came into England.
In the year 1386. king Richard with Queen Anne his wife, kept their
Christmas at Eltham, whether came to him Lion king of Ermony under pretense to
reform Peace, betwixt thekinges of England and France, but what his coming
profited he only understood: for besides innumerable gifts, that he received
of the king, and of the Nobles, the king lying then in this Royal at the
Queens Wardrobe, Richard the 2. lodged in the Tower Royal.
in London, granted to him a Charter of a thousand pounds by year, during his
life. He was (as he affirmed) chased out of his kingdom by the Tartarians.
The rest concerning this Tower shall you read when you come to the Vintry
ward in which it stands.

Of Schools and other houses of Learning.
IN the reign of king Stephen, and of Henry the second says Fitzstephen,
there were in London, three principal Churches: which had famous Schools,
Famous Schools of philosophy by privilege in London.
either by privilege and ancient dignity, or by favor of some particular
persons, as of Doctors which were accounted notable and renowned for knowledge
in Philosophy. And there were other inferior Schools also. Upon Festival
days the Masters made solemn meetinges Solemn meetinges and disputing of
scholars Logically and Demonstratiuely.
in the Churches, where their Scholars disputed Logically and demonstratiuely,
as he terms it: some bringing Enthimems, other perfect Sillogismes, some
disputed for show, others to trace out the truth: cunning Sophisters were
thought brave Scholars, when they flowed with words: Others used Fallaxes:
Rethoritians spoke aptly to persuade, observing the precepts of art, and
omitting nothing that might serve their purpose: the bo^es of diverse Schools
Grammar schools and scholars their exercises.
did cap, or pot verses, and contended of the principles of Grammar: there
were some, which on the other side with Epigrams and Rymes, nipping and
quipping their fellows, and the faults of others, though suppressing their
names, moved thereby, much laughter among their Auditors: hitherto out of
Fitzstephen for Schools and Scholars, and for their exercises in the City,
in his days, Sithence the which time, as to me it seems, by the increase of
Colleges and Studients in the Uniuersities of Oxforde and Cambridge, the
frequenting of Schools and exercises of Scholars in the City as had been
accustomed has much decreased.

The three principal Churches, which had these famous Schools by privileges
must needs be at the Cathedral Church of S. Paul for one, seeing that by a
general Council holden in the year of Christ, 1.176. at Rome, in the
Patriarchie of Latarane, Matthew Paris
it was decreede that every Cathedral Church should have his Schoolemaister to
teach poor Scholars every cathedral Church had his school for poor scholars
and others as had been accustomed, and that no man should take any reward
for license to teach. The second as most ancient may seem to have been the
Monastery of S. Peter at Westminster, whereof Iugulphus Iugulphus
(Abbote of Crowland in the reign of William the Conqueror writes thus:) I
Iugulphus an humble servant of God borne of English parents, in the most
beutifull City of London, for to attain to learning, was first put to
Westminster Free school at Westminster, in the reign of Edward the
Confessor.
and after to study at Oxforde, etc. And writing in praise of Queen Edgitha,
wife to Edward the Confessor, I have seen her, says he, often when being
but a boy, I came to see my father dwelling in the Kings court, and often
coming from School, when I met her, she would oppose me, touching my
learning, and lesson, and falling from Grammar to Logic, wherein she had some
knowledge, she would subtly conclude an argument with me, and by her
handemaiden give me 3. or 4. pieces of money, and send me unto the Palace where
I should receive some victuals, and then be dismissed.

The third School seems to have been at the Monastery of S. Savior at
Barmondsey in Southwark: for other Priories, as of S. John by Smithfielde, S.
Bartlemew, in Smithfielde. S. Marie Ouery in Southwarke, and that of the Holy
Trinity by Aldgate, were all of later foundation, and the Friories, Colleages,
and Hospitals in this City, were raised since them, in the reigns of Henry
the 3, Edward the 1. 2. and 3. etc. Al which houses had their Schools, though
not so famous as these first named.

But touching Schools more lately advanced in this City, I read, that king
Henry the fifth having suppressed the Priories Priories alliens suppressed^
aliens whereof some were about London, namely one Hospital, called Our Lady
of Rounciuall by Charing Cross: one other Hospital in Oldbourne: one other
without Cripplegate: and the fourth without Aldersgate, besides other that are
now worn out of memory and whilst there is no monument remaining more then
Rounciuall converted to a brotherhoode which continued till the reign of Henry
the 8. or Edward the 6. this I say, and other their schools being broken up and
ceased: king Henry the sixth in the 24. of his reign, by patent, appointed that
there should be in London, Grammar schools, besides S. Paul's, at S. Martins
Henry the sixth appointed Grammar Schools.
Le Grand, S. Marie Le Bow, in Cheap, S. Dunstons in the west and S. Anthonies.
And in the next year to wit, 1394. the said king ordained by Parliament that
four other Grammar schools should be erected, to wit in the parishes of S.
Andrew in Oldborne, Grammar schools appointed by Parliament.
Alhallowes the great in Thames street, S. Peter's. upon Cornehill, and in the
Hospital of S. Thomas of Acons in west Cheap, since the which time as diverse
schools by suppressing of religious houses (whereof they were members) in the
reign of Henry the 8. have been decayed, so again have some others been newly
erected, and founded for them: as namely Paul's school, Paul's school new
builded.
in place of an old ruined house was builded in most ample manner, and largely
endowed, in the year 1512. by John Collet Doctor of Divinity Deane of Paul's,
for 153. poor men's children: for which there was ordained a Master,
Surmaister, or Usher, and a Chaplen. Again in the year 1553. after the
erection of Christ's hospital Free schools in Christ's Hospital.
in the late dissolved house of the Gray Friars, a great number of poor
children being taken in a Schole was also ordaned there, at the Citizens
charges. Also in the year 1561. the Merchant Tailors Free schole founded by the
Merchant Tailors.
of London: founded one notable free Grammar School, in the parish of S.
Lawrence Poultney by Candleweeke street, Richard Hills late master of that
Company: having given 500. ^. toward the purchase of an house, called the
Mannar of the Rose, sometime the Duke of Buckinghams, wherein the School is
kept. As for the meeting of the Schoolemaisters, on festival days, at
festival churches, and the disputing of their Scholars Scholars disputed in
S. Bartilmews churchyard.
Logically etc. whereof I have before spoken, the same was long since
discontinued: But the arguing of the School boys about ^th principles of
Grammar, has been continued even till our time: for I my self in my youth
have yearly seen on the Eve of S. Bartlemew the Apostle, the scholars of
diverse Grammar schools repair unto the Churchyard of S. Bartlemew, the
Priorie in Smithfielde, where upon a bank boorded about under a Tree, some
one Scholar has stepped up, and there has appoased and answered, till he
were by some better Scholar overcome and put down: and then the ouercomer,
taking the place, did like as the first: and in the end the best apposars and
answerers had rewards, which I observed not, but it made both good
Schoolemasters, and also good Scholars, diligently against suchtimes to
prepare themselves for the obtaining of this garland. I remember there repaired
to these exercises amongst others the Masters and Scholars of the free
Schools of S. Paul's in London: of S. Peter's at Westminster: of S. Thomas
Acons Hospital: and of S. Anthonies Hospital: whereof the last named commonly
presented the best scholars: and had the prize in those days.

This Priorie of S. Bartlemew, being surrendered to H. the 8. those disputations
of Scholars in that place succeased. Disputation of Scholars in Christ's
Hospital.
And was again (only for a year or twain) in the reign of Edward the 6.
revived in the Cloystre of Christ's Hospital, where the best Scholars then
still of S. Anthonies school, howsoever the same be now fallen, both in number
and estimation, were rewarded with bows and arrows of silver given to them by
Sir Martin Bows Goldsmith: nevertheless howsoever the encouragement failed,
the children mindful of the former usage did for a long season disorderly in
the open streets, provoke one an other with salve tu quoque, placet tibi mecum
disputare, placet: and so proceeding from this to questions in Grammar, they
usually fell from that to blows, many times in so great heaps that they
trobled the streets, and passengers, so that finally they were restrained.

Of latter time, in the year of Christ, 1582. there was founded a public
lecture in Chirurgerie to be read in the College of Physicians, Lecture in
Surgery
in Knight-riders street, and to begin in the year 1584. on the 6. of May:
and so to be continued for ever twice in every week, on wednesday and Friday,
by the honorable Baron, John Lord Lombley and the learned Richard Caldwell
Doctor in Physic: the Reader whereof to be Richard Forster, Doctor of
Physic during his life. Furthermore about the same time there was also
begun a Mathematical lecture to be read in a fair old Chapel,
Mathematical lecture read.
builded by Simon Eayre, within the Leaden hall: whereof a learned Citizen
borne, named Thomas Hood was the first Reader. But this Chapel and other
parts of that hall being employed for stowage of goods taken out of a great
Spanish Caracke, the said Lecturs ceased any more to be read, and was then in
the year 1588. read in the house of M. Thomas Smith in Grass street, etc.

Last of all S. Thomas Gresham knight, Sir Thomas Greshams College in London.
Agent to the Queens Highness, by his last will and testament made in the year
1579. gave the Royal Exchange, and all the buyldings thereunto appertayning,
that is to say, the one moytie to the Mayor and communaltie of London and their
successors, upon trust that they perform as shall be declared: and the other
moitie to the Mercers in like confidence. The Mayor and communaltie are to find
four to read Lectures, of Divinity, Astronomy, Music, and Geometry,
within his dwelling house in Bishopsgate street, and to bestow the sum of
200, ^. to wit 50. ^. the piece etc. The Mercers likewise are to find three
Readers, that is in Civil law, Physic, and Rethorick within the same
dwelling house, the sum of 150. ^. to every Reader 50. ^. etc. Which gift has
been since that time confirmed by Parliament, to take effect, and begin
after the decease of the Lady Anne Gresham, which happened in the year 1596.
and so to continue for ever. Whereupon the Lecturers were accordingly chosen
and appointed to have begun their readinges in the month of June 1597. etc.
which also they do at this time perform. Whose names be Anthony Wootton for
Divinity, Doctor Matthew Guin for Physic, Doctor Henry Mountlow for the Civil
law, Doctor John Bull for Music, Breerewood for Astronomy, Henry Brigges
for Geometry, and Caleb Willis for Rethoricke, to the great delight of many
both learned and lovers of learning. These Lectures are read daily in the term
times, by every one upon his day, in the morning betwixt 9. and 10. in Latin:
in the afternoon betwixt 2: and 3. in English, save that D. Bull is dispensed
with to read the Music Lecture in English only upon two several days,
Thursday and Saturday in the after noones, betwixt 3. and 4. of the clock.

Houses of students of the Common Law.
BUt besides all this there is in and about this City a whole University A
university of students in and about this City.
(as it were) of students, practisers or pleaders and Judges of the laws of
this realm, not living of common stipends (as in other Uniuersities it is for
the most part done) but of their own private maintenance, as being altogether
fed either by their places, or practice, or otherwise by their proper
reuenew, or exhibition of parents and friends: for that the younger sort are
either gentlemen, or the sons of gentlemen, or of other most wealthy
persons. Houses of students of the common laws and Judges.
Of these houses, there be at this day 14. in all, whereof 9. do stand within
the liberties of the City, and 5. in the subburbes thereof, to wit: Sergeants
Inn in Fleetstreet for Judges and Sergeants only Sergeants Inn in Chancery
lane The Inner Temple in Fleetstreete, houses of Court. The Middle Temple
Within the liberties. Cliffords Inn in Fleetstreet Thauies Inn in Oldborne
Furniuals Inn in Oldborne houses of Chauncerie Barnards Inn, in Oldborne
Staple Inn in Oldborne Grayes Inn in Oldborne Lincolnes Inn, in Chancerie,
lane by the old Temple in Oldborne. houses of Court Without the liberties.
Clements Inn New Inn houses of Chauncerie, without Temple bar. Lions Inn

One other Inn of Chauncery sometime there was, called Chesters Inn, Chesters
Inn or strand Inn
for the neerenes to the Bishop of Chesters house, but more commonly termed
Strand Inn, for that it stood near to the Strand bridge without temple
Bar: the which and other dwelling houses near adjoining, were pulled down
in the reign of king Edward the sixth, by Edward Duke of Sommerset and
Protector of the realm, who in place thereof raised that beautiful (but yet
imperfect house) called Sommerset house. There was moreover in the reign of
King Henry the sixth, a tenth house of Chauncerie, mentioned by Justice
Fortscue in his book of the Laws of England, but where it stood or when it
was abandoned I cannot find, and therefore I will leave it, and return to the
rest.

The houses of Court Houses of Court what they be.
be replenished partly with young students, and partly with graduates and
practisers of the law: but the Innes of Chauncery being as it were, provinces,
severally subjected to the Innes of Court, be chiefly furnished with Officers
Atturneyes, Soliciters, and clerks, that follow the courts of the Kings
Bench, or common place: and yet there want not some other being young students,
that come thither sometimes from one of the universities, and sometimes
immediately from Grammar schools, and these having spent some time in studying
upon the first elements and grounds of the law, and having performed the
exercises of their own houses (called Boltas Mootes, and putting of cases)
they proceed to be admitted, and become students in some of these four houses
or Innes of Court, where continuing by the space of seven years (or
thereaboutes) they frequent readinges, meetinges, boltinges, and other learned
exercises, whereby growing ripe in the knowledge of the laws, and approved
withal to be of honest conversation, they are either by the general consent
of the Benchers (or Readers) being of the most ancient, grave, and judicial
men of every Inn of the Court, or by the special privilege of the present
reader there, selected and called to the degree of Utter Barresters, and so
enabled to be common counselors, and to practice the law, both in their
chambers and at the Bars.

Of these after that they be called to a further step of preferment, (called
the Bench) there are twain every year chosen among the Benchers, of every
Inn of Court, to be readers there, who do make their readings at two times in
the year also: that is, one in Lent, and the other at the beginning of August.

And for the help of young students in every of the Innes of Chauncery, they
do likewise choose out of every one Inn of court a Reader (being no Bencher)
but an Utter Barrester there, of 10 or 12. years continuance, and of good
profit in study. Now from these of the said degree of Counselors (or Utter
Barrester) having continued therein the space of fourteen or fifteen years
at the least, the chiefest and best learned, are by the benchers elected to
increase the number (as I said) of the Bench amongst them, and so in their time
do become first single, and then double readers, to the students of those
houses of Court: after which last reading they be named Apprentices at the
law, Apprentizes at the law.
and in default of a sufficient number of Sargeantes at law, these are (at the
pleasure of the prince) to be advanced to the places of Sergeants: out of
which number of Sergeants also the void places of Judges are likewise
ordinarily filled, albeit now and then some be advanced by the special favor
of the Prince, to the estate, dignity and place, both of Sergeant and Judge,
as it were in one instant. But from thenceforth they hold not any room in
those Innes of court, being translated to one of the said two Innes, called
Sergeantes Innes, where none but the Sergeants and Judges do conuere.

Of Orders and Customs.
OF Orders and Customs in this City of old time Fitz Stephen says as
follows: Men of all trades, Men of all trades in distinct places. Wine in
ships and wine in Tauern^s. Cooks row in Thamestreet.
sellers of all sorts of wares, laborers in every work, every morning are
in their distinct and several places: furthermore, in London upon the river
side, between the wine in ships, and the wine to be sold in Tauernes, is a
common cookerie or cooks row, there daily for the season of the year, men
might have meat, roast, sod or fried: fish, flesh, fowls, fit for rich and
poor. If any come suddenly to any Citizen from a far, weary and not
willing to tarry till the meat be bought, and dressed, while the servant
brings water for his masters hands, and fetches bread, he shall have
immediately from the rivers side, all viandes whatsoever he desires, what
multitude soever either of soldiers or strangers do come to the City,
whatsoever hour day or night according to their pleasures may refresh
themselves, and they which delight in delicateness may be satisfied with as
delicate dishes there, as may be found else where. And this cooks row is very
necessary to the City: and (according to Plato in Gorgias) next to Physic,
is the office of cooks, as part of a City.

Without one of the gates is a plain field, Smithfield for a plain smooth
ground, is called smeth and smothie.
both in name and deed, where every friday (unless it be a solemn bidden
holy day) is a notable show of horses to be sold, Earls, Barrons, Knights,
and Citizens repair thither to see, or to buy: there may you with pleasure see
amblers pacing it delicately: there may ye see trotters fit for men of arms,
sitting more hardly: Market for horses and other cattle.
there may you have notable young horse not yet broken: there may you have
strong steeds well limmed, geldings whom the buyers do especially regard for
pace, and swiftnes: the boys which ride these horses, sometime two, sometime
three, do run races for wagers, with a desire of praise, or hope of
victory. In an other part of that field are to be sold all implements of
husbandry, as also fat swine, milch kine, sheep and oxen: there stand also
mares and horses, fit for ploughes and teames with their young coltes by
them. At this city Merchants of all nations traded at this City, and had their
several Keys and wharfes.
Marchante strangers of all nations had their keys and wharfes: The Authors
opinion of this City, the antiquity thereof after some authors which he had
read.
the Arabians sent gold: the Sabians spice and frankensence: the Scithian
armor, Babylon oil, Indian purple garments, Egypt precious stones, Norway and
Russia Ambergrese, and Sables, and the French men wine. According to the truth
of Chronicles, this City is ancienter then Rome, This City divided into
Wards more then 400 years since, and also had then both Aldermen and Sheriffs.
built of the ancient Trojans and of Brute, before that was built by Romulus,
and Rhemus: and therefore uses the ancient customs of Rome. This City even
as Rome, is divided into Wards: it has yearly Shiriffes in steed of
Consulles: it has the dignity of Senators in Aldermen. It has under
Officers, Common Sewers, and Conduictes in streets, according to the quality
of causes, in has general Courts: and assemblies upon appointed days. I do
not think that there is any City, wherein are better customs, Customs of
London.
in frequenting the Churches, in serving God, in keeping holy days, in giving
alms, in entertayning strangers in solemnizing Marriages, in furnishing
banquets, celebrating funerals, and burying dead bodies.

The only plagues of London, is immoderate quassing among the foolish sort,
and often casualties by fire. Casualtie of fires when houses were covered with
thatch.
Most part of the Bishops, Abbots, and great Lords of the land have houses
there, whereunto they resort, and bestow much when they are called to
Parliament by the king, or to counsel by their Metropolitan, or otherwise by
their private business.

Thus far Fitzstephen of the estate of these things in his time, whereunto may
be added the present, by conference whereof, the alteration will easily appear.

Men of trades and sellers of wares in this City have often times since
changed their places, as they have found their best advantage. For whereas
Mercers and Haberdashers used to keep their shoppes in West Cheap, of later
time they held them on London Bridge, where partly they yet remain. The
Goldsmithes of Gutherons lane, and old Exchange, are now for the most part
removed into the South side of west Cheap: the Peperers and Grocers of Sopers
lane, are now in Buckles berrie, and other places: the Drapers of
Lombardstreete and of Cornehill, are seated in Candlewickstreete and Watheling
street: the Skinners from S. Mary Pellipers, or at the Axe, into Budgerow and
Walbrooke: The Stockefishmongers Stockfishmonger row, old fishstreet, and new
fishstreet.
in Thames street: wette Fishmongers in Knightriders street, and Bridge
street: The Ironmongers of Ironmongers lane, and old Jury, into Thames
street: the Uinteners from the Uinetree into diverse places. But the Brewers
for the more part remain near to the friendly water of Thames: the Butchers
in Eastcheape, and S. Nicholas Shambles: the Hosyers of old time in Hosyer
lane, near unto Smithfield, are since removed into Cordwayner street, the
upper part thereof by Bow Church, and last of all into Birchouerislane by
Cornehill: the Sh^omakers and Curryars of Cordwaynerstreete, removed the one to
S. Martins Le Graund, the other to London wall near unto Moregate, the
Founders remain by them selves in Lothebery: Cokes, or Pastelars for the more
part in Thames street, the other dispersed into diverse parts. Powlters of late
removed out of the Powltry betwixt the Stocks and great Conduite in Cheap
into Grassestreete and S. Nicholas Shambles: Bowyars, from Bowyerrowe by
Ludgate, into diverse places, and almost worn out with the Fletchers: Pater
noster Beade makers and Text Writers are gone out of Pater Noster Row into
Stationers of Paul's Church yard: Patten makers of S. Margaret Pattens lane,
clean worn out: Laborers every work day are to be found in Cheap about
Sopars lane end, horse coursers and Sellars of Oxen, Sheep, Swine, and such
like, remain in their old market of Smithfilde etc.

That Merchants of all Nations had their Keys and wharfes at this City
whereunto they brought their Marchandises before, and in the reign, of Henry
the second mine author wrote of his own knowledge to be true, though for the
antiquity of the city, he took the common opinion. Also that this city was
in his time and before divided into wards, had yearly Sherifs, Aldermen, general
courts, and assemblies, and such like notes by him set down, in commendation of
the citizens (whereof there is no question) he wrote likewise of his own
experience, as being borne and brought up amongst them. Thomas Clifford.


And concerning Marchandises then thither transported (whereof happily may be
some argument) Thomas Clifforde (before Fitz Stephens time) writing of Edward
the Confessor, says to this effect: King Edward intending to make his
Sepulcher at Westminster, for that it was near to the famous city of London
and the River of Thames, that brought in all kind of Marchandises, from all
parts of the world etc. And William of Malmsberie, William Malmsbery.
that lived in the raygne of William the first and second, Henry the first,
and king Stephen, calls this a noble City, full of wealthy citizens,
frequented with the trade of Marchandises from all parts of the world. Also I
read in diverse records that of old time no woade was stowed or harbored in
this City but all was presently sold in the ships, except by license
purchased of the Sheriffs, till of more latter time, to wit, in the year
1236. Andrew Bokereil being Mayor, by assent of the principal Citizens, the
Merchants of Amiens, Nele and Corby, purchased letters insealed with the common
seal of the City, that they when they come, might harborow their woades, and
therefore should give the Mayor every year 50. marks starling: and the same
year they gave 100. ^ toward the conueying of water from Tyborne to this
City. Also the Merchants of Normandy made fine for license to harbor their
woads, till it was otherwise provided. In the year 1263. Thomas Fitz Thomas,
being Mayor, etc. which proves that then (as before) they were here, amongst
other nations privileged.

It follows in Fitz Stephen, that the plagues of London in that time were
immoderate quaffing among fools, and often casualties by fire. For the first,
to wit of quaffing, it continues as before, though greatly qualified among the
poorer sort not of any holy abstinencie, but of mere necessity, Ale and Beer
being small, and wines in price above their reach. As for prevention of
casualties by fire (the houses in this city being then builded all of timber
and covered with thatch of straw or reed) it was long since, thought good
policy in our forefathers, wisely to provide, namely in the year of Christ
1189. Li. Constitutions
the first of Richard the first, Li. H^rne.
Henry Fitzalwine being then Mayor, Li. Clarkenwell.
that all men in this city should build their houses of stone up to a
certain height, and to cover them with slate, brick or tyle: since the which
time (thanks be given to God) there has not happened the like, often consuming
and denouring fires in this city as before. But now in our time in stead of
these inormities: others are come in place no less meet to be reformed: and
first, and namely, Purprestures, Purpresture in and about this city. W.
Patten. Carres and Drayes not well governed in this City, daungerons.
or in^rochments on the high ways, lanes, and common grounds, in and about
this city, whereof alearned and grave citizen has lately written and exhibited
a book (as I hear) to the Mayor and communaltie.

Then the number of Carres, Drayes, and Coatches, more then has been
accustomed, the streets and lanes being strengthened, must needs be
dangerous, as daily experience proves. I know that by the good laws and
customs of this city, shodde carts are forbidden to enter, except upon
reasonable causes, (as service of the Prince, or such like) they be tolerated.
Also that the forehorse of every carriage should be lead by hand: but these
good orders are not observed. Of old time coatches were not known in this
Island, but chariots, or Whirlicotes, and they only used of Princes or great
estates, such as had their footmen about them: I read that Rychard the second
being threatened by the rebels of Kent, rode from the Tower of London to the
Miles end, L.S. Mary Aborum.
and with him his mother in a Wherlicote, Riding in Wherlicotes.
the Earls of Buckingham, Kent, Warwick, and Oxford, Sir Thomas Perie, Sir
Robert Knowles, the Mayor of London, Sir Auberie de Vere, that bare the Kings
sword, with other Knights and Esquires attending on horseback. But in the
year next following the said King Richard took to wife Anne daughter to the
King of Boheme, that first brought hither the riding upon side saddles, Riding
in side saddles, that were wont to ride a stride. Riding in Coaches.
and so was the riding in Wherlicoates and chariots forsaken, except at
coronations and such like spectacles: but now of late years the use of
coatches is taken up, and made so common, as there is neither distinction of
time, nor difference of persons observed.

Last of all mine Author in this Chapter has these words: Most part of the
Bishops, W. Fitz Stephen.
Abbots, and great Lords of the land, as if they were Citizens and free men of
London, had many fair houses to resort unto, and many rich and wealthy
gentlemen spent their money there. And in an other place he has these words:
Every Sunday in Lent a fresh company of young men comes into the fields on
horseback, and the best horsemen conducteth the rest: then martch forth the
Citizens sons, and other young men with disarmed lances and shieldes, and
practice feats of war: many Courtiers likewise and attendants of noble men
repair to this exercise, and whilst the hope of victory does inflame their
minds, they do show good proof how serviceable they would be in martial
affairs etc. Again he says: This City in the troublesome time of King
Stephen showed at a muster 20000. armed horsemen, and 40000. footmen,
serviceable for the wars. etc. All which sayings of the said Author well
considered, do plainly prove, that in those days, the inhabitants and
repayrers to this City of what estate soever, spiritual or temporal, having
houses here, lived together in good amity, every man observing the customs
and order of the City, and chose to be contributarie to charges here, rather
then in any part of the land wheresoever: This city being the heart of the
Realm, the Kings chamber, and Princes seat whereunto they made repair, and
showed their forces, both of horses and of men, which caused in troublesome
time (as of king Stephen) the Musters of this City to be so great in number.
The causes of great shows and musters in this city of old time, more then of
late.


And here to touch somewhat of the great families and households kept in former
times I read that in the 36. of Henry the sixth, the great estates being called
up to London, the Earl of Salesbury came with 500. men on horseback, and was
lodged in the Herber: Richard Duke of York with 400. men lodged at Baynards
Castle: the Dukes of Excester, and Sommerset with 800. men. The Earl of
Northumberland, the Lord Egremonte, and the Lord Clifford with 1500. men.
Richard Neuell Earl Neuill Earl of Warwick. R. Fabian manuscript.
of Warwick with 600. men, all in read iackets, imbrodered with ragged staves
before and behind, and was lodged in Warwick lane: in whose house there was
oftentimes ^ixe Oxen eaten at a breakefast, and every Tavern was full of his
meat, for he that had any acquaintance in that house, might have there so much
of sodden and roste meat, as he could prick and carry upon a long dagger.
Nicholas West Bishop of Ely Liber Ely. West Bish. of Ely.
in the year 1532. kept continually in his house, an hundred servants giving
to the one half of them 53. ^. four pence the piece yearly: to the other
half each 40. ^. the piece: to every one for his winter gown, four yardes of
broad cloth, and for his summer coat three yardes and a half: he daily gave
at his gates besides bread and drink, warm meat to two hundred poor people.
The house keeping of Edward late Earl of Darby Earl of Darby
is not to be forgotten who had 220. men in Check Roll: his feeding aged
persons, twice every day sixty and odd, besides all comers thrice a week,
and every good Friday 2700. with meat drink and money.

Thomas Audley Tho. L. Audley
Lord Chauncelor, his family of gentlemen, before him in coats guarded with
Ueluet, and chains of Gold: his yeomen after him in the same livery not
guarded. William Powlet Lord great master, Marquis of Winchester, kept the
like number of Gentlemen and yeomen in a livery of Reding Tawney. Thomas Lord
Cromwell Earl of Essex kept the like or greater number in a liuerie of gray
marble, etc. the gentlemen guarded with Ueluet, and the yeomens with the same
cloth.

These, as all other of those times gave great relief to the poor, and I have
often seen at that Lord Cromwels gate, more then two hundred persons served
twice every day with bread, meat, and drink.

Edward Duke of Sommerset Edw. Duke of Sommerset.
was not inferior in keeping a number of tall Gentlemen and yeomen. These (I
say) and all other men of honor and worship then lodging in this City, or
within the liberties thereof, did without grudging, bear their part of charges
with the Citizens, according to their estimated estates, without the which,
those musters of old time could not have been so great.

And thus I end touching usual Orders and Customs of this city.

Sports and pastimes of old time used in this City.
LEt us now says ( Fitz Stephen) come to the sportes and pastimes, Of sports
and pastimes in this City every thing has his time, a time to weep a time
to laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to dance. Eccles. 3.
seeing it is fit that a city should not only be commodious and serious,
but also merry and sportfull: whereupon in the seals of the Popes, until the
time of Pope Leo, on the one side was Saint Peter; fishing with a keye over
him, reached as it were by the hand of God out of heaven, and about it this
verse. Tu pro me nauem liquisti, ^uscipe clauem. And on the other side was a
city, and this inscription on it, Aurea Roma. Likewise to the praise of
Augustus Caesar, and the city, in respect of the shows and sportes was written,

Nocte pluit tota redeunt spectacula mane, etc. All night it raynes, and shows
at morrowtide return again. And Caesar with almigtie Jove has matched any
equal reign. But London for the shows upon Theaters, and Comical pastimes,
has holy plays representations of miracles, Stage plays.
which holy confessors have wrought, or representations of torments wherein
the constancy of Martirs appeared. Every year also at Shrouetuseday (that we
may begin with childrens sports, seeing we al have been children) the
school boys do bring cocks of the game to their Master, and all the
forenoone they delight themselves in cockfighting: Cock fighting.
after dinner all the youths go into the fields, to play at the ball. Ball
play.
The scholars of every school have their ball (or bastion) in their hands:
the ancient and wealthy men of the City come forth on horseback to see the
sport of the young men, and to take part of the pleasure in beholding their
agilitie. Every Friday in Lent a fresh company of young men comes into the
field on horseback, Exercise of war like feats on horseback with disarmed
lances.
and the best horsemen conducteth the rest. Then march forth the citizens
sons, and other young men with disarmed lances and shieldes, and there they
practice feats of war. Many Courtiers likewise when the king ^yeth near,
and attendants of noble men do repair to these exercises, and while the hope
of victory does inflame their minds, do show good proof how serviceable they
would be in martial affairs. In Easter holidaies they fight battles on the
water, Battles on water.
a shield is hanged upon a pole, fixed in the midst of the stream, a boat is
prepared without oars to be carried by violence of the water, and in the ^ore
part thereof stands a young man, ready to give charge upon the shield with
his lance: if so be he breaks his lance against the shield, and does not
fall, he is thought to have performed a worthy deed. If so be (without
breaking his lance, he runs strongly against the shield, down he falls
into the water, for the boat is violently forced with the tide, but on each
side of the shield ride two boats furnished with young men, which recover him
that falls as soon as they may, Upon the bridge, wharfes, and houses, by the
rivers side, stand great numbers to see, and laugh thereat. In the holy days
all summer the youths are exercised in leaping, dancing, shooting, wrestling,
Leaping, dancing, shooting wrestling,
casting the stone, and practizing their shieldes: the maidens trippe it with
their Timbrelles, and dance Dancing.
as long as they can well see. In winter every holy day before dinner, the
Boares prepared for brawne are set to fight, Fighting of Boars, bayting of
Bears and Bulls.
or else Bulls and Bears are bayted.

When the great fenne or Moore (which waters the walls of the city on the
North side) is frozen, many young men play upon the ice, The More field when
there was no ditch by the wall of the City slyding on the ice.
some stryding as wide as they may, do slide swiftly: others make themselves
seats of ice, as great as milstones: one sits down, many hand in hand do
draw him, and one slipping on a sudden, all fall together: some tie bones to
their feet, and under their heels, and shouing themselves by a little picked
staff, do slide as swiftly as a bird flies in the air, or an arrow out of
a crossebow. Sometime two run together with poles, and hitting one the other,
either one or both do fall, not without hurt: some break their arms, some
their legs, but youth desirous of glory, in this sort exercises it self
against the time of war: Many of the citizens do delight themselves in
Hawks, and hounds, Hauking and hunting.
for they have liberty of hunting in Middlesex, Hartfordshire, all Chiltron,
and in Kent to the water of Cray. Thus far FitzStephen of sports.

These, or the like exercises have been continued till our time, namely in
stage plays, A Stage play continued.
whereof ye may read in Anno 1391. a play to be plaide by the parish Clearkes
of London at the Skinners well besides Smithfield: which play continued three
days together, A stage play that lasted eight days.
the King, Queen, and Nobles of the realm being present. And of another,
plaide in the year 1409. which lasted eight days, and was of matter from the
creation of the world, whereat was present most part of the nobility, and
gentry of England etc. Of late time in place of those Stage plays, has been
used Comedies, Tragedies, enterludes, and histories, both true and feigned: For
the acting whereof certain public places, as the Theater, the Curtine,
Theater and Curtine for Comedies and other shows Cock fight.
etc. have been erected. Also cocks of the game are yet cherished by diverse
men for their pleasures, much money being laid on their heads, when they fight
in pits, whereof some be costly made for that purpose. The Ball is used by
noble men and gentlemen in Tennis courts, The ball at Tennis play
and by people of meaner sort in the open fields, and streets. The youths of
this city time out of mind, have left off to practice the disarmed lance, and
shield on horseback in the fields, but I have seen some few upon the River
of Thames rowed in boats, with staves flat at the fore^end, running one
against another, and for the most part either one, or both overthrown and well
ducked. On the holydaies in summer the youths of this City, have in the
fields exercised themselves in leaping, dancing, shooting, wrestling, Leaping,
dancing, shooting wrestling, etc.
casting of the stone or Ball etc. And for defense and use of the weapon, there
is a special profession of men that teach it. Ye may read in mine Annalles,
how that in the year 1222. the citizens kept games of defense, Games of
defense.
and wrestlings near unto the Hospital of Saint Giles in the field, where
they challenged, and had the masterie of the men in the suburbs, and other
comers etc. Also in the year 1453. of a tumult made against the Mayor, at the
wrestling besides Clerks well etc. which is sufficient to prove that of old
time the exercising of wrestling, and such like has been much more used then
of latter years. The youths of this city, also have used on holy days after
evening prayer, at their masters doors, to exercise their wasters and
bucklers: Playing at the Bucklers.
and the maidens (one of them playing on a Timbrel) in sight of their masters
Dancing for garlandes in the streets.
and Dames to dance for garlandes hanged thwart the streets, which open
pastimes in my youth, being now suppressed: worser practizes within doors are
to be feared: as for the bayting of Bulls and Bears, they are till this day
much frequented. Slyding upon the Ice is now but childrens play: but in hauking
and hunting many grave citizens, at this present have great delight, and do
rather want leisure then good will to follow it. Of triumphant shows Matthew
Paris. Shows for triumphs.
made by the citizens of London, ye may read in the year 1236. the 20. of
Henry the third, Andrew Bockwell then being Mayor, how Helianor daughter to
Reymonde earl of Prouance, riding through the city toward Westminster, there
to be crowned Queen of England, the city was adorned with silks, and in the
night with lamps, cressets, and other lights, without number, besides many
Pageantes, and strange devises there presented, the citizens also rode The
citizens road.
to meet the King and Queen clothed in long garments embrodered Imbrodered
garments
about with gold, and silks of diverse colors, their horses gallantly trapped to
the number of 360. every man bearing a cup of gold or silver in his hand, and
the kings trumpetters sounding before them: These citizens did minister wine,
as Bottelers, which is their service at the coronation. More in the year 1298.
for victory obtained by Edward the first against the Scotts, every citizen
according to their several trade, mate their several show, but specially the
Fishmongers, Fishmongers procession, for triumph of victory, against the
Scots, more then a thousand ^orsmen.
which in a solemn procession, passed through the city, having amongst other
Pageants and shows, four Sturgeons guilt, carried on four horses: then four
Salmons of silver on four horses, and after them six and forty armed
Knights riding on horses, made like luces of the sea, and then one
representing S. Magnus (because it was on S. Magnus day) with a thousand
horsemen etc. Of one other show ye may read in the year 1377. A show by torch
sight, being a Momme^^e, of more then 100. horses.
made by the citizens for disport of the young prince Richard, son to the black
prince, and thus it follows. On the sunday before candlemas in the night,
130. citizens disguised, and well horsed in a mummerie with sound of trumpets,
shackbuts, cornets, Shalmes, and other minstrels, and innumerable torch lights
of Wax, rode from Newgate through Cheap over the bridge, through Southwarke,
and so to Kennington besides Lambhith, where the young Prince remained with his
mother, and the Duke of Lancaster, his uncle, the carles of Cambrldge,
Hertford, Warwick, and Suffolk, with diverse other Lords. In the first rank
did ride 48. in the likeness and habit of Esquires, two and two together
clothed in read coats and gowns of Say, or sandall, with comely visors on
their faces: after them came riding 48. knights in the same liucrie, of color
and stuff: Then followed one richly arrayed like an Emperor, and after him
some distance, one stately tired like a Pope, whom followed 24. Cardinals, and
after them eight or ten with black visors not amiable, as if they had been
Legates from some foreign Princes. These maskers, after they had entered the
Manor of Kenington, alighted from their horses and entered the hall on foot:
which done, the Prince, his mother, and the Lords came out of the chamber into
the hall, whom the said mummers did salute, showing by a pair of dice upon
the table their desire to play with the Prince, which they so handled, that the
Prince did always win when be cast them. Then the mummers set to the prince
three Iewelles, The prince did win three Jewels of the Maskers.
one after another, which were a boule of gold, a cup of gold, and a ring of
gold, which the Prince wanne at three casts. Then they set to the Princes
mother, the Duke, the Earls, and other Lords, to every one a ring of gold,
which they also did win: After which they were feasted, and the music sounded,
the prince and Lords daunced on the one part with the mummers, which did also
dance, which iolitie being ended, they were again made to drink, and then
departed in order as they came.

Thus much for sportfull shows in triumphs may suffice: of other shows for
sports and pastimes yearly used, first at Christmasse, there was in the Kings
house wheresoever he was lodged, a Lord of misrule, I. of misrule at
Christmas.
or master of merry disporters, and the like had ye in the house of every
noble man, of honor, or good worship, were he spiritual, or temporal.
Amongst the which the Mayor of London, and either of the shiriffes had their
several Lords of Misrule, ever contending without quarrel or offense, who
should make the rarest pastimes to delight the beholders. These Lords
beginning their rule on Alhollon Eve, continued the same till the morrow after
the Feast of the Purification, commonly called Candlemas day: In all which
space there were fine and subtle disguisinges, Maskes, and Mummeries, with
playing at Cards, for Counters, Nails, and points, more for pastimes then
for gain. In the week before Easter had ye great shows made for the
fetching in of a twisted Tree, Twisted trees ^e^ from the woods.
or With, as they termed it, out of the woods into the kings house, and the
like into every man's house of honor or worship. In the month of May, May games.
namely on May day in the morning, every man (except impediment) would walk
into the sweet meadows and green woods, there to rejoice their spirits with
the beuty and savor of sweet flowers, and with the noyce of birds, praising
God in their kind and for more notable example hereof Edward Hall, Edward
Hall.
has noted, that K. Henry the eight in the seventh of his reign on May day in
the Morning with Queen Katheren his wife, accompanied with many Lords and
Ladies, rode a Maying from Greenewitch to the high ground of Shooters hill,
where (as they passed by the way) they espied acompanie of tall yeomen clothed
all in Green, with green whoodes, and with bows and arrows to the manber of
200. One being their Chieftain was called Robin Hoode, who required the king
and his company, to stay and see his men shoot whereunto the king granting,
Robin Hoode Robin Hoode and his men shot before the king.
whistled^ and all the 200. Archers shot of, loosing all at once, and when he
whistled again they likewise shot again, their arrows whistled by craft of
the head, so that the noise was strange and loud, which greatly delighted the
king and Queen and their Company. Moreover this Robin Hoode desired the King
and Queen with their retinue to enter the green wood, where, in harbors made
of boughs and decked with flowers, they were set and served plentifully with
venison and wine, by Robin Hoode and his meynie, to their great contentment,
and had other Pageantes and Pastimes as ye may read in my said Author. I
find also that in the month of May, the Citizens of London, of all estates,
lightly in every parish, or sometimes two or three parishes joining together,
had their several mayinges, and did fetch in Maypoles, with diverse warlike
shows, with good Archers, Morris dauncers, and other devises for pastime all
the day long, and toward the evening they had stage plays and bonefires in
the streets, of these Mayinges, we read in the reign of Henry the 6. that
the Aldermen and Shiriffs of London being on May day at the Bishop Bishops wood
Bishops hall by Blethenhal green.
of Londons wood in the parish of Stebunheath, and having there a worshipful
dinner for themselves and other comers, Lydgate, the Poet that was a Monk of
Bray, sent to them by a Pursiuant a joyful commendation of that season
containing 16. staves in meter Royal, beginning thus.

Mighty Flora, Goddess of fresh flowers,
which clothed has the soil in lusty green.
Made buds spring, with her sweet showers,
by influence of the Sun shine.
To do pleasance The pleasant month of May commended.
of intent full clean,
unto the States which now sit here.
Has Vere down sent her own daughter dear.
Making the virtue, that dured in the root.
Called of Clerks, the virtue vegitable.
for to trascend, most holsom and most soote.
Into the Crop, this season so agreeable,
the ba^my libuor, is so commendable.
Thar it rejoices, with his fresh moisture,
man, beast, and foul, and every creature: etc.
These great Mayinges and Maygames made by the governors and masters of this
City, with the triumphant setting up of the great shafte, (a principal
Maypole in Cornhill, before the parish Church of S.Andrew) therefore called
Undershafte, by mean of an insurrection of youths, against Alianes on May
day, 1517. the ninth of Henry the eight, have not been so freely used as
before. And therefore to speak of watches Watches in the night commanded.
and shows in the nights: First I read that in the year of Christ, 1253.
watches in Cities and Borough towns were commanded by king Henry the third,
for the better observing of peace and quietness amongst his people: And
farther by the advice of them of Sauoy: he ordained that if any man chanced to
be robbed, or by any means damnifled, by any thief or robber, he to whom
the charge of keeping that country, Citi^ or Borough chifely appertained where
the robbery was don, should competently restore the loss: And this was after
the use of Sauoy, but yet thought more hard to be observed, here, then in
those parts: and therefore leaving those laborious watches, I will speak of
our pleasures and pastimes in watching by night. In the months of June, and
July, on the Uigiles or Festival days, and on the same Festival days in the
eueninges, after the Sun setting, there were usually made Bonefiers in the
streets, Bonefiers and banqueting in the streets.
every man bestowing wood or labor toward them: the welthier sort also
before their doors near to the said Bonefires would, set out tables on the
Uigiles furnished with sweet bread, and good drink, and on the Festival
days with meats and drinks plentifully, whereunto they would inuit their
neighbors and Passengers also to sit, and be merry with them in great
familiarity, praising God for his benefits bestowed on them: These were called
Bonefires as well of good amity amongst neighbors that being before at
controversy, (were there by the labor of others) ^ reconciled, and made of
bitter enemies, loving friends: as also for the veriue that a great firehath
to purge the infection of the air. On the vigils of S. John Baptist, Watches
at Midsommer.
and of S. Peter, and Paul the Apostles, besides the standing watches all in
bright harness in every ward, and street of this City, there was also a
marching watch, that passed through the principal streets thereof, to wit
from the little Conduite by Paul's gate through west Cheap, by the Stocks,
through Cornhill, by Leaden hall to Aldegate, then back down Fenchurchstreete,
by Grass church, about Grass church Conduite, and up Grass church street
into Cornhill, and through it into west Cheap, again, and so broke up, the
whole way ordered for this marching watch, extended to 3200. Tailors yards of
assize, for the furniture whereof with lights there were appointed 700.
Cressetes, 500. of them being found by the Companies, the other 200. by the
Chamber of London? besides the which lights every Constable in London) in
number more then 240. had his Cresset: the charge of every Cresset was in light
two shillinges four pence, and every Cresset had two men, one to bear or hold
it, an other to bear a bag with light, and to serve it, so that the poor men
perteyning to the Cressets, taking wages, besides that every one had a strawne
hat, with a badge painted, and his breakfast amounted in number to almost 2000.
The marching watch contained in number about 2000. men, part of them being
old soldiers, of skill to be captains, Lieutenantes, Sergeantes, Corporals,
etc. Wiflers, Drommers, and Fifes, Standard and Ensign bearers, Sword
players, Trompiters on Horseback, Demilaunces on great horses, Gunners with
hand Guns, or half hakes Archers in coats of white sustian signed on the
breast and back with the arms of the city, their bows bent in their hands,
with sheafes of arrows by their sides, Pike men in bright corslets, Burganets,
etc. Holbarders, like the Bilmen, in Almaine Riuetes, and Aperns of Mayle in
great number, there were also diverse Pageantes, Morris dancers, Constables the
one half (which was 120. on S. John's Eve, the other half on S. Peter's Eve in
bright harness some ouergilte, and every one a Iornet of Scarlet thereupon,
and his hench man following him, his minstrels before him, and his cresset
light passing by him, the Wayts of the city, the Mayors Officers, for his
guarde before him, all in a Livery of wolsted or Say Iacquetes party colored,
the Mayor him self well mounted on horseback, the Sword bearer before him in
fair Armor well mounted also, the Mayors footmen, and the like Torch bearers
about him, Hench men twain, upon great stirring horses following him. The
Shiriffes watches came one after the other in like order, but not so large in
number as the Mayors: for where the Mayor had besides his Giant three
Pageantes, each of the Shiriffes had besides their Giantes but two Pageants,
each their Morris Dance, and one hench man, their Officers in Iacquetes of
wolsted, or Say, party colored, differing from the Mayors and each from other,
but having harnised men a great many, etc.

This Midsommer watch was thus accustomed yearly, time out of mind, until
the year 1539. the 31. of Henry the 8. in which year on the eight of May, a
great muster was made by the Citizens, at the Miles end, all in bright
harness, with coats of white silk, A great muster at London.
or cloth, and chains of gold, in three great battles, to the number of
15000. which passed through London to Westminster, and so through the
Sanctuary, and round about the Park of S. James, and returned home through
Oldbourne. King Henry then considering the great charges of the Citizens for
the furniture of this unusual Muster, forbad the marching watch provided for,
at Midsommer, for that year, which being once laid down, was not raised
again till the year 1548. the second of Edward the sixth, Sir John Gresham,
then being Mayor, who caused the marching watch, both on the Eve of S. John
Baptist, and of S. Peter the Apostle, to be revived and set forth, in as
comely order as it had been accustomed, which watch was also beutified by the
number of more then 300. Dem^lances, and light horsemen, prepared by the
Citizens to be sent into Scotland for the rescue of the town of Hadington,
and others kept by the English men, since this Majors time, the like marching
watch in this City has not been used, though some attempts have been made
thereunto, as in the year 1585. John Mountgomery.
a book was drawn by a grave Citizen, and by him dedicated to Sir Thomas
Pullison, then Lord Mayor and his Brethren the Aldermen: containing the manner
and order of a marching watch in the city upon the Euens accustomed, in
commendation whereof (namely in time of peace to be used) he has words to
this effect. The Artificers of sondrie sorts were thereby well set a work,
none but rich men charged: poor men helped: old Soldiers, Tr^mpiters,
Drommers, Fifes, and ensign bearers, with such like men, meet for Princes
service kept in ure, wherein the safety and defense of every common weal
consists. Armo^r and Weapon being yearly occupied in this wise: the Citizens
had of their own redily prepared for any need, whereas by intermission
hereof, Armorers are out of work, Soldiers out of ure, weapons ouergrown with
foulenes, few or none good being provided. etc.

In the month of August about the feast of S. Bartlemew the Apostle, before
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Shiriffes of London placed in a large Tent near
unto Clarken well, of old time were diverse days spent in the pastime of
wrestling, where the Officers of the City: namely the Shiriffes, Serieantes
and Yeomen, the Portars of the kings beam, or weigh house, and other of the
City were challengers of all men, in the suburbs ^to wrestle for games
appointed: and on other days, before the said Mayor, Aldermen and Shiriffes,
in Fensbery field, to shoot the Standarde, broad arrow, and flight, for
games: but now of late years the wrestling is only practiced on Bartilmew day
in the after noone, and the shooting some three or four days after, in one
after noone and no more. What should I speak of the ancient daily exercises
in the long bow by Citizens of this city, now almost clean left of and
forsaken. I over pass it: for by the mean of closing in the common grounds,
our Archers for want of room to shoot abroad, creep into bowling Allies,
and ordinary dicing houses, nearer home, where they have room enough to hazard
their money at unlawful games: where I leave them to take their pleasures.

Honor of Citizens, and worthiness of men in the same.
THis City (says Fitzstephen) is glorious in manhood: furnished with
munitions: populous with inhabitants, insomuch that in the troublesome time of
king Stephen, it has showed at a mu^^er twenty thousand armed horsemen, and
threescore thousand ^ootemen, serviceable for the wars. Moreover says he,
the Citizens of London, The modest matrons that have been and ought to be.
wheresoever they become, are notable before all other Citizens in ciuillitie
of manners, attire, table, and talk. The matrons of this city are the very
modest Sabine Ladies of Italy. The Londiners sometime called Trinobantes,
repelled Caesar, Worthiness of men Citizens of London.
which always made his passage by shedding blood, whereupon Lucan song.

Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis.

The city of London has bred some, which have subdued many kingdoms, and
also the Roman Empire. It has also brought forth many others, whom virtue
and valor has highly advanced, according to Apollo, in his Oracle to Brute,
sub occas^i solis: etc. In the time of christianity, it brought forth that
noble Emperor Constantine, Constantine the Emperor borne in London.
which gave the city of Rome and all the imperial ensigns to God, S. Peter
and Pope Siluester: choosing rather to be called a Defendor of the church, then
an Emperor: and least peace might be violated, and their eyes troubled by his
presence, he retired from Rome, and built the city of Constantinople. London
also in late time has brought forth famous kings: Maude the Empress, king
Henry, son to Henry the second etc. thus far Fitzstephen: whereunto may be
added innumerable persons of honor, borne in London, and actions done by
worthy citizens, Honorable actions done by the worthy Citizens.
whereof I will only note a few best known to the comminalty.

In the year, 1216. the Londiners: sending out a Navy, took 65. ships of
Pirates and sea robbers: besides innumerable others that they drowned, which
had robbed on the river of Thames. In the year 1235. Walter Brune, Walter Brune
a Citizen of London, and Rosia his wife founded the Hospital of our Lady,
called S. Mary the Spittle without B^shopsgate of London, a house of such
relief to the needy, that there was found standing at the suppression thereof,
ninescore beds well furnished for receipt of poor people. In the year 1247.
Simon Fitzmary, Simon Fitzmarie.
one of the Shiriffes of London, founded the Hospital of S. Marie called
Bethleme, also without Bishopsgate. In the year 1283. Henry Wallice, Henry
Wallice mayor.
then Mayor, builded the Tun upon Cornhill, to be a prison for night walkers,
and a market house called the Stocks, both for fish and flesh, standing in the
midst of the City. In the year 1332, William Elsing Mercer of London, founded
Elsing spittle Elsing Spittle for 100. poor blind men.
within Criplegate, for sustentation of 100. poor blind men, and became
himself the first Prior of that Hospital, In the year 1363. Patent record.
Henry Picad Henry Picard Mayor of London feasted four King in one day. s.
sometime Mayor, in one day royally feasted Edward the third, king of England,
John king of France, David king of Scots, the king of Cipres, (then arrived in
England) Edward Prince of Wales, with many other noble men, and after kept his
hall for all comers that were willing to play at Dice, and hasarde. In like
manner the Lady Margaret his wife, kept her Chamber to the same intent etc. In
the year 1378. John Filpot John Filpot. a most^ famous Citizen.
sometime Mayor, hired with his own money, 1000. Soldiers, and defended the
Realm from the incursions of the ennemie, so that in a small time his hired
men took John Mercer, a sea-rouer, with all his Ships, which he before had
taken from Scarberow, and fifeteene Spanish ships laden with great riches. In
the year 1380. Thomas of VVodstocke, Thomas Percie, Henry Calueley, Robert
Knowles, and others, being sent with a great power to aid the Duke of
Britain, the said John Filpot hired ships for them of his own charges, and
released the Armor, which the soldiers had pawned for their victuailes, more
then 1000. in number. This most noble Citizen (says Thomas Walsingham)
Thomas Wal^singham.
that had traveled for the commodity of the whole Realm, more then all other
of his time, had often relieved the king, by lending him great sommes of money,
and otherwise, deceased in anno 1384. after that he had assured Lands to the
City for the relief of 13. poor people for ever. In the year 1381. William
Walworth William Walworthes Valiantie.
then Mayor a most provident, valiant and learned Citizen, did by his arrest
made upon VVat^ Tylar (a presumptuous Rebel, upon whom no man durst lay
hands) deliver the king and kingdom from the danger of most wicked Traitors,
and was for his service knighted in the field. William Walworth and other
knighted in the field.


Nicholas Brembar, John Filpot, Robert Laund, Nicholas Twiforde, and Adam
Francis, Aldermen were then for their service likewise knighted, and Sir Robert
Knoles, for assisting of the Mayor was made free of this City. This Sir
Roberte Knoles Robert Knoles.
thus worthily enfranchised a Citizen, founded a College with an Hospital at
Pontfract, and he also builded the great stone bridge at Rochester, over the
river of Medway, etc. In the year 1391. Adam Bamne Adam Bamne.
Mayor, in a great dearth procured corn from parts beyond the seas, to be
brought to London in such abundance as sufficed to serve the City, and the
Countries nere adjoining, to the furtherance of which good work, he took out
of the Orphants chest in the Guildehall, 2000. Marks to buy the said corn
and each Alderman laid out 20. ^. to the like purpose. In the year 1415.
Thomas Faulconer Thomas Fauconer.
Mayor, lent to king Henry the fifth toward the maintenance of his wars in
France, 10000. Record.
Marks upon Jewels. In the year 1420. Richard Whitington Richard VVhitington.
Mayor founded Whitingtons College for the poor, with divinity lectures to
be read there, for ever: He also builded Newgate etc. In the year 1427. John
Rinwell John Reinwel
Mayor gave to discharge certain wards of London, from fifteenes, and other
payments. In the year 1432. John Wels John Wels.
Mayor conveyed fresh water from Teyborne to the Standardei^ west Cheap for
service of the City. In the year 1438. William Eastfielde Mayor, conveyed
water to the Conduite in Fleetestreete to Aldermanberry, and to Criplesgate. In
the year 1439. Stephen Brown Stephen Brown.
Mayor sent into Prussia, and caused corn to be brought thence to London in
great quan titie, whereby he brought down the prize of wheat from iij.^.the
Bushel, to less then half that money. In the year 1446. Simon Air Simon
Air
Mayor, builded the Leaden hall, for a common Grayner of corn to the use of
this City, and left 5000. marks to be bestowed in charitable actions for
relief of the poor. In the year 1471. John Stocton Mayor, and 11. Aldermen
of London, with the Recorder were all made knights in the field, by Edward
the fourth, for their good service done unto him. In the year 1483. Edmond
Shaa Edmond Shaa
Mayor, builded Criplesgate. In the year 1491. Hugh Clopto^ Hugh Clopto^.
Mayor, builded the great stone arched bridge at Stratford upon Auon. In the
year 1494. Robert Fabyan, Robert Fabian labored and spent his time and goods
in writing for posterities.
Alderman and one of the Shiriffes gathered out of diverse good Authors, as well
Latin as French, a large chronicle of England and France, which he published
in English to his great charges, for the honor of this city, and common
utility of the whole Realm. In the year 1554, Sir Thomas White Sir Thomas
White.
Mayor founded S. John's College in Oxforde, and gave great sums of money to
diverse Towns in England for relief of the poor. In the year 1566. Sir Thomas
Gresham Sir Thomas Gresham.
Mercer, builded that stately Exchange Royal in London, and left his dwelling
house in Bishopsgate street, to be a college of readings etc. as in my
summary.

About the year 1570. Margaret Dan, Margaret Dan
widow to William Dan, late one of the Sheriffs of London gave by her
testament more then 2000. pound to charitable actions.

Also about the year 1577. Dame Mary Ramsey Lady Mary Ramsey.
wife to Sir Thomas Ramsey Mayor, being seized of lands in fee simple of her
inheritance to the yearly value of 243. pound, by his consent gave the same to
Christ's Hospital in London, toward relief of poor children there, and
otherwise, as in my summarie and abridgement I have expressed, and as farith by
monumentes erected in Christ's Hospital: which gift she afterward in her
widowhode confirmed, and greatly augmented.

In the year 1577. William Lamb Wiliam Lamb
Clothworker builded a water Conduite at Oldbourne Cross, to his charge of
1500. ^. and did many other charitable acts, as in my summarie.

In the year 1582. John Haydon John Haydon.
Alderman, gave large Legacies, and more then 3000. ^. for relief to the
poor. In the year 1583. Barnalde Randulph, Barnalde Randulph.
common Serieant of London, gave and delivered with his hand 906. ^. toward
the building of water Conduites, which was performed. Moreover he gave by his
Testament 1000. ^. to be employed in deeds of charity, but that money being
left in holdfast hands, I have not heard how it was bestowed.

Thus much for the worthiness of Citiizens in this City, touching whom John
Lydgate John Lidgate.
a Monk of Bury, in the reign of Henry the sixth made (amongst other) these
verses following.

Of Seven things I praise the City.
Of true meaning and faithful observance.
Of righteousness, truth, and equity.
Of Stablenes aye kept in Legiance.
And for of virtue, thou have suffisance,
In this land here, and other londs all,
The kings Chamber, of Custom men thee call.
Having thus in generality handled the original, the walls, gates, ditches, and
fresh waters, the bridges, towers and castles the schools, of learning, and
houses of law, the orders and customs, sportes and pastimes, watchinges and
martial exercises, and lastly the honor and worthiness of the Citizens: I am
now to set down, the distribution of this City into parts: and more especially
to declare the antiquities: note worthy in every of the same: and how both the
whole and parts, have been from time to time ruled and governed.

THe Ancient division of this City, was into Wards, or Aldermanries: and
therefore I will begin at the East, and so proceed through the high and most
principal street of the city, to the west, The Cite of London divided from
east to west.
after this manner. First through Aldgate street, to the west corner of S.
Andrews Church called Undershaft, on the right hand, and Lymestreete corner,
on the left, all which is of Aldgate ward: from thence through Cornhill
street, to the west corner of Leaden hall, all which is of Limestreete ward:
from thence leaving the street, that leads to Bishopsgate on the right hand,
and the way that leads into Grass street on the left, still through
Cornhill street, by the Conduite to the west corner against the Stocks, all
which is in Cornhill ward, then by the said Stocks (a market place both of
fish and flesh standing in the midst of the City) The stocks market the
midst of the City.
through the Poultrie, (a street so called) to the great conduite in west
Cheap, and so through Cheap, to the Standarde, which is of Cheap ward,
except on the South side from Bow lane, to the said Standarde, which is of
Cordwainer street ward. Then by the Standarde to the great cross which is in
Cripplegate ward, on the North side, and in Bredstreete ward on the south
side. And to the little conduite by Paul's gate from whence of old time, the
said high street stretched straight to Ludgate, all in the ward of Faringdon
within, then divided truly from East to West, but since that by means of the
burning of Paul's Church which was in the reign of William the first surnamed
Conqueror. Mawricius then Bishop of London, laid the foundation of a new
church, so far in largenes exceeding the old, that the way toward Ludgate
was thereby greatly streightened, as before I have at large discoursed: Now
from the North to the South, The City de^uided from North to South.
this city was of old time divided not by a large high way or street, as
from East to West, but by a fair Brook of sweet water, which came from out
the North fields through the wall, and midst of the city into the river of
Thames, which division is till this day constantly and without change
maintained. This water was called (as I have said) Walbrooke, The course
Walbrooke
of running through, and from the wall the course whereof to prosecute it
particularly, was and is from the said wall to S. Margarets church, in
Lothberry: from thence beneath the lower part of the Grocers hall, about the
east part of their Kitchen, under S. Mildredes church, somewhat west from the
said Stocks market: from thence through Buckels berry, by one great house
builded of stone and timber, called the old Bardge. because Barges out of the
river of Thames were rowed up so far into this Brook: on the backside of the
houses in Walbrooke street (which street takes his name of the said
Brook:) by the west end of S. John's church upon Walbrooke, under Horshew
Bridge, by the west side of Tallow Chandlers hall, and of the Skinners hall,
and so behind the other houses, to Elbow Lane, and by a part thereof down
Greenewitch lane, into the River of Thames. This is the course of Walbrooke,
which was of old time bridged over in diverse places, for passage of horses and
men, as need required: but since by means of encrochment on the banks
thereof, the channel being greatly straightened, and other noyances don
thereunto, at length the same by common consent was Arched over with brick,
and pa^ed with stone, equal with the ground, where through it passed, and is
now in most places builded upon, that no man may by the eye discern it, and
therefore the trace thereof is hardly known, to the common people.

The City thus divided from East to West, and from North to South: I am
further to show how the same was of old time broken into diverse parts called
wards, whereof Fitzstephen more then four hundred years ago writes thus.
This City (says he) even as Rome, is divided into wards, it has yearly
Shiriffes in stead of Consuls. It has the dignity of Senators in Aldermen
etc. The number of these wards in London were both before and in the reign of
Henry the third: 24. in all: whereof 13 lay on the East side of the said
Walbrooke, and 11. on the West side of the same: notwithstanding these 11.
Patent Record.
grew much more larger and bigger then these on the East, and therefore in the
year of Christ, 1393. the 17. of Richard the second, Farengdon ward which
was then one entier ward, but mightelie increased of buildinges without the
gates: was by Parliament appointed to be divided into twain, and to have two
Aldermen, to wit Faringdon within and Faringdon without, which made up the
number of 12. wards on the west side of Walbrooke, and so the whole number of
25. on both sides: moreover in the year 1550. the Mayor, Commonalty, and
Citizens of London, purchasing the Liberties of the Borough of Southwark,
appointed the same to be a ward of London, and so became the number of 13.
wards on the East, 12. on the West, and one in the South of the river of
Thames, lying in the said Borough of Southwarke, within the county of Surrey,
which in all arise to the number of 26. wards and 26. Aldermen of London.

The names of Wards on the East part of Walbrooke are these.
1 Portsoken ward without the walls. 2 Towerstreete ward. 3 Ealdegate ward. 4
Lymestreete ward. 5 Bishopsgate ward within the walls and without. 6
Bredstreete ward. 7 Cornhill ward. 8 Langbourne ward 9 Billingsgate ward 10
Bridge ward within. 11 Candlewicke street ward. 12 Walbrooke ward. 13
Downgate ward.
The Wards on the west side of Walbrooke are these.
14 Vintry ward. 15 Cordwainer street ward. 16 Cheap ward. 17
Colemanstreete ward. 18 Bassinges hall ward. 19 Criplesgate ward. within and
without. 20 Aldersgate ward within and without. 21 Faringdon ward within. 22
Bredstreete ward. 23 Queen hith ward 24 Castle Baynarde ward. 25 Faringdon
ward without. 26 The Bridge ward without, in the Brugh of Southwarke.
Portsoken Ward.
Seeing that of every of these Wards: I have to say somewhat: I will begin
with Portsoken ward, Portsoken ward.
without Ealdgate.

This Portsoken, which sounds as much as the Franchise at the gate, was
sometime a Guilde, Li^^^r Trinita Knighetn Guilde.
and had this beginning, as I have read. In the days af king Edgar, more then
600. years since, there were thirteen Knights (or soldiers) well-beloved to the
king and realm (for service by them done) which requested to have a certain
portion of land on the East part of the City, left desolate, and forsaken, by
the inhabitants, by reason of too much servitude. They besought the king to
have this land, with the Liberty of a Guilde for ever: the king granted to
their request with conditions following: that is, that each of them should
victoriously accomplish three combats, one above the ground, one under ground,
and the third in the water, and after this at a certain day in East
Smithfield, they should run with spears against all comers, all which was
gloriously performed: and the same day the king named it knighten Guilde,
Bounds Knighten Guild or Portsok^^ ward.
and so bounded it, from Ealdgate to the place where the bars now are toward
the East, on both the sides of the street, and extended it toward the North,
and the gate now since called Bishopsgate, unto the house then of William
Presbiter, after of Geffery Tannar, and then of the heirs of Coluer, after
that of John Esseby, but since of the Lord Bourchier, etc. And again toward
the South unto the River of Thames, and so far into the water, as a horseman
entering the same may ride at a low water, and throw his spear: so that all
East Smithfielde, with the right part of the street that goes to Dodding Pond
into the Thames, and also the Hospital of S. Katherins, with the Mils, that
were founded in king Stephens days, and the outward stone wall, and the new
ditch of the Tower are of the said Fee and Liberty: for the said wall and
ditch of the Tower, were made in the time of king Richard, when he was in the
holy Land, by William Longshamp Bishop of Ely, as before I have noted unto you.
These knights had as then none other Charter, by all the days of Edgar,
Ethelred, and Cnutus, until the time of Edward the Confessor, whom the heirs
of those knights humbly besought to confirms their Liberties, whereunto he
graciously granting, gave them ^^ deed thereof, as appears in the book of
the late house of the holy Trinity, written in the Saxon letter and tongue.
Liber Trinitate
After this king William the son of William the Conqueror, made a
confirmation of the same Liberties, unto the heirs of these knights, in these
words. Wiliam king of England to Maurice Bishop and Godfrey de Magum, and
Richard de Parr, and to his faithful people of London, greeting, know ye me
to have granted to the men of Knighten Guilde, the Guilde that belonged to
them, and the Land that belonged thereunto, with all Customs, as they had the
same in the time of king Edward, and my Father. Witness Hugh de Buclie: at
Rething. After him, king Henry the first confirmed the same by his Charter, to
the like effect, the recital whereof, I pretermit for breutties sake. After
which time, the Church of the holy Trinity within Ealdgate P^iorie of the
Trinity within Ealdgate.
of London, being founded by Queen Matilde wife to the said Henry, the
multitude of Brethren praising God day and night therein, in short time so
increased, that all the City was delighted in the beholding of them: insomuch
that in the year 1115. certain Burgeses of London, of the progeny of those
noble English knights to wit Radulphus Fitzalgod, Wilmarde le Deuereshe,
Orgare le Prude, Edward Hupcornehill, Blackstanus, Knighten Guilde given the
Canons of the holy Trinity.
and Alwine his kinsman, and Robert his brother, the sons of Leafstanus the
Goldsmith, Wizo his son, Hugh Fitzvulgar, Algare Secusme, coming together
into the Chapter house of the said church of the Holy Trinity, gave to the
same Church and Canons serving God therein, all the Lands and Soke called in
English Knighten Guilde, which lies to the wall of the City, without the same
gate, and stretches to the river of Thames, they gave it, I say, taking upon
them the Brotherhoode and participation of the benefits of that house by the
hands of Prior Norman. And the better to confirm this their grant, they
offered upon the Altar there, the Charter of Edward together with the other
Charters, which they had thereof: and afterward they did put the foresaid
Prior in se^sine thereof, by the Church of S. Buttolphes which is builded
thereon, and is the head of that land: These things were thus done, before
Barnarde Prior of Dunstable, John Prior of Derland, Geffery Glinton
Chamberlain, and many other Clarks and Laymen, French and English, Orgar le
Prude (one of their Company) was sent to King Henry, beseeching him to confirm
their gift, which the king gladly granted^ by this deed following. Henry king
of England to R. B. of London; to the Shiriffes, and Provost, and to al his
Barons, and faithful people, French and English, of London Barons of London.
and Middlesex, greeting. Know ye me to have granted, and confirmed to the
Church and Canons of the Holy Trinity of London, the Soke of the English
knighten Guild, and the land which pertayneth thereunto, and the Church of S.
Buttolph, as the men of the same Guilde have given, and granted unto them: and
I will and straightly command that they may hold the same well and honorably
and freely, with sack, and soke, Toll, and Thea, infangthese and all customs
belonging to it, as the men of the same Guilde in best sort had the same in the
time of king Edward, and as king William my Father, and brother did grant it
to them by their writs. Witness A. the Queen Geffery Glinton the Chauncelor,
and William of Glinton at Wodstocke. Al these prescribed writings (says my
book), which sometime belonged to the Priorie of the Holy Trinity, are
registered in the end of the book of Remembrances of the Guildhall of London,
marked with the Letter C. folio ^34. The king sent also his Shiriffes to wit,
Albert de Vere, and Roger nephew to Hubert which upon his behalf should inuest
this Church, with the possession hereof^ which the said Shiriffes accomplished
coming upon the ground, Andrew Bucheuite, and the forenamed witnesses, and
other standing by, notwithstanding Othowerus Acoli^llus Otto, and Geffery Earl
of Essex, Constables of the Tower, Constables of the Tower.
by succession, withheld by force, a portion of the said land as I have before
delivered. The Prior and Chanons of the Holy Trinity, being thus seized of the
said Land and Soke, of Knighten Guilde, a part Part of Cnitten Guild with
held b^ the Constables of the Tower.
of the Suburb without the wall, (but within the Liberties of the City) the
same Prior was for him, and his Successors, admitted as one of the Aldermen of
London, to govern the same Land and Soke: according to the Customs of the
City, he did sit in Court and road with the Mayor, and his Brethren the
Aldermen, as one of them in Scarlet, or other Li^ery, as they used until the
year 1531. at the which time, the said Priory by the last Prior there, Prior of
the Trinity an Alderman of London.
was surrendered to king Henry the eight, in the 23. of his reign. Who gave
this Priorie to Sir Thomas Audley, Knight, Lord Chauncelor of England, and he
pulled down the church. Since the which dissolution of that house, the said
Ward of Portsoken, has been governed by a temporal man one of the Aldermen of
London, elected by the Citizens, as be the Aldermen of other wards. Thus much
for the out bounds of Cnitten Guilde, or Portsoken Ward, and for the
antiquity and government thereof.

Now of the parts therein, this is specially to be noted. First the East part
of the Tower stands there, then an Hospital of S. Katherines Hospital of S.
Katherens.
founded by Matilde the Queen, wife to king Stephen, by license of the Prior
and Covent of the Holy Trinity in London on whose ground she founded it.
Helianor the Queen wife to king Edward the first, appointed there to be a
Master, three Brethren Chaplens, and three Sistars^ ten poor women, and six
poor Clerks, Queen Philip wife to king Edward the third, founded a Chantry
there, and gave to that Hospital x ^. land by year, it was of late time
called a free chapel, a college, and an Hospital for poor Sisters. The
Quire which of late years was not much inferior to that of Paul's, was
dissolved by D. Wilson a late master there, y^ brethren and Sistars remaining:
this house was valued at 315.^.14.^.ij.pence, being now of late years enclosed
about (or pestered with small tenements, and homely cottages, having
inhabitants, English and strangers, more in number then some City in England.
There lie buried in this Church the Countess of Huntington, Countess of the
March, in her time 1429. John Holland Duke of Excester and Earl of Huntington
1447. in a fair tomb on the North side the quire, Thomas Walsingham Esquire,
and Thomas Ballarde Esquire by him 1465. Thomas Flemming Knight 1466.

On the East and by North of the Tower, lies Eastsmithfield New Abbey on
Eastsmithfield
and Tower hill, two plots of ground so called, without the wall of the City,
and East from them both was sometime a monastery called new Abbey, founded by
King Edward the third, in the year 1359. upon occasion as follows.

In the year 1348. the 23. of Edward the third, the first great pestilence in
his time began, and increased so sore, that for want of room in Churchyardes
to bury the dead of the city, and of the suburbs, one John Corey clearke,
procured of Nicholas Prior of the holy Trinity within Ealdegate, one Toft of
ground near unto Eastsmithfield, for y^ burial Burial for the dead, prepared
in time of peastilence.
of them that died, with condition that it might be called the Church yard of
the holy Trinity, which ground he caused by the aid of diverse devout citizen
to be enclosed with a wall of stone. Robert Elsing son of William Elsing
gave five pound thereunto: and the same was dedicated by Raph Stratford Bishop
of London, where innumerable bodies of the dead were afterward buried, and a
chapel built in the same place, to y^ honor of God: to the which, K. Edward
setting his eye (having before in a tempest on the sea and peril of drowning
made a vow build a monastery to the honor of God, and our Lady of grace, if
God would grant him grace, to come safe to land) builded there a monastery,
placing an Abbot, and monks of the Cistercian (or white) order. The bounds of
this plot of ground together with a decree for Tithes thereof, are expressed
in the Charter, the effect whereof I have set down in an other place. This
house at the late general suppression was valued at 546.^.x.^ yearly, it was
surrendered in the year 1539. the 30. of Henry the eight, since the which
time, the said monastery being clean pulled down, by Sir Arthur Darcy knight
and other, of late time in place thereof is builded a large Store house for
victuailes, and convenient Quens are builded there, for baking of biscuit to
serve her Majesty's ships. The grounds adjoining belonging to the said
Abbey are employed in building of small tenementes: for Tower hill, Tower hill.
as the same is greatly diminished by building of tenements and garden plottes,
etc. Merchant Tailors alms li^uses.
So it is of late. to wit in the year of Christ 1593. on the North side
thereof, and at the West end of Hogstreete, beautifyed by certain fair Alms
houses, there strongly builded of Brick and timber and covered with slate for
the poor, by the Merchant Tailors of London, in place of some small cottages,
given to them by Richard Hills sometime a Master of that company certain
timber for that use, being also given by Anthony Radcliffe of the same
society Alderman. In these Alms houses 14. charitable brethren of the said
merchant Tailors yet living have placed 14. poor sole women, which receive
each of them of their founder sixteen pence (or better) weekly, besides
viii.^.xv^. yearly, paid out of the common Treasury of the same corporation,
for fuel.

From y^ west part of this Tower hill, toward Ealdegate being a long continual
street, amongst other smaller buildings in that row there was sometimes an
Abbey Abbey of Saint Clare Nuns called the Minories.
of Nuns of the order of Saint Clare, called the Minories founded by Edmund
Earl of Lancaster, Leycester and Darbie, brother to King Edward the first, in
the year 1293, the length of which Abbey contained 15. perches and seven
foot, near unto the kings street, or high way, etc. as appears by a deed
dated 1303. This house was valued to dispend 418.^.8.^.v.^. yearly, and was
surrendered by Dame Elizabeth Saluage, the last Abbeyes there, unto King Henry
the eight, in the 30. of his reign, the year of Christ 1539.

In place of this house of Nuns, is now builded diverse fair and large store
houses, for armor, Store house for armor.
and habiliments of war, with diverse work houses serving to the same purpose:
there is a small parrish Church for inhabitants of the close, called S.
Trinities. Parish church of S. Trinity. A farm by the Minories.


Near adjoining unto this Abbey on the South side thereof, was sometime a
Farm, belonging to the said Nunnerie, at the which I my self in my youth have
fetched many a half penny worth of milk, and never had less then three Ale
pints for a halfpenie in y^ summer, nor less then one Ale quart for a
halfpennie in the winter, always hot from the cow, as the same was milked and
strained. One Trolop, and afterward Goodman, were the Farmers there, and had
30. or 40. kine to the payle. Goodmans son being heir thereof, let out the
ground first for grazing of horse, and then for garden plottes, and lived like
a gentleman thereby. On the other side of that street, lies the ditch without
the walls of the city, which of old time was used to lie open, and was
always from time to time cleansed from filth and mud, as need required, and
was of great breadth and so deep, that diverse watring horses, where they
thought it shallowest, were drowned both horse and man. But now of latter time,
the same ditch is enclosed, and the banks thereof let out for garden plottes,
carpenters yardes, bowling Allies, and diverse houses be thereon builded,
whereby the ditch is filled up, and made shalllow enough.

From Ealdegate East, lies a large street, and high way, sometime replenished
with few, but fair and cleanly buildinges: on the North side whereof the first
building was the parish church of Saint Buttolph, in a large cemitorie, or
church yard. This church Parish Church of S. Buttolph
has been lately new builded at the special charges of the Priors of the
holy Trinity, patrons thereof, as it appears by the Arms of that house
engraven on the stone work. The paris^ioners of this parish being of late
years mightily increased, the church is pestered with lofts and seats for
them. Monuments in this Church there are few. John Romany Ollarie and Agnes his
wife were buried thereabout 1408. Richard Chester Alderman, one of the
Sheriffs 1484. Ihon^ Lord Darcy of the North, knight of the Garter beheaded
1537. Sir Nicolas Carew of Bedington in Surrey, knight of the Garter beheaded,
1538. Sir Arthur Darcy, youngest son to Thomas Lord Darcie, deceased at the
new Abbey on the Tower hill, was buried there. East from this parrish church
there were certain fair Innes, for receipt of travelers, repayring to the
city, up toward Hog lane Hog lane.
end, somewhat within the Bars, a mark showing how far the liberties of
the City do extend.

This Hog lane stretches North to Saint Mary Spittle, without Bishopsgate,
and within these forty four years last, had on both sides fair hedgerowes
of Ealme trees, with bridges and easy styles to pass over into the pleasant
fields, very commodious for citizens therein to walk, shoot, and otherwise
to recreate and refresh their dulled spirits in the sweet and wholesome air,
which is now within few years made a continual building throughout, of garden
houses, and small cottages: and the fields on either sides be turned into
garden plottes, teynter yardes, bowling Alleyes, and such like, from Hounds
ditch in the West, so far as White chapel, and further in the East. The
South side of the high way from Ealdegate had some few tenements thinly
scattered here and there, with much void space between them, up to the said
Bar, but now that street is not only fully replenished with buildings,
outward, and also pestered with diverse Allies, on either side to the Bars,
but also even to White chapel, and beyond.

From Aldegate Northwest to Bishopsgate, lies the ditch of the city in that
part called Hounds ditch, Hounds ditch.
for that in old time when the same lay open much filth (conveyed forth of the
city) especially dead dogs was there laid or cast: wherefore of latter time
a mudde wall was made enclosing the ditch, to keep out the laying of such
filth as had been accustomed. Over against this mudde wall on the other side
of the street, was a fair field, sometime belonging to the Priory of the
Trinity, and since by Sir Thomas Audley given to Magdalen College in
Cambridge: this field (as all other about the city) was enclosed, reserving
open passage there into, for such as were disposed. Toward the street were
some small cottages, of two stories high, and little garden plottes backewarde,
for poor bedred people Bedred people in Hounds ditch.
(for in that street dwelt none other) builded by some Prior of the holy
Trinity, to whom that ground belonged. In my youth I remember, devout people
as well men as women of this city, were accustomed oftentimes especially on
Frydayes weekly to walk that way purposely, and there to bestow their
charitable alms, every poor man or woman lying in their bed within their
window, which was toward the street open so low, that every man might see
them, a clean linen cloth lying in their window, and a pair of beads to
show that there lay a bedred body unable but to pray only. This street was
first paued in the year 1503. about the later reign of Henry y^ eight, three
brethren that were Gunfounders surnamed Owens, gate ground there to build upon
and to enclose for casting of brass ordinance. Brass ordinance cast in Hounds
ditch^


These occupied a good part of y^ street on the field side, and in short time
diverse other also builded there, so that the poor bedred people were worn
out, and in place of their homely cottages, such houses builded, as do rather
want room, then rent. The residue of the field was for the most part made into
a garden, by a Gardener, named Casway, one that served the markets, with
herbs and roots, and in the last year of King Edward the sixth, the same was
parcelled into gardens, wherein are now many fair houses of pleasure builded.
On the ditch side of this street, the mudde wall is also by little and little
all taken down, the bank of the ditch being raised made leuel ground, and
turned into garden plottes, and Carpenters yardes, and many large houses are
there builded, by which means the ditch is filled up, and both the ditch and
wall so hidden that they cannot be seen of the passers by. This Portsoken
ward has an Alderman and his deputy, common counselors fire, Constables
four, Scauengers four, for the Wardemote inquest eighteen, and a Beadle, to
attend upon them all, to the Fifteen it is ceased at ix.pound.

Towerstreet Ward.
THe first Ward in the East part of this city within the wall, is called
Towerstreete Ward, Towerstreet ward.
and extends along the river of Thames, from the said Tower in the East,
almost to Belingsgate in the West: One half of the Tower, the ditch on the
West side and bulwarks adjoining do stand with in that part, where the wall
of the City of old went, straight from the Posterne gate, South to the River
of Thames, before that the Tower was builded. From and without the Tower ditch
West and by North is the said Tower hill Tower hill
sometime a large plot of ground now greatly strengthened by means of
incrochments, (unlawfully made and suffered) for gardens and houses, some on the
bank of the Tower ditch, (whereby the ditch is marred) but more near unto the
wall of the City from the Posterne North till over against the principal fore
gate of the Lord Lumleyes house, etc. But the Tower ward goes no further that
way. Upon this hill is always readily prepared at the charges of the City a
large Scaffold, Scaffold on Tower hill.
and gallows of timber, for the execution of such traitors or other
transgressors, as are delivered out of the Tower, or otherwise to the Sheriffs
of London by writ there to be executed. I read that in the fifth of King Edward
the fourth, a Scaffold and gallows was there set up by other the kings
officers, and not of the Cities charges, whereupon the Mayor and his brethren
complained, but were answered by the king, that the Tower hill was of the
liberty of the City, And whatsoever was done in that point was not in
derogation of the cities liberties, Liberl. folio 40.
and thereupon commanded proclamation Proclamation W. Danthorne
to be made, as well within the city as in the suburbs, as follows: For as
much; as the 7. day of this present month of November, gallows were erect and
set up besides our Tower of London, within the liberties and franchises of
our City of London, in derogation and prejudice of the liberties and
franchises of the City, The king our sovereign Lord would it be certainly
understood, that the erection and setting up of the said gallows was not done
by his commandment, wherefore the King our sovereign Lord wills that the
erection and setting up of the said gallows be not any president or example
thereby hereafter to be taken, in hurt, prejudice, or derogation, of the
franchises, liberties, and privileges, of the said City, which he at all
times has had, and has in his benevolence tender favor and good grace etc.
Apud Westminst. 9. die Nouemb. Anno Regni nostri quinto. On the North side of
this hill, is the said Lord Lumleyes house, and on the West side diverse houses
lately builded, and other incrochments along south to Chicke lane, Chicke lane.
and so Berwardes lane, Berwards lane
on the East of Barking Church, at the end whereof you have Tower street
stretching from the Tower hill, West of Saint Margeret Patten^s church
Parsonage.

Now therefore to begin at the East end of the street, Towerstreet.
on the North side, there is the fair parish church called Alhallowes Barking,
Alhallowes Barking a parish church. Barking chapel of our Lady.
which stands in a large (but sometime far larger) cemitory or Churchyard.
On the North side thereof was sometime builded a fair Chapel, founded by
King Richard the first, confirmed and augmented by king Edward the first.
Edward the fourth gave license to John Earl of Worcester, to found there a
brotherhood for a Master and brethren, and he gave to the Custos of that
fraternity, which was Sir John Scotte Knight, Thomas Colt, John Tate, and John
Croke, the Priorie of Tottingbroke in the County of Surrey, with all the
members and appurtenances, and a part of the Priorie of Okeborne in Wiltshire
both Priors Aliens, and appointed it to be called the Kings Chapel The
kings Chapel of Barking.
or Chauntrie, In Capella beatae Mariae de Barking. King Richard the third new
builded this Chapel, and founded therein a College of Priests etc. Robert
Tate Mayor of London in the year 1488. when he deceased, 1501. was buried
there. This Chapel and College was suppressed and pulled down in the year
1548. the second of King Edward the sixth, the ground was employed as a garden
plot, during the reigns of King Edward, Queen Mary, and part of Queen
Elizabeth, till at length a large strong frame of timber and brick was set
thereon, and employed as a fair house of Merchants goods brought from the sea,
by Sir William VVinter etc. Monumentes in the parish Church of Alhallowes
Barking not defaced are these: Sir Thomas Studinham, of Norwich diocese Knight
1469. Thomas Gilbart Draper and Merchant of the Staple 1483. John Bolt merchant
of the Staple 1459. Sir John Style knight, Draper, 1500. William Thin
Esquire, one of the clearks in household to K. Henry the eight, 1546. Humfrey
Monmouth Draper, one of the Sheriffs, 1535. buried in the church yard
William Denham, one of the Shiriffes, 1534. Henry Howard Earl of Surrey
beheaded 1546. Lord Ferrers, Richard Brown Esquire, 1546. Phillip Dennis
Esquire 1556. Andrew Euenger Salter, William Robinson Mercer, Alderman, 1552.
William Armorer Clothworker Esquire, Governor of the Pages of honor, servant to
Henry the eight, Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary, buried 1560. Besides which
there be diverse Tombs without inscription. By the West end of this parrish
Church and Chapel, lies Sydon lane, Sidon lane.
from Tower street up North to Heart street. In this Sydon lane diverse fair
and large houses are builded, namely one by Sir John Allen, sometime Mayor of
London, and of counsel unto King Henry the eight: Sir Frauncis Walsingham
Knight principal Secretary to the Queens Majesty that now is, was lodged
there, and so was the Earl of Essex, etc. At the North West corner of this
lane, stands a proper parrish Church of S. Olaue, which Church together with
some howses adjoining, and also with others over against it in Hartstreete, are
of the said Tower street ward. Monuments in this parish Church Parish church
of S. Olaue in Hartstreet.
of Saint Olaue be these: Rychard Cely, and Robart Cely, Felmongers, principal
builders and benefactors of this church: Dame Ioahan wife to Sir John Zouch
1439. John Clarentiaulx Herralde 1427. Thomas Sawle, Sir Richard Haddon Mercer,
Mayor 1512. Thomas Burnall Mercer 1548. Thomas Morley Gentleman 1566. Sir John
Radcliffe Knight 1568. And Dame Anne his wife, 1585. Chapone a Florentine
Gentleman 1582. Sir Hamond Vaughan Knight, George Stoddard Merchant. etc.

VVoodroffe lane Woodroffe lane.
toward the Tower is in this Parish. Then have ye out of Towerstreete, also
on the North side, one other lane, called Mart lane, Mart lane ^ a Mart kept
boute Blan^ Chapel.
which runs up toward the North, and is for the most part, of this
Towerstreete ward, which lane is about the third quarter thereof divided,
from Aldegate ward, by a chain to be drawn, twhart the said lane, above
thewest end of Heart street, a third lane out of Towerstreete, on the North
side is called Mincheon Mincheon lane, Galley men dwelle^ there.
or Minion lane: this lane is all of the said ward, except the corner house
toward Fenchurch street. In this lane of old time, dwelled diverse Strangers
born of Genoa, and those parts, these were commonly called Gallie men, as men
that came up in the Galleys, brought up wines and other marchandizes which they
landed in Thames street, at a place called Galley key: they had a certain
coin of Silver amongst themselves which were half pence of Genoa, and were
called Gallye half pence: these half pence were forbidden in the thirtenth of
Henry the fourth, and again by Parliament in the third of Henry the fifth, by
the name of half pence of Genoa forbidden to pass as unlawful payment
amongst the English subjects. Notwithstanding in my youth, I have seen them
pass current, but with so me difficulty, for that the English halfepence were
then (though not so broad) somewhat thicker and stronger. There was at that
time also forbidden certain other coins called Seskaris, and Dodkins, with
all Scottish moneys.

The Clothworkers hall Clothwork hall.
is in this lane: Then at the west end of Towerstreete have ye a little
turning toward the North to a fair house sometime belonging to one named
Grista, for he dwelled there in the year 1449. And Jack Cade captain of the
rebels in Kent, being by him, in this his house feasted, when he had dined
(like an unkind guest) robbed him of all that was there to be found worth the
carriage. Gristes hot^
Next to this is one other fair house, sometime builded by Angel Dune Grocer,
since possessed by Sir John Champneis John Cha^^neis Alderman blinde^
Alderman and Mayor of London, he builded in this house an high Tower of
Brick, the first that ever I heard of in any private man's house to ouerlooke
his neighbors in this city. But this delight of his ey was punished with
blindness, some years before his death, since that time Sir Perceual Heart
knight, a Jolly courtier and knight harbenger to the Queen, was lodged there
etc. From this house somewhat West is the parish church and Parsonage house of
S. Margarets Pattentes, to the which church and house on the North side, and as
far over against on the south stretches the farthest west part of this ward.
And therefore to begin again at the East end of Towerstreete, on the south
side, have ye Bear lane, Bear lane^ Sporiar lane, or Water lane or Heart lane.
Bakers hall. Harp lane.
wherein are many fair houses, and runs down to Thames street: The next
is Sporiar lane, of old time so called, but since, and of later time named
Water lane, because it runs down to the Water gate, by the Custom house in
Thames street: then is there Heart lane, or Harp lane which likewise runs
down into Thames street. In this Heart lane is the Bakers hal, sometime the
dwelling house of Chichley Camberlaine of London, who was Brother to Chichley
the Archbishop: he had 24. children. Sir Thomas Kirriell of Kent, after that
he had been long Prisoner in France, married Elizabeth one of the daughters
of this Chichley, by whom he had this Chichleis house. This Elizabeth was
secondly married to Sir Ralfe Ashton, knight Marshall: and thirdly to Sir John
Burchier, uncle to the late Burchier, Earl of Essex, but she never had
child. Edward Poininges made part with Burchier, and Elizabeth to have
Ostenhanger in Kent, after their death, and entered into it, they living. In
Tower street between Heart lane and Church lane, was a Quadrante ^alley Row
church lane ^y East.
called Galley Row, because Galley men dwelled there. Then have ye two lanes
out of Towerstreete, both called Church lanes church lane ^^ the west.
because one runs down by the east end of S. Dunstones church and the other
by the west end of the same: out of the west lane, turns an other lane, west
toward S. Marie hill, and is called Foul lane, ^owle lane.
which is for the most part of Towerstreete ward. This Church of S, Dunstone
is called in the East, for difference from one other of the same name in the
west: it is a fair and large Church of an ancient building, and within a large
Church yard, ^rish church ^S. Dunstone ^he east.
it has a great parish of many rich Marchantes and other occupiers of diverse
Trades, namely Saltars and Ironmongers.

The monumentes in that Church be these. In the Quire John Kenington Parson
there buried, 1374. William Islip, Parson, 1382. John Kryoll Esquire, brother
to Thomas Kryol, 1400. Nicholas Bond, Thomas Barry Merchant, 1445. Robert
Shelly Esquier, 1420. Robert Pepper Grocer, 1445. John Norwich Grocer. 1390.
Alice Brom, wife to John Couentry sometime Mayor of London. 1433. William
Isaac Draper Alderman, 1508. Edward Skales Merchant, 1521. John Ricroft
Esquire, Sargiant of the Larder, to Henry the seventh, and Henry the eight,
1532. Edwatars Esquier Sargeant at Arms, 1558. Sir Bartilmew James Draper
Mayor, 1479. buried under a fair Monument, with his Lady. Ralph Greenway
Grocer, Alderman, put under the stone of Robert Peppar 1559. Thomas Bledlow one
of the Shiriffes. 1472. James Bacon Fishmonger Shiriffe, 1573. Sir Richard
Champion Draper Mayor, 1568. Henry Herdson Skinner Alderman. 1555. Sir James
Garnado Knight, William Hariote Draper Mayor. 1481. buried in a fair Chapel
by him builded, 1517. John Tate son to Sir John Tate, in the same Chapel,
in the north wall, Sir Christopher Draper Ironmonger Mayor, 1566. buried 1580.
and many other worshipful Personages besides, whose monumentes are altogether
defaced. Now for the two church lanes, they meeting on the south side of this
Church and Churchyard, do join in one: and running down to the Thames
street: the same is called S. Dunstans hill, at the lower end whereof the
said Thames street, toward the west on both sides almost to Belins gate, but
toward the east up to the water gate, by the Bulwark of the Tower, is all of
Towerstreete ward. In this street on the Thames side are diverse large landing
places, called wharffes, or keys, for Cranage up of wares and marchandizes, as
also for shipping of wares from thence to be transported. These wharffes and
keys commonly bear the names of their owners, and are therefore changeable. I
read in the 26. of Henry the first that in the parish of S. Dunstone in the
East a Tenement called Passekes Passekes Wharfe and Hornars Key.
wharffe and an other called Horners key in Thames street, were granted to
William Haringdon Esquire. I read also that in the sixth of Richard the
second John Churchman Grocer, for the quiet of Marchantes, did newly build a
certain house upon the key, called Wool wharfe, in the Towerstreete ward, in
the Parish of Alhallowes, Barking, betwixt the Tenement of Paul Salisberry on
the east part, and the lane called the water gate on the west, Whole wharfe by
Custom key.
to serve for Troynage, or weighing of wooles in the Port of London: Water gate
by Wolle key.
Whereupon the king granted that during the life of the said John, the
aforesaid Troynage should be held and kept in the said house, Custom house.
with easementes there, for the balances and waightes, and a counting place,
for the Customer, Controwlers, Clerks, and other Officers of the said
Troynage together with ingresse and egresse to and from the same, even as was
had in other places, where the said Troynage was wont to be kept, Tronage of
wels.
and that the king should pay yearly to the said John, during his life xl.^.
at the terms of S. Michaell and Easter, by even portions by the hands of his
Customer without any other payment to the said John, Custom house.
as in the Indenture thereof more at large appears.

Near unto this Customers key toward the East, is the said watergate, and
west^ from it Porters key, Portars key or Portars lane Galley key.
then Galley key, where the Galleys were used to unlade, and land their
marchandizes and wares: and that part of Thames street, was therefore of some
called Galley Row, but more commonly Petty Wales. Pety Wales.


On the North side, as well as on the South of this Thames street is many
fair houses large for stowage, builded for Marchantes, but toward the east
end thereof, namely over against Galley key, Woole key, and the custom house,
there have been, of old time some large buildings of stone, the ruins where of
do yet remain, but the first builders and owners of them are worn out of
memory, wherefore the common people affirm Julius Caesar Julius Cesars house
by the Tower as was said.
to be the builder thereof, as also of the Tower it self. But thereof I have
spoken already. Some are of an other opinion, and that a more likely, that
this great stone building was sometime the lodging appointed for the Princes of
Wales, Princes of Wales their lodging.
when they repaired to this city, and that therefore the street in that
part, is called Pety Wales, which name remains there most commonly until
this day: even as where the kings of Scotland were used to be lodged betwixt
Charing cross and white hall, it is likewise called Scotland: and where the
Earls of Briton, were lodged without Aldersgate, the street is called
Britain street, etc.

The said building might of old time pertain to the Princes of Wales as is
aforesaid, but is since turned to other use.

It is before noted of Galley key that the Galleys of Italy, and other parts
did there discharge their wines and marchandizes The Marchantes of Italy their
lodging by their Galleys.
brought to this City. It is like therefore that the Merchants and Owners
procured the place to build upon for their lodgings and storehouses, as the
Marchantes of the Haunce of Almayne, were licensed to have an house called,
Gilda T^utonicorum the Guild hall of the Germans. Also the Marchantes of
Burd^aux were licensed to build at the Uintry, strongly with stone, as may
be yet seen and seems old, though often repaired: much more cause has
these building in Pety Wales (though as lately builded, and partly of the like
stone, brought from Cane in No^mandie,) to seem old which for many years (to
wit since the Galleys No Galleys landed here in memory of men living.
left their course of landing there) has fallen to ruin and been letten out,
for stabling of horses, to Tiplers of Beer, and such like amongst others, one
mother Mampudding (as they termed her) for many years kept this house (or a
great part thereof) for victualing, and it seems that the builders of the
hall of this house were shipwrightes, A strange kind of building by
Shipwrightes or Gally men
and not house Carpenters: for the frame thereof (being but low) is raised of
certain principal all posts of maine timber, fixed deep in the ground,
without any groundsell boorded close round about, on the inside, having none
other wall from the ground to the roof, those Boordes not exceeding the length
of a Clapboorde, about an inch thick, every boorde ledging over other, as in
a Ship or Gallie nailed with ship nails, called rugh, and clenches, to wit
rugh nails with broad round heads, and clenched on the other side with square
plates of iron, the roof of this hall is also wrought of the like boorde and
nailed with rugh and clench, and seems as it were a Galley, the kecle turned
vpwardes, and I observed that no worm or rottennes is seen to have enterred,
either boorde or timber, and therefore (in mine opinion) of no great antiquity,
but I leave every man to his own judgment, and pass to other matters.

I read in the 44. of Edward the third, that an Hospital An Hospital for
Lunatike or frenzy people.
in the parish of Barking Church was founded there by Robert Dento^ Chaplen,
for the suffentation of poor Priests, and other both men and women, that were
sick, of the Frenzy, there to remain till they were perfectly whole, and
restored to good memory. Also I read that in the 6. of Henry the fifth, there
was in the Tower ward, a Message or great house, called Cobhams Inn, Cobhams
Inne^
and in the 37. of Henry the sixth, a Message in Thames street pertaining to
Richard Longuile etc. Some of the ruins before spoken of, may seem to be of
the foresaid Hospital, belonging peradventure to some Prior Alien, and so
suppressed amongst the rest, in the reign of Edward the third, or Henry the
fifth, who suppressed them all. Thus much for the bounds and antiquities of
this ward, wherein is noted the Tower of London, three parrish Churches, the
Custom house, and two Hals of Companies, to wit, the Clothworkers and the
Bakers. This ward has an Alderman his Deputy, common Counselors eight,
Constables thirteen, Scauengers twelve, Wardmote men thirteen, and a Beadle:
it is taxed to the fifteen at 46.^. and accounted in the Exchequer at 45.^.
10.^.

Ealdgate ward.
THe second ward within the wall on the east part is called Ealdgate ward,
Ealdgate ward
as taking name of the said gate, the principal street of this ward
begineth at Ealdgate, stretching west to sometime a fair wall, where now a
pumpe is placed: from thence the way being divided into twain, the first and
principal street, called Ealdgate street, runs on the Southside, to
Limestreete corner, and half that street down on the left hand, is also of
that ward. In the mid way on that South side, betwixt Ealdgate and
Lymestreete, is Heart horn alley, Heart horn Alley.
a way that goes through into Fenchurch street over against Northumberlande
house. Then have ye the Bricklayers hall, Bricklayers hall.
and an other Alley called sprinckle alley, Sprinckle Alley.
of an holy water Sprinkle sometime hanging there, now named Sugar loaf Alley
of the like sign. Then is there a fair, house: with diverse Tenements near
adjoining, sometime belonging to a late dissolved Priorie since possessed by
Mistress Cornewallies, widow and her heirs, by the gift of king Henry the 8.
in reward of fine puddings (as it was commonly said) by her made, where with
she had presented him. Such was the princely liberality of those times. Of
later time, Sir Nicholas Throgmorto^ knight, was lodged there. Then somewhat
more west, is Belzetars lane, Bilzettars lan^
so called of the first builder and owner thereof, now corruptly called Billita
lane, betwixt this Belzettars lane, and Lymestreete, was of later time a frame
of three fair houses set up in the year 1590. in place where, before was a
large garden plot, enclosed from the high street, with a Brick wall, which
wall being taken down, and the ground dug deep for Cellerage, there was
found right under the said Brick wall an other wall of stone, Wall, gate and
window of stone, found under ground.
with a gate Arched with stone and gates of Timber, to be closed in the midst
toward the street, the timber of the Gates was consumed, but the Hinges of
iron still remained on their staples on both the sides. Moreover in that wall
were square windows with bars of iron, on either side the gate, this wall was
under ground about two fathomes deep, as I then esteemed it, and seems to
be the ruins of some house burned in the reign of king Stephen, when the fire
began in the house of one Aelward near London stone, and consumed east to
Ealdgate, whereby it appears how greatly the ground of this City, has been
in that place raised. On the north side: this principal street stretches to
the west corner of S. Andrews Church, and then the ward turns toward the
North by S. Mary street, S. Mary stree^^^
on the east side to S. Augustines Church in the wall, and so by Buries marks
again, or about by the wall to Ealdgate. The second way from Ealdgate, more
toward the south from the Pumpe aforesaid is called Fenchurch street, and
is of Ealdgate ward till ye come to Culuar Alley, Culuar Alley
on the west side of Ironmongers hall where sometime was a lane which went out
of Fenchurchstreete to the midst of Limestreete, but this lane was stopped up,
for suspicion of thieves that lurked there by night. Again to Aldgate out of
the principal street even by the gate and wall of the City, runs a lane
south to the Tower hill, and out of this lane west, a street called Heart
street, Heart street.
which of that ward stretches to Sydon lane by S. Olaues Church. One other
lane more west from Ealdgate goes by Northumberland house toward the Crossed
Friars: then have ye on the same side the Northend of Martlane, and Blanch
Chappleton where that ward ends.

Thus much for the bounds: now for monuments, or places most ancient and
notable: I am first to begin with the late dissolved Priorie of the Holy
Trinity called Christ's Church, on the right hand within Ealdgate. This
Priorie was founded by Matilde the Queen, wife to Henry the first, in the same
place where Siredus sometime began to erect a Church in honor of the Cross,
and of S. Marie Magdalen, of which the Deane and Chapter of Waltham were wont
to receive 30.^. The Queen was to acquit her Church thereof, and in Exchange
gave unto them a mill. King Henry her husband confirmed her gift: This Church
was given to Norman, the first Cannon regular in all England. Priorie of the
Trinity of Canons regular.
The said Queen also gave unto the same Church and those that served God
therein the port of Ealdgate, and the Soke thereunto belonging, with all customs
so free as she had held the same, and 25.^, Blanks, which she had of the City
of Excester: as appears by her deed, wherein she names the house Christ's
Church, and reports Aldegate to be of her demaines, which she grants with
2. parts of the rent of the city of Excester. Norman took upon him to be
Prior of Christ's Church, in the year of Christ 1108 in the Parishes of S.
Marie Magdalen, S. Michael. S. Katherine, and the Blessed Trinity, which now
was made but one Parish of the Holy Trinity, and was in old time of the Holy
Cross, or Holy Roode Parish. The Priorie was builded on a piece of ground in
the Parish of S. Katherine, toward Ealdgate, which lies in length betwixt the
Kings street, by the which men go toward Ealdgate: near to the Chapel of
S. Michaell toward the North, and conteyneth in length 83. else half quarter
and quartern of the kings Iron eln, and lies in breadth etc. the Soke and ward
of Ealdgate, was then bounded as I have before showed, the Queen was a mean
also that ye land and English Knighten Guild, was given unto the Prior Norman
the honorable man Geffery de Glinton was a great helper therein and obtained
that the Canons might enclose the way betwixt their church and the wall of the
city etc. Prior of Christ church an Alderman of London.
This Priorie in process of time became a very fair and large church, rich in
lands and ornaments and passed all the Priories in the city of London or shire
of Middlesex, the Prior whereof was an Alderman of London, to wit, of Portsoken
ward. I read that Eustacius the 8. Prior, about the year 1264. because he
would not deal with temporal matters instituted Theobald Fitz Iuonis Alderman
of Portsoken Ward under him. And that William Rising, Prior of Christ's Church
was sworn Alderman of the said Portsoken Ward, in the first of Richard the
second. These Priors have fitten and ridden amongst the Aldermen of London, in
livery like unto them, saving that his habit was in shape of a spiritual
person as I my self have seen in my childhood: at which time the Prior kept a
most bountiful house of meat and drink both for rich and poor, as well
within the house as at the gates, to all comers according to their estates.
These be the monumentes in this church, Sir Robert Turk, and Dame Alice his
wife, John Tirell Esquire, Simon Kempe Esquire, James Manthorpe Esquire, John
Ascue Esquire, Thomas Fauset of Scalset Esquire, John Kempe gentleman, Robert
Chirwide Esquire, Sir John Heningham and Dame Isabel his wife, Dame Agnes wife
first to Sir William Bardolpe, and then to Sir Thomas Mortimer, John Ashfield
Esquire. Sir John Dedham Knight. Sir Ambrose Charcam, John wife to Thomas Nuck
Gent. John Husse Esquire, John Beringham Esquire, Thomas Goodwine Esquire, Raph
Walls Esquire, Dame Margaret daughter to Sir Raph Cheuie, wife to Sir John
Barkely, to Sir T. Barnes, and to Sir W. Bursire, William Roose, Simon
Frauncis, John Breton Esquire, Helling Esquire, John Malwen, and his wife,
Anthony Wells, son to John Wells, Nicholas de Auesey and Margery his wife,
Anthony son to John Milles, Henry Fitzalwine Mayor of London 1213. Baldwine
son to king Stephen, and Mathilde daughter to king Stephen, wife to the Earl
of Millen, and many other. But to conclude my speech of this Priorie, Priorie
of the holy Triniti^ surrendered ^ surppessed.
king Henry the eight minding to reward Sir Thomas Audley speaker of the
Parliament, against Cardinal Wolsey (as ye may read in Hall) sent for the
Prior commending him for his hospitality, promised him (as a man worthy of a
far greater dignity, (which promise surely he performed, and compounded with
him (though in what sort I never heard) so that the Prior surrendered all that
Priory with the apurtenances to the king, in the month of July, in the year
1531. the 23. of the said Kings reign. The Canons were sent to other houses
of the same order, and the Priory with the apurtenances King Henry gave unto
Sir Thomas Audley newly knighted, and after made Lord Chauncelor. This Sir
Thomas Audeley offered the great Church of this Priorie, with a ring of nine
bells well tuned (whereof four the greatest are now at Stebunhith, and the five
lesser at S. Stephens in Colemans street) to the parishioners of Saint
Katherine Christ church, in exchange for their small parrish Church, minding
to have pulled it down, and to have builded there toward to street: But the
parishioners having doubts in their heads of afterclappes, refused the offer.
Then was the Priorie Church and steeple, proffered to whomsoever that would
take it down, and carry it from the ground, but no man would undertake the
offer, whereupon Sir Thomas Audley was feign to be at more charges to take it
down, then could be made of the stone, timber, lead, iron etc. For the
workmen with great labor beginning at the top, loased stone from stone, and
threw them down, whereby the most part of them were broken, and few remained
whole, and those were sold very cheap, for all buildinges then made, were of
brick and timber. At that time any man in the City, might have a carte load
of hard stone for pa^ing brought to his door for vj.^.or vij.^.with the
carriage. The said Thomas Lord Audley builded and dwelt on this Priorie during
his life, and died there in the year 1544. since the which time the said
Priory came by marriage of the Lord Audleyes daughter and heir unto Thomas
late Duke of Norfolk, and was then called the Dukes place. The Dukes place.
The parish Church of S. Katherine Parish church of S. Katherin Christ's church
stands in the Cemitory of the late dissolved Priorie of the holy Trinity,
and is therefore called S. Katherine Christ Church. This Church seems to be
a very old thing, since the building whereof the high street has been so
often raised by pauementes, that now men are feign to descend into the said
Church by diverse steps. But the steeple, or Bell Tower thereof has been
lately builded, to wit, about the year 1504. for Sir John Perciuall Merchant
Tailor then deceasing gave money toward the building thereof. There be the
Monuments of Sir Thomas Fleming Knight of Rowalles, in Essex, and Margaret his
wife 1464. Roger Marshall Esquire, Jane Horn, wife to Roger Marshall, William
Multon, alias Burdiaux Herralde, John Goade Esquire and Joan his wife, Beatrix
daughter to William Brown, Thomas Multon Esquire, son to Bordeaux Herralde,
John Chitcroft Esquire, John Wakefielde Esquire, William Criswicke, Anne, and
Sewch daughters to Raph Shirley Esquire, Sir John Rainstorth knight of Essex,
Sir Nicholas Throkmorton chief Butler of England, one of the Chamberlaynes of
the Exchequer, Ambassador etc. 1570. and other. At the North west corner of
this Ward in the said high street, stands the fair and beautiful parrish
Church of S. Andrew Parish church of S. Andrew Undershaft.
the Apostle, with an addition (to be known from other Churches of that name)
of the Knape or undershaft, and so called S. Andrew Undershaft because that of
old time, every year on May day in the morning it was used, that an high or
long shaft (or May pole) was set up there, in the midst of the street before
the south door of the said Church, which shaft when it was set on end, and
fixed in the ground, was higher then the Church steeple. Geffrey Chawcer,
writing of a vain boaster, has these words, meaning of the said shaft. A
shaft or May pole higher then the church steeple


Right well aloft and high ye bear your head,
The weather cock with flying, as ye would kill, Chaucer chance of dice.

When ye be stuffed bet of wine, then bread
Then look ye when your womb does fill,
As ye would bear the great shaft of Cornehill,
Lord so merrily crowdeth then your croke
That all the street may hear your body cloak.
This shaft was not raised at any time since evil May day, (so called of an
insurrection made by Prentises, and other young persons against Aliens in the
year 1517) but the said shaft was laid along over the doors and under the
pentises of one row of houses, and Alley gate, called of the shaft, shaft
Alley, (being of the possessions of Rochester bridge) in the Ward of
Limestreete. It was there I say hanged on Iron hooks many years, till the
third of king Edward the sixth, that one Sir Stephen, curat of S. Katherine
Christ's Church, preaching at Paul's cross, said there, that this shaft was
made an Idol (by naming the church of S. Andrew, with the addition of under
that shaft: Shaft or May pole preached against, at Paul's cross.
he persuaded therefore that the names of churches might be altered: also that
the names of days in the week might be changed, the fish days to be kept
any days, except friday and saturday, and the Lent any time, save only
betwixt Shrouetide and Easter: I heard his sermon, and saw the effect that
followed: for in the afternoon of that present sunday, the neighbors and
tenants to the said Bridge, over whose doors the said shaft had lain (after
they had well dined to make themselves strong) gathered more help, and with
great labor raising the shaft from the hooks whereon it had rested two and
thirty years, they sawed it in pieces, Shaft or May pole sawed in pieces and
burnt.
every man taking for his share so much as had layne over his door and stall,
the length of his house, and they of the Alley divided amongst them so much as
had layne over their Alley gate. Thus was this Idol (as he poor man termed
it) mangled and after burned.

Soon after was there a commotion of the Commons in Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex,
and other shires, by means whereof straight orders being taken for the
suppression of rumors) diverse persons were apprehended and executed by the
martial Law, amongst the which the Baylife of Romford Bayliefe of Romford
executed within Aldegate for words spoken to the priest of the parish.
in Essex was one, a man very well beloved: he was early in the morning of
Mary Magdalens day (then kept holy day) brought by the Sheriffs of London and
the Knight Marshall, to the Well within Ealdgate there to be executed upon a
Iebit set up that morning, where being on the ladder, he had words to this
effect: Good people I am come hither to die, but know not for what offense,
except for words by ^e spoken yester night to Sir Stephen, Curate and Preacher
of this parish, which were these: He asked me what news in the country, I
answered heavy news: why quod he? it is said (quoth I) that many men be up
in Essex, but thanks be to God all is in good quier about us: and this was all
as God be my Judge, etc. upon these words of the prisoner, Sir Stephen to
avoid the reproach of the people, left the City, and was never heard of ^^nce
to my knowledge. I heard the words of the prisoner, for he was executed upon
the pauement of my door, where I then kept house: Thus much by digression, now
again to the parish church of S. Andrew Undershaft Parish church of S. Andrew
Undershaft new builded.
(for it still retains y^ name) which has been new builded by the
parishioners there, since the year 1520. every man putting to his helping
hande^ some with their purses, other with their bodies: Stephen Genings
merchant Tailor, sometime Mayor of London, caused at his charges to be builded
the one half, to wit, the whole North side of the great middle I Will, both of
the body and quire, as appears by his arms over every pillar graven, and
also the North I Will, which he also roofed with timber, and seeled, also the
whole South side of the church was glased, and the Pewes in the south chapel
made of his costs as appears in every window, and upon the said pewes. He
deceased in the year 1524. and was buried in the Gray Friars church. John
Kerkbie Merchant Tailor sometime one of the Sheriffs, John Garlande Merchant
Tailor and Nicholas Leuison mercer, executor to Garland, were great benefactors
to this work: which was finished to the glasing in the year 1529. and fully
finished 1532. The monuments of the dead buried in this church are these:
Phillip Malpas one of the Sheriffs in the year 1439. was buried in the old
church: this man gave by his testament to the poor prisoners 125. pound: to
other poor, every year for five years together four hundred shirtes and
smockes, an hundred and fifty gowns, and forty pair of sheets, to poor
maids marriages an hundred marks, to high ways an hundred marks, and to five
hundred poor people in London every one si^e shillinges eight pence, besides
twenty marks the year to a graduate, to preach abroad in the countries:
twenty shillings the year, for twenty years to the preachers at the
Spittle, the three Easter holy days. Sir Robert Dennie Knight, and after him
Thomas Dennie his son in the year 1421. Thomas Stokes Gentleman, Grocer,
1496. In the new church John Michell Merchant Tailor, 1537. William Draper
Esquire 1537. Isabel and Margaret his wives, Nicholas Leuison Mercer, one of
the Sheriffs 1534. John Gerrarde Woolman Merchant of the Stayle 1546. Henry
Man Doctor of divinity, Bishop of Man, 1550. Stephen Kyrton merchant Tailor
Alderman 1553. David VVoodroffe Ha^^rdasher, one of the Sheriffs 1554. Sir
Thomas Ofley Merchant Tailor, Mayor, 1556. Thomas Starkey Skinner, one of the
Sheriffs 1578. Hugh Ofley Leatherseller one of the Sheriffs. 1588.

Now down S. Mary street S. Mary street
by the West end of the church toward the North, stand diverse fair houses
for Marchantes, and other: namely one fair great house, builded by Sir William
Pickering Pickering house.
the father, possessed by Sir William his son, and since by Sir Edward
Wootton of Kent. North from this place is the Fletchers Hall, Fletchers hall
and so down to the corner of that street, over against London wall, and
again Eastwards, to a fair house lately builded, by M. Beale one of the
Clearkes of the Counsel.

Then come you to the Pappey, a proper house, wherein sometime was kept a
Fraternity, or brotherhood of S. Charity, and S. John Evangelist, called the
Papey, Pappey a brotherhood or Hospital for poor priests.
for poor impotent Priests, (for in some language Priests are called Papes)
founded in the year 1430. by William Oliver, William Barnabie, and John
Stafford Chaplens, or Chauntrie Priests in London, for a Master, two Wardens,
etc. Chaplens, Chauntery Priests, conducts, and other brethren, and sisters,
that should be admitted into the Church of S. Augustine Papey in the Wall, the
brethren of this house becoming lame, or otherwise into great poverty, were
here relieved, as to have chamber, with certain allowance of bread, drink,
and cole, and one old man and his wife to see them served, and to keep the
house clean. This brotherhood amongst others was suppressed in the reign of
Edward the sixth, since the which time in this house has been lodged M. Moris
of Essex, Sir Frauncis Walsingham principal Secretary to her Majesty,
Master Barret of Essex etc.

Then next is one great house large of rooms, fair courts and garden plottes,
sometimes pertaining to the Bassets, since that to the Abbots of Bury The Abbot
of Bery his Inn, Beuis Marks.
in Suffolk, and therefore called Buries Marks, (corruptly Beuis Marks) and
since the dissolution of the Abbey of Bury to Sir Thomas Henage the father and
the son. Then next unto it is the before spoken Priorie of the holy Trinity
to wit, the West and North part thereof, which stretches up to Ealdgate where
we first begun. Now again in the second way from Ealdgate more toward the
south from the Well or Pumpe aforesaid, lies Fenne Church street, Fenne
church street.
on the right hand whereof somewhat west from the south end of Belzetters lane,
is the Iro^mongers hall: Iremongers hall.
which company was incorporated in the third of Edward the fourth. Richard
Fleming was their first master, Nicholas Marshall and Richard Cox were Custos
or Wardens. And on the left hand or south side, even by the gate and wall of
the city runs down a lane to the Tower hill, A lane by the wall to the
Tower hill.
and out of this lane toward the west, a street called Heart street. In this
street, at the southeast corner thereof sometime sto^de one house of Crouched
(or crossed) Friars, Crossed Friars Church.
founded by Raph Hosiar) and William Sabernes, about the year 1298. Stephen
the 10, Prior of the holy Trinity in London, granted 3. tenements for
xiij.^.viij.^. by the year, unto the said Raph Hosiar, and William Sabernes,
who aftrerwards became Friars of S. Cross. Adam was the first Prior of that
house. These Friars founded their house in place of certain tenements
purchased of Richard VVimbush the 12. Prior of the holy Trinity in the year
1319. which was confirmed by Edward the 3. the 17. of his reign, valued at two
and fifty pound, thirteen shillings, four pence, surrendered the 12. of
November the 30. of Henry the eight. In this house was buried Master John
Tirres, Nicholas the son of William Ky^iel Esquire, Sir Thomas Mellington
Baron of Wemese, and Dame Elizabeth his wife, daughter and heir of William
Botelar Baron of Women, Robert Mellington esquire, and Elizabeth his wife,
daughter to Ferreis of Ousley, Henry Louell, son to William Lord Louell, Dame
Isabell wife to William Edward, Mayor of London 1471. William Narborough, and
Dame Elizabeth his wife, William Narbrough, and Dame Beatrix his wife, William
Brosked esquire, William Bows, Lyonel Mollington esquire, son of Robert
Mollington, Nicholas Couderow and Elizabeth his wife. Sir John Stratford
Knight, Sir Thomas Asseldy, Knight Clearke of the crown, Submarshall of
England, and Justice of the shire of Middlesex, John Rest Grocer Mayor of
London 1516. Sir John Skeuington Knight, Merchant Tailor, Sheriff 1520. Sir
John Milborne Draper, Mayor in the year 1521. was buried there, but removed
since to S. Edmonds in Lombard street, etc.

In place of this church is now a carpenters yard, a Tennis court, and such
like: the Friars hall was made a glass house, The Glass house burned.
or house wherein was made glass of diverse sorts to drink in: which house in
the year 1575. on the 4. of September brast out into a terrible fire, where
being practiced all means possible to quench, not withstanding as ye same
house in a small time before, had consumed a great quantity of wood by making
of glasses, now it self having within it about 40000. Billets of wood was all
consumed to the stone walls, which nevertheless greatly hindered the fire from
spreading any further. Adjoining unto this Friars church, by the East end
thereof, in the lane toward the Tower hill, are certain proper alms houses,
Alms houses by crossed Friars.
14. in number, builded of Brick and timber, founded by Sir John Milborne
Draper, sometime Mayor 1521. wherein be placed xiij. aged poor men, and their
wives, if they have wives: these have their dwellings rent free, and
ij.^.iiij.^.the piece: the first day of every month for ever. One also is to
have his house over the gate, and iiij.^.every month etc. For the performance
whereof by the master and wardens of the Drapers in London, he assured unto
them and their successors 23. Messuages and tenements and 18. garden plottes in
the parish of S. Olaue in Heart street, with Prouiso, that if they perform not
these points above mentioned and others, the said tenementes and gardens to
remain to the Mayor and communalty of the City of London etc. Next to these
alms houses is the Lord Lumleyes house, Lord Lumleyes house.
builded in the time of Henry the eight, by Sir Thomas What the father, upon
one plot of ground of late pertaining to the foresaid Crossed Friars, where
part of their house stood: And this is the farthest part of Ealdgate ward,
toward the south, and joins to the Tower hill. The other side of that lane,
over against the Lord Lumleyes house, on the wall side of the City is now for
the most part (or altogether) builded even to Ealdgate.

Then have ye on the south side of Fen church street, over against the wall,
amongst other fair and large builded houses, one that sometime belonged to the
Prior of Monte Jove's, or monastery Cornute (a cell to Monte Jove's beyond the
seas) in Essex: it was the Priors Inn, when he repaired to this city. Prior
of Horn church in Essex.
Then a lane that leads down by Northumberland house, toward the crossed
Friars, as is before showed.

This Northumberland house Northumberland house.
in the parrish of S. Katherine Colman belonged to Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland in the three and thirty of Henry the sixth, but of late being
left by the Earls, the Gardens thereof were made into Bowling Alleyes, and
other parts into dycing houses, common to all comers for their money, there
to bowl and hasard, but now of late so many Bowling allies and other houses
for unlawful gaming, has been raised in other parts of the city and
suburbs, that this their ancient and only patron of misrule, is left and
forsaken of her Gamesters, and therefore turned into a number of great rented
small cottages, for strangers and other. At the west end of this Lane in the
way from Ealdgate toward the Crossed Friars, of old time were certain
Tenements called the poor Jury The poor Jury.
of Jews dwelling there. Next unto this Northumberland house is the parish
Church of S. Katheren called Coleman, Parish church of S. Katherin Coleman.
which addition of Coleman, was taken of a great Haw yard or garden, of old
time called Coleman haw, in the parish of the Trinity, now called Christ's
Church, and in the Parish of S. Katherine, and All Saints called Coleman
Church. Then have ye the Blanch Chapleton, whereof I read in the thirteenth of
Edward the first, that a lane behind the same Blanch Chapleton, Manor of
Blanch Chappleton.
was granted by the King to be enclosed and shut up. This Blanch Chapleton was
a manor belonging to Sir Thomas Roes of Hamelake knight, the seventh of
Richard the second, standing at the Northeast corner of Mart lane, which was
so called of a Privilege sometime enjoyed, so keep a Mart there, now long
time since discontinued, and therefore forgotten, so as nothing remains for
memory, but the name of Mart lane, Mart lane.
and that corruptly termed Mark lane. I read that in the third of Edward
the fourth, all Basket makers, Wiar Drawers, and other Forreyners, were
permitted to have shops, in this manner of Blanch Cappleton, Basketmakers at
Blanch Chapleton.
and not else where within this city or suburbs thereof: and this also being
the farthest west part of this ward, on that southside I leave it. Which has
one Alderman, his Deputy, common counsaylors six, Constables six, Schauengers
9. Wardmote men for inquest eightteene, and a Bedle. It is taxed to the
Fifeteene in London, at 46.^. and accounted in the Exchequer to 45.^. 10.^.

Lymestreete ward.
THe next is Lymestreete ward, Lymestreete ward.
and takes the name Lymestreete, Lymestreete.
of making or selling of Lyme there, (as is supposed,) the East side of this
Lymestreete, from the North corner thereof to the midst is of Ealdgate ward,
as is aforesaid: the west side, for the most part from the said North
corner, southward, is of this Lymestreete ward: the southende on both sides is
of Langborne ward: the body of this Lymestreete ward, is of the high street
called Cornhill street, High street of Cornhill.
which stretches from Limestreete on the south side, to the west corner of
Leaden hall: and on the North side from the southwest corner of S. Marie
street, to an other corner over against Leaden hall.

Now for S. Marie street, the west side thereof is of this Limestreete ward,
and also the street which runs by the Northende of this S. Marie street,
on both sides, from thence west to an house called the Wrestlers (a sign so
called) almost to Bishopsgate. And these are the bounds of this small ward.

Monuments or places notable in this ward be these: In Lymestreet are diverse
fair houses, for Merchants and others, there was sometime a mansion house of
the kings, called the kings Artirce An house in Lymestreete called the kings
Artirce.
whereof I find record in the 14. of Edward the first, but now grown out of
knowledge. I read also of an other great house in the westside of
Lymestreete, having a Chapel on the south, and a garden on the west, then
belonging to the Lord Neuell, (which Garden is now called the Green yard of
the Leaden hal. This house in the ninth of Richard the second, pertayned to Sir
Simon Burley, and Sir John Burley, his brother, and of late the faide house was
taken down, and the forefront thereof new builded of timber by Hugh Offley
Alderman. At the North west corner of Lymestreete was of old time one great
Message called Benbriges Inn, Benbriges Inn.
Ralph Hollend Draper, about the year 1452. gave it to John Gill, master, and
to the Wardens and Fraternity of Tailors and Linen Armorers of S. John
Baptill, in London, and to their successors for ever. They did set up in place
thereof a fair large frame of timber, containing in the high street one great
house, and before it to the corner of Limestreete, three other Tenementes, the
corner house being the largest, and then down Limestreete diverse proper
Tenementes. Al which the Merchant Tailors in the reign of Edward the sixth
sold to Stephen Kirton Marchantaylor, and Alderman: this worshipful man, and
the Gentlewoman his widow after him, kept those houses in good reparations,
never put out one Tennant, took no fines, nor raised Rents of them, which was
x.^.the piece yearly: But whether that favor did ouerliue her funeral, the
Tenantes now can best declare.

Next unto this on the high street, was the Lord Souches Message Message of
the Lord Souch.
or Tenement and other. In place whereof Richard VVhethill, Merchant Tailor
builded a fair house, with an high Tower, the second in number, and first of
timber, that ever I learned to have been builded to ouerlooke neighbors in
this city.

This Richard then a young man became in short time so tormented with Goutes
in his joints, of the hands and legs, that he could neither feed himself,
nor go farther then he was led, much less, was he able to clime, and take
the pleasure of the height of his Tower. Then is there an other fair house,
builded by Stephen Kyiton Alderman, Alderman Lee does now possess it.

Then is there a fair house of old time called the Green gate, Patent.
by which name one Mighel Pistoy Lumbard held it, with a tenement and 9. shops,
in the reign of Richard the second, who in the ^5. of his reign gave it to
Roger Crophull, and Thomas Bromeflet, Esquiers, by the name of the Green gate,
Message called the Green gate.
in the parish of S, Andrew upon Cornhill, in Lymestreete ward: since the which
time Philip Malpas, philip Malpa^ robbed.
sometime Alderman, and one of the Shiriffes dwelled therein, and was there
robbed, and spoiled of his goods to a great value, by Jack Cade and other
Rebels in the year 1449.

Afterwades in the reign of Henry the seventh, it was seized into the kings
hands, and then granted, first unto John Alston, after that to William de la
Riuars, and since by Henry the eight, to John Mutas (a Picarde) or Frenchman,
who dwelled there, and harbored in his house, many Frenchmen, that kalendred
wolstedes, and did other things contrary to the Franchises of the Citizens:
wherefore on evil May day, which was in the year 1517. the Prentizes and
other spoiled his house: and if they could have found Mutas, Mutas^ house
robbed.
they would have stricken off his head. Sir Peter Mutas a serviceable Gentleman,
son to the said John Mutas, sold this house to David Wodrofte Alderman,
whose son Sir Nicholas Wodroffe Alderman, sold it over to John Moore
Alderman, that now possesses it.

Next is a house called the Leaden Portch Leaden Portch.
lately divided into two Tenementes, whereof one is a Tavern, and then one
other house for a Marchante, likewise called, the Leaden Portch: but now turned
to a Cooks house, next is a fair house and a large, wherein diverse
Maioralities have been kept, whereof twain in my remembrance: to wit Sir
William Bowiar, and Sir Henry Huberthorne.

The next is Leaden Hall, Leaden hall.
of which I read, that in the year 1309. it belonged to Sir Hugh Neuill
knight, and that the Lady Alice his widow, made a Feofment thereof, by the
name of Leaden hall, with the aduowsons of the Church of S. Peter upon
Cornhill, and other churches, to Richard Earl of Arundel and Surrey, 1362.
More in the year 1380. Alice Neuill, widow to Sir John Neuill knight of Essex,
confirmed to Thomas Cogshal, and others the said Manor of Leaden hal, ye
aduowsions etc. In the year 1384. Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereforde, had
the said Manor. And in the year 1408. Robert Rikeden of Essex, and Margaret
his wife confirmed to Richard Whitington and other citizens of London, the
said Manor of Leaden hall, with the Appurtenances, the aduowsions of S.
Peter's Church, S. Margarets Pattens, etc, And in the year 1411 the said
Whitington and other confirmed the same to the Mayor and Comminaltie of London,
whereby it came to the possession of the City. Then in the year 1443. the 21.
of Henry the sixth, License to take up lead to the building up of common
Granarie.
John Ha^herley Mayor, purchased license of the said king to take up 200.
fodar of lead, for the building of water conduites, a common Granary, and the
Cross in west Cheap, more richly for honor of the City. In the year next
following the Parson and Parish of S. Dunstone in the east of London, seeing
the famous and mighty man (for the words be in the grant: cum nobilis and
potens. vir.) Simon Air, citizen of London, among other his works of piety,
effectually determined to erect and build a certain Granarie upon the soil of
the same city at Leaden hall, of his own charges, for the common utility of
the said city, to the amplifiyng, and enlarging of the said Garnary, granted
to Henry Frowicke then Mayor, the Aldermen, and Comminaltie and their
successors, for ever, all their Tenementes, with the Appurtenances sometime
called the Horsemill in Grass street, for the anuall rent of four pound,
etc. Also certain Evidences (of an Alley and Tenements pertaining to the
Horsemill, Horsmill in Grassestreete
adjoining to the said Leaden hall in Grassestreete, given by William
Kingstone Fishmonger, unto the parish church of S. Peter upon Cornehill) do
specify the said Granary to be builded by the said honorable and famous
Merchant Simon Air, Simon Air sometime an vpholster then by changing of his
coppie a Draper.
sometime an Upholster, and then a Draper, in the year 1419. he builded it of
squared stone, in form as now it shows, with a fair and large chapel in
the east side of the Quadrante over the Portch of which he caused to be
written. Dextra Domini exultauit me, the Lords right hand has exalted me: he
deceased in the year 1459, Leaden hall now builded to be a common garnar.
and was buried in his Parish Church of S. Marie Wolnoth: in Lombard street^ he
gave by his Testament (which I have read) to be distributed, to al prisoners in
London, A Chapel builded in Leaden hall.
or within one mile of that city, somewhat to relieve them. More he gave two
thousand marks upon a condition which not performed, was then to be
distributed, to maids marriages, Legacies given by Simon Air.
and other deeds of charity, he also gave three thousand marks to the
Company of Drapers upon condition they should within one year after his
decease establish perpetually a Master or Warden, 5. secular Priests, Daily
service by noate etc. and three free schools in the Leaden hall^
six Clerks and two Queristers to sing daily divine service, by note for ever
in his Chapel of the Leaden hall: Also three Schoolemaisters, with an Usher,
to wit, one Master with an Ushar for Grammar, one Master for writing, and the
third for Song with howsing there newly builded for them for ever, the master
to have for his Salary ten pound: and every other Priest eight pound, every
other Clarke, five pound six shillinges eight pence, and every other Chorister,
five marks: and if the Drapers refused this to do within one year after his
decease, then the three thousand Marks to remain to the Prior and Covent of
Christ's Church in London, with condition to establsh as is aforesaid, within
two years after his decease, and if they refused, then the three thousand
marks to be disposed by his Executors as they best could devise in works of
charity: thus much for his Testament not performed by establishing of divine
service in his chapel, or free schools for scholars, neither how the stock
of three thousand marks was employed by his Executors, could I ever learn,
flying tales have I heard, but not of credit, to avouch, and therefore I over
pass them: he left issue Thomas, who had issue Thomas, Liber albus. Beam for
tronage of wools at Leaden hal
etc. True it is that in the year 1464. the third of Edward the fourth, it
was agreede by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Comminalty of London, that
notwithstanding the kings letters patentes, lately before granted unto them
touching the Troynage or Weighing of wares to be holden at the Leaden hall, yet
suite should be made to the king for new letters pattents to be granted to the
Mayor of the Staple, for the Tronage of Wolles to be holden there, and order to
be taken, by the discretion of Thomas Cook, then Mayor, y^ counsel of the
city, Geffery Filding, then Mayor of the Staple at Westminster, and of his
counsel, what should be paid to the Mayor and Aldermen of the city for the
laying and howsing of the Woolles there, that so they might be brought forth
and weighed, etc.

Touching the chapel there, I find that in the year 1466. by license
obtained of king Edward the fourth, in the sixth of his reign, a Fraternity
of the Trinity, of 60. priests, A brotherhood of 60. Priests in the Chapel of
Leaden hall^
(besides other Brethren, and Sisters) in the same Chapel was founded by
William Rouse, John Risbie, and Thomas Ashby, priests, some of the which 60
priests, every market day, in the fore no^ne, did celebrate divine service
there, to such market people as repaired to prayer, and once every year, they
met altogether, and had solemn service, with procession of all the brethren
and sisters. This foundation was in the year, 1512. by a common counsel
confirmed to the 60. Trinity Priests, and to their successors at the will of
the Mayor and Comminaltie. Now it did befall that in the year, 1484. a great
fire happened upon this Leaden hal, Leaden hall burned.
by what casualty I know not, but much howsing was there destroyed with all the
stocks for Guns, and other provision belonging to the City, which was a
great loss, and no less charge to be repaired by them. In the year 1503. the
eighteenth of Henry the seventh, Richard Arnold
a request was made by the Commons of the City, concerning the usage of the
said Leaden hall, in form as follows. Please it the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and common Counsel, to enact that all French men, bringing Canuas, Linen
cloth, and other wares to be sold, and all Forrens bringing Wolffeds, Says,
Staimus, Kiuerings, Nails, Iron work, A request of the Citizens to the Mayor
and Aldermen.
or any other wares, and also all manner Forrens bringing Lead to the city to
be sold, shall bring all such their wares aforesaid to the open market of
Leaden hall there, Leaden hall market for Canuas and Linen cloth.
and no where else to be showed, sold and uttered, like as of old time it has
been used, upon pain of forfeyture of all the said wares showed or sold in
any other place then aforesaid, the show of the said wares to be made three
days in the week, that is to say Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, it is also
thought reasonable that the common Beam be kept from henceforth in the Leaden
hall, and the Farmer to pay therefore reasonable rent to the chamber: for
better it is that the chamber have advantage thereby, then a Foreign person, and
also the said Leaden hal, which is more chargeable now by half then
profitable, shall better bear out the charges thereof, also the common Beam
Common Beam to be kept in Leaden hall.
for wolle at Leaden hall, Leaden hall pertaining ^^ the Comminaltie.
may pay yearly a rent to the chamber of London, toward supportation and
charges of the same place: for reason it is, that a common office occupied upon
a common ground^ bear a charge to the use of the Comminaltie: also that
Forrens bringing wolles, Fels, or any other Marchandizes or wares to Leaden
hall, Wools, Fels, and other merchandise to be sold, in Leaden hall.
to be kept there for the sale and market, may pay^ more largely for the
keeping of their goods, then Free men. Thus much for the request of the
Commons at this time.

Now to set down some proof that the said hall has been employed and used
as a Granarie for Corn and Grain (as the same was first appointed) leaving
all former examples, this one may suffice: Roger Acheley Mayor Leaden hall used
as a garna^ Roger Acheley Mayor, made good provision for the city
of London, in the year 1512. the third of Henry the eight, when the said
Mayor entered the Maioralitie, there was not found one hundred quarters of
wheat in all the Garners of the city, either within the Liberties or near
adjoining: through the which scarcity, when the Carts of Stratforde Bread
carts of Stratford at the Bow.
came laden with Bread to the City (as they had been accustomed) there was
such press about them, that one man was ready to destroy an other, in
striving to be served for their money: but this scarcity lasted not long: for
the Mayor in short time made such provision of Wheat, that the Bakers both of
London, and of Stratforde were weary of taking it up, and were forced to take
much more then they would, and for the rest the Mayor laid out the money and
stowed it up in Leaden hall, and other Garnars of the City. This Mayor also
kept the market so well, that he would be at the Leaden hall, by four a clock
in the summer morninges, and from thence he went to other markets, to the
great comfort of the Citizens. I read also that in the year, 1528. the 20. of
Henry the eight, Surueyers were appointed to view the Garnars of the City,
namely the Br^dge house, and the Leaden hal, how they were stored of Grain for
service of the City: And because I have here before spoken of the bread
carts coming from Stratforde at the Bow, ye shall understand that of old
time the Bakers of Bread at Stratforde, were allowed to bring daily (except the
Saboath and principal Feast) diverse long Carts laden with Bread, the same
being two ounces in the penny wheat loaf heavier then the penny wheat loaf
baked in the City, the same to be sold in Cheap, three or four Carts
standing there, between Guthurans lane, and Fausters lane end, one cart on
Cornhill by the Conduite, and one other in Grassestreete. And I have read that
in the fourth year of Edward the second, Richard Reffeham being Mayor, a
Baker named John of Stratforde: Liber d. A Baker of Stratford punished in
London for baking bread under the Assise.
for making Bread lesser then the Assisse, was with a fools whoode on his
head, and loves of bread about his neck, drawn on a hurdle through the streets
of this city: Moreover in the 44. of Edward the third. John Chichester being
Mayor of London, John Mall. Breadcarts from Stratford misused in this city in
time of scarcity.
I read in the visions of Pierce Plowman, a book so called as follows.

There was a careful commune, when no cart came to town with baked bread fro
Stratford: tho began beggars weep and workmen were aghast, a little this will be
thought long in the date of our Drirte, in a dry Auerell a thousand and three
hundred, twice thirty and ten etc.

These Bakers of Stratford left serving of this City I know not upon what
occasion, about 30. years since: In the year 1519. a petition A petition by
the commons concerning the use of the Leaden hall.
was exhibited by the commons to the common counsel, and was by them allowed,
concerning the Leaden hall, how they would have it used, viz. Meekely
beseeching shows unto your good Lordship, and maysterships, diverse cittzens
of this City, which under correction think, that the great place called the
Leaden hall, should nor ought not to be letten to farm, to any person or
persons, and in especial to any fellowship or company incorporate, to have
and hold the same hall for term of years, for such inconveniences as thereby
may ensue, and come to the hur^ of the common weal of the said city, in time
to come, as somewhat more largely may appear in the articles following.

First if any assembly, or hasty gathering of the commons of the said City
for oppressing or subduing, of misruled people within the said City hereafter
shall happen to be called or commanded by the Mayor, Aldermen, and other
governors and counselors of the said city for the time being, there is none
so convenient meet and necessary a place to assemble them in, within the said
city, as the said Leaden hall, both for largenes of room, and for their sure
defense in time of their counselling together about the premises. Also in that
place has been used the artillery, Guns, and other armors of the said city
to be safely kept in a readiness for y^ safeguard, wealth, and defense of the
said city, to be had and occupied at times when need required. As also the
store of timber for the necessary reparations of the tenements belonging to
the chamber of the said city, there commonly has been kept. Item if any
triumph or nobleness were to be done or showed by the communalty of the city
for the honor of our sovereign Lord, the King, and realm, and for the
worship of the said city, the said Leaden hall is most meet and convenient
place to prepare and order the said triumph therein, and from thence to issue
forth to the places therefore appointed, Item, at any largess or dole of any
money made unto the poor people of this city, it has been used to be done
and given in the said Leaden Hall, Leaden Hall a market place for victulers and
the people to stand dry.
for that the said place is most meet therefore. Item, the honorable Father,
that was maker of the said hall, had a special will, intent and mind, that (as
it is commonly said) the market men and women that came to the City with
victuailes and other things should have their free standing within the said
Leaden Hall in wet weather, to keep themselves and their wares dry, and
thereby to encourage them and all other to have the better will and desire the
more plenteously to resort to the said City, to victuaile the same. And if
the said Hall should be letten to farm, the will of the said honorable father
should never be fulfilled nor take effect. Item, if the said place which is the
chief fortress and most necessary place within all the City, for the
tuition and safegarde of the same, should be letten to farm out of the hands
of the chief heads of the same City, and especially to an other body
politic, it might at length by likelihood be occasion of discord, and debate
between the said bodies politic, which God defend.

For these and many other great and reasonable causes, which hereafter shall be
showed to this honorable Court, your said beseechers think it much necessary,
that the said Hall be still in the hands of this city, and to be surely kept
by sad and discreet officers in such wise, that it may always be ready to be
used and occupied for the common weal of the said City, when need shall
require, and in no wise to be letten to any body politic. Thus much for the
petition.

About the year 1534. great means was made about the Leaden Hall Leaden hall
meant to have been made a Bu^se for merchants.
to have the same made a Burse for the assembly of merchants, as they had
been accustomed in Lombard street, many common counselles, were called to that
end, but in the year 1535. John Champnais being Mayor, it was fully concluded
that the Burse should remain in Lombard street, as before: and Leaden Hall no
more to be spoken of concerning this matter.

The use of Leaden Hall in my youth was thus: In a part of the North quadrant
on the East side of the North gate, was the common beams for weighing of
wool, and other wares, as had been accustomed: on the west side the gate was
the scales to way meal: the other three sides were reserved for the most part
to the making and resting of the pageants showed at midsommer in the watch: the
remnant of the sides and quadrantes were employed for the stowage of wool
sackes, but not closed up: the lofts above were partly used by the painters in
working for the decking of pageants and other devises, for beautifying of the
watch and watchmen, the residue of the loftes were letten out to marchantes,
the wool winders and packers therein to wind and pack their wools: And thus
much for Leaden Hall may suffice.

Now on the North of Limestreete ward in the high street, are diverse fair
houses for merchants, and proper tenements for artificers, with an alley also
called Shaft Alley, of the shaft or Maypole sometime resting over the gale
thereof, as I have declared in Aldegate ward. In the year 1576 partly at the
charges of the parish of S. Andrew, and partly at the charges of the chamber of
London, a water pumpe A pumpe in the high street of Limestreet ward.
was raised in this high street of Limestreete ward, near unto Limestreet
corner: for the placing of the which pumpe, having broken up the ground, they
were forced to dig more then two fadome deep before they came to any maine
ground: Cornehil street in some place raised 2, fadom higher then of old time,
as appeared by buildings found so deep.
where they found a harth made of Britain (or Romayne) tyle as they call it,
every tile half yard square and about two inches thick: they found cole
lying there also, (for that lying whole will never consume) then digging one
fadome into the maine they found water sufficient, and set up the pumpe. Thus
much for the high street.

In S. Mary street S. Mary street.
had ye of old time parish Church of S. Mary the virgin, S. Vrsula, and the
11000. Parish church of Mary S. Vrsula, and 11000 vigines called at the Axe,
letten out for a warehouse.
virgins, which Church was commonly called S. Mary at the Axe, of the sign of
an Axe, over against the East end thereof, or S. Marie Pellipar of a plot of
ground lying on the North side thereof, pertaining to the Skinners in London.
This parrish about the year 1565. was united to the parish Church of S. Andrew
Undershaft, and so was S. Mary at the Axe suppressed, and letten out to be a
warehouse for a Merchant. Also against the North end of this S. Mary street
was sometime one other parish Church of S. Augustine, Parish church of S.
Austine in the wall made a chapel to the papey, and since pulled down made a
stable.
called S. Augustine in the wall, for that if stood adjoining to the wall of
the City: and otherwise called S. Augustines Papey, for that about the year
1430. in the reign of Henry the sixth, the same Church was allowed to the
brethren of the Papey, the house of poor priests, whereof I have spoken in
Aldgate ward. The parishioners of this Church were appointed to the parish
Church of Alhallowes in the wall, which is in Breadstreet ward, this
brotherhood (called Papey) being suppressed, the church of S. Augustine was
pulled down, and in place thereof one Gray a Pothecarie builded a stable, and
a heyloft: it is now a dwelling house, reserving the Church yard for a garden
plot. Those two parish Churches both lying in the Ward of Limestreet, being
thus suppressed, there is not any one parish church or place for divine service
in that ward, but the inhabitants thereof repair to Churches, out of their
Ward, namely to S. Peter upon Cornehill in Cornehill ward, S. Andrew in
Aldegate ward, Alhallowes in the wall in Breadstreete ward, and some to S.
Denis in Langborne ward. Now because of late there has been some question,
to what ward this Church or chapel of S. Augustine Papie should of right
belong, for the same has been challenged by them of Aldgate ward, and without
reason taken into Bishopsgate ward, from Limestreete ward, I am somewhat to
touch it. About 30. years since the chamber of London granted a lease of
ground (in these words) lying near London wall in the ward of Limestreet,
Houses by London wall, in the ward of Limestreet.
from the West of the said church or chapel of S. Augustine, Papey, toward
Bishopsgate etc. On the which plat of ground the lease, builded three fair
tenements, and placed tennantes there: these were charged to bear scot and
lot, and some of them to bear office in Limestreete ward: all which they
willingly did without grudging. And when any suspected or disordered persons
were by the Landlord placed there, the officers of Limestreete ward fetched
them out of their houses, committed them to the ward, procured their due
punishments, and banished them from thence: whereby in short time that place
was reformed and brought into good order: which thing being noted by them of
Aldegate Ward, they moved their Alderman Sir Thomas Offley to call in those
houses to be of his ward: but I my self showing a fair ledgier book
sometime pertaining to the late dissolved Priorie of the holy Trinity within
Aldegate, wherein were set down the just bounds of Aldegate ward, before Sir
Thomas Offley, Sir Rowland Heyward, the common counsel and Wardemote inquest
of the said Limestreete ward, Sir Thomas Offley gave over his challenge: and
so that matter rested in good quiet, until the year 1579. that Sir Rychard
Pype being Mayor, and Alderman of Bishopsgate ward A part of Limestreet ward
unjust withheld by Bishopsgate ward.
challenged those houses, to be of his Ward, whereunto (without reason showed)
Sir Rowland Heyward yielded: and thus is that side of the street from the
North corner of S. Mary street, almost to Bishopsgate, (wherein is one plot of
ground letten by the Chamberlain of London to the parish of S. Martins
Oto^wich, A churchya^ by London wall pertaining to Saint Martins O^^wich in
Bishopsgate. Liber fraete^
to be a churchyard, or burying place for the dead of that parish etc.)
unjustly drawn from the ward of Limestreet. Diverse other proofs I could set
down, but this one following may suffice. The Mayor and Aldermen of London
made a grant to the fraternity of Papie, in these words: Be it remembered
that where now of late the master and wardens of the fraternity of the Papie
have made a brick wall, closing in the chapel of Saint Augustine called
Papie Chapel, situate in the parish of All-saintes in the wall, in the Ward
of Limestreet of the city of London: from the southeast corner of the which
brick wall, is a scutcheon of xxi.foot of assise from the said corner
Eastward. And from the same scuncheon there to a message of 55. foot and a
half westward, the said scuncheon breaks out of line right southward betwixt
the measures aforesaid, iij, foot, and five inches of assise, upon the common
ground of the city aforesaid, Raph Verney Mayor, and the Aldermen of the same
city the xxij.day of October, the sixth year of Edward the fourth granted to
John Hod priest, master John Bolt and Thomas Pachet priests, wardens of the
fraternity of Papie aforesaid, and to their successors for ever, etc. yielding
iiij.^.sterling yearly at Michelmas, and this is (says my book) enrolled in
the Guildhall in London: which is a sufficient proof the same plotte of ground
to be of Limestreet ward.

On the south side of this street stretching west from S. Mary street,
toward Bishopsgate street, there was of old time one large message builded
of stone and timber, Patent. Oxford place.
in the parish of S. Augustine, in the wall, now in the parish of Alhallowes in
the same wall, belonging to the Earl of Oxford, for Richard de Vere Earl of
Oxford possessed it in the 4. of Henry the fifth, but in process of time the
lands of the Earl fell to females, amongst the which one being married to
VVingfield of Suffolk: this house with the apurtenances fell to his lot, and
was by his heir Sir Robert Wingfield sold to M. Edward Cook, at this time the
Queens Attorney general. This house being greatly ruinated of late time, for
the most part has been letten out to Powlters, for stabling of horses and
stowage of poultrie. One note more of this ward, and so an end. I find of
record, that in the year 1371 the 45. of Edward the third, a great subsidy
of 100000. Subsidy of Limestreet ward in the year 1371.
^. was granted toward the Kings wars in France, whereof the clergy paid
50000. ^. and the layitie 50000. ^. to be levied in 39. shires, of England,
containing parishes 8600. of every parrish 5. ^.xvj.^.the greater to help the
lesser: this City (as one of the shires) then containing 24. wards, and in
them 110. parishes, was therefore assessed to 635. ^. 12. ^. whereof Limestreet
ward did bear 34. shillings and no more: so small a ward it was and so
accounted, as having no one whole parrish therein, but small portions only, of
two parishes in that ward. This ward has an Alderman, his deputy, common
counsailors 4. Constables 4. Scauengers 2. Wardemote inquest 16. and a Beadle,
and is taxed to the fifteen at 40. shillings, or thereabout.

Bishopsgate ward.
THe next is Bishopsgate Ward, Bishopsgate ward.
whereof a part is without the gate, and of the suburbs from the bars, by S.
Mary Spittle, to Bishopsgate, and a part of Hounds ditch, almost half thereof,
also without the wall is of the same Ward. Then within the gate is Bishopsgate
street, so called of the gate, to a Pumpe where sometime was a fair well with
two buckets by the East end of the parish church of Saint Martine Otoswich, and
then winding by the West co^ner of Leaden Hall, down Grass street to the
corner over against Grass Church, and this is the bounds of that ward.

Monumentes there most to be noted, are these: the parish Church of S.
Buttolph without Bishopsgate Parish church of S. Buttol^ without Bishopsgate.
in a fair Churchyard, adjoining to the Town ditch upon the very bank
thereof, but of old time enclosed with a comely wall of brick, lately repaired
by Sir William Allen Mayor, in the year 1571. because he was borne in that
parish, where also he was buried.

Now without this Churchyard wall is a causeway leading to a quadrant, called
Petie France, Petie France near to the town ditch^
of Frenchmen dwelling there, and to other dwelling houses, lately builded on
the bank of the said ditch by some citizens of London, that more regarded
their own private gain, then the common good of the City: for by means of
this causeway raised on the bank, and soylage of houses, with other filthiness
cast into the ditch, the same is now forced to a narrow channel, and almost
filled up with unsavory things, to the danger of impoysoning the whole city.

Next unto the parish church of S. Buttolph, is a fair Inn for receipt of
travelers: then an Hospital Hospital o^ Bethelem.
of S. Mary of Bechelem, founded by Simon Fitz Mary one of the Sheriffs of
London, in the year 1246. he founded it to have been a Priorse of Cannons
with brethren and sisters, and king Edward the third granted a protection,
which I have seen for the brethren, Miliciae beatae Mariae de Bethlem, within
the city of London, the 14. year of his reign. It was an Hospital for
distracted people: the Mayor and communaltie purchased the patronage thereof
with all the lands and tenements thereuuto belonging, in the year 1546 the same
year King Henry the eight gave the Hospital thereof unto the city: the
Church and chapel whereof were taken down in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
and houses builded there, by the Governors of Christ's Hospital in London. In
this place people that be distraight in wits, are by the suite of their
friends received and kept as before it was used, but not without charges to
their bringers in. In the year 1569. Sir Thomas Roe Merchant Tailor Mayor,
caused to be enclosed with a wall of brick, about one acre of ground, being
part of the said Hospital of Bethelem, to wit, on the west, on the bancke of
deep ditch, so called, parting the said hospital of Bethlem from the More
field: this be did for burial, Burial for the dead prepared Deep ditch by
Bethelem.
in ease of such parishes in London as wanted ground, convenient within their
parishes. The Lady his wife was there buried (by whose persuasion he enclosed
it) but himself borne in London was buried in the parish church of Hackney.

From this Hospital Northward upon the streets side many houses have been
builded with alleyes backward, of late time too much pestered with people (a
great cause of infection) up to the bars.

The other side of this high street from Bishopsgate, and Hounds ditch: the
first building is a large Inn for receipt of travelers, then a fair house of
late builded by the Lord John Powlet. Fishers Folly.
Next to that a far more large and beautiful house with gardens of pleasure,
bowling alleyes, and such like, builded by Jasper Fisher free of the
Goldsmithes, late one of the six Clearkes of the Chauncery, and a Justice of
peace. It has since for a time been the Earl of Oxfords place. The Queens
Majesty Elizabeth has lodged there. It now belongs to M. Cornewallos. This
house being so largely and sumptuously builded by a man of no greater calling
or possessions, was mockingly called Fishers Folly, and a Rithme was made of
it, and other the like in this manner; Kirkebies Castle, and Fishers Folly,
Spinilas Pleasure, and Megses glory, and so of other such like buildinges
about the City. From Fishers Folly up to the West end of Hog Lane, which
comes from the bars without Aldegate, as is before showed, is a continual
building of tenements, with alleyes of cottages, pestered, etc. Then is there a
large close, called Tasell close, Tasell close.
sometime for that there were Tassels planted for the use of Clothwor^ers:
since letten to the Crossebow makers, wherein they used to shoot for games at
the Popingey: now the same being enclosed with a brick wall, serves to be an
Artillery yard, Artillarie yard
whereunto the Gunners of the Tower do weekly repair, namely every
thurseday, and there leuelling certain Brass pieces of great Artillery
against a butte of earth, made for that purpose, they discharge them for their
exercise.

Then have ye the late dissolved Priorie and hospital of our blessed Lady
commonly called S. Mary Spittle, S. Mary Spitt^
founded for Canons regular, by a citizen of London named Walter Brune, and
Rosya his wife, in the year 1235. This Hospital was at the suppression valued
so dispend 478. pound, etc. Where besides the ornaments of the Church, and
goods pertaining to the Hospital, there was found standing one hundredth and
fourscore beds, well furnished for receipt of the poor of charity: for it
was an Hospital of great relief. There lycth buried Sir Henry Plesington
Knight, 1452.

In place of this Hospital, and near adjoining, are now many fair houses
builded, for receipt and lodging of worshipful and honorable persons. Apart of
the large churchyard pertaining to this Hospital, and severed from the rest
with a brick wall, Pulpit Cros^ at the Spittle.
yet remains, (as of old time) with a pulpet cross therein, somewhat like to
that in Paul's churchyard: and against the said pulpit on the south side,
before the chernell and chapel of S. Edmonde the Bishop: and Mary Magdalen
remains also one fair builded house of two stories in height for the Mayor
and other honorable persons, with the Aldermen and Sheriffs to sit in, there
to hear the Sermons preached upon Easter holy days. In the loft over them,
the Ladies and Aldermens wives do stand at a fair window or sit at their
pleasure. And here it is to be noted, that time out of mind, it has bin a
laudable custom that on good friday in the after noone some especial learned
man by appoyntme^t of y^ prelates does preach a sermon at Paul's cross,
treating of Christ's passion. And upon the three next Easter holidayes, Monday,
Tuesday, and Wednesday, the like learned men by the like appointment do use to
preach on the fore noon at the said Spittle, to perswad the articles of Christ's
resurrection, and then on low So^day before noon one other learned man at
Paul's cross is to make rehersall of those four former sermons, either
commending or reproving them, as to him by judgment of the learned divines is
thought convenient: And that done he is to make a sermon of himself, which in
all were five Sermons in one. At these Sermons so severally preached, the Mayor
with his Brethren, the Aldermen are accustomed to be present in their Uiolets
at Paul's, on Good Friday, and in their Scarlets, both they and their wives, at
the Spittle in the Holy days (except Wednesday in Uiolet) and the Mayor with
his Brethren, on Low Sunday in Scarlet, at Paul's Cross. Touching the
antiquity of this custom, I find none other, then that in the year, 1398.
the 22. of Richard the second: that the king having procured from Rome,
confirmation of such statutes, and ordinances, as were made in the Parliament,
(begun at Westminster, and ended at Shreusbery, he caused the same
confirmation to be read and pronounced at Paul's Cross, and at S. Marie Spittle
in the Sermons before all the people: Philip Malpas one of the Sheriffs in the
year 1439. the 18. of Henry the sixth, gave twenty shillinges by year to the
three Preachers at the Spittle. Stephen Fo^^^ar Mayor, in the year 1454. gave
forty pound to the Preachers at Paul's Cross and Spittle. House in S. Marie
Spittle churchyard builded for the Mayor and Aldermen. Pulpit Cross in
Spittle church yard new builded. A house in Spittle church yard builded for
the gouerners and children of christ's Hospital. Lolesworth field. Burial of
the Romans in Spittle field. Old monumentes of the Romans found,
I find also that the aforesaid house, wherein the Mayor and Aldermen do sit
at the Spittle, was builded for that purpose, of the goods, and by the
Executors of Richard Rawson Alderman and Isabell his wife, in the year 1488. In
the year 1594. this Pulpit being old, was taken down, and a new set up: and
the Preachers face turned toward the south, which was before toward the
west, also a large house on the east side of the said Pulpit, was then builded
for the governors and children of Christ's Hospital to sit in: and this was
done of the goods of William Elkens Alderman, late deceased, but within the
first year, the same house decaying, and like to have fallen, was again with
great cost repaired at the Cities charge. On the east side of this Churchyard
lies a large field of old time called Lolesworth, now Spittle field: which
about the year 1576. was broken up for clay to make brick, in the digging
whereof many earthen pottes called Vrnae, were found full of ashes, and of
brent bones of men, to wit of the Romans that inhabited here: for it was the
custom of the Romans to bren their dead, to put their ashes in an vrna, and
then to bury the same, with certain ceremonies in some field appointed for
that purpose, near unto their City: every of these pots had in them with the
ashes of the dead, one piece of Copper money, with the inscription of the
Emperor, then reigning: some of them were of Claudius, some of Vespasian, some
of Nero, of Anthonius Pius, of Troianus: and others besides those vrnas, many
other pots were there found, made of a white earth with long nockes, and
handles, like to our stone Iugges: these were empty, but seemed to be buried
full of some liquid matter long since consumed and soaked through: for there
were found diverse vials and other fashioned glasses, some most cunningly
wrought, such as I have not seen the like, and some of Crystal, all which
had water in them, nothing differing in clearenes, taste, or savor from common
spring water: some of these glasses had oil in them very thick, and earthie
in savor, some were supposed to have balm in them, but had lost the virtue:
many of those pots and glasses were broken in cutting of the clay: so that few
were taken up whole: there were also found diverse dishes and cups of a fine red
colored earth, which showed outwardly such a shining smothnesse, as if they had
been of curral, those had in the bottomes Roman letters printed, there were
also lamps of white earth artificially wrought with diverse antiques about
them, some three or four Images, made of white earth, about a span long, each
of them: one I remember was of Pallas, the rest I have forgotten, I my self
have reserved amongst diverse of those antiquities there found, one pot of white
earth very small, not exceeding the quantity of a quarter of a wine pint, made
in shape of a Hare, squatted upon her legs, and between her ears is the mouth
of the pot: there has also been found in the same field Troughes of stone
found in the Spittle field.
diverse coffins of stone, containing the bones of men: these I suppose to be
the burials of some especial persons, in time of the Britons, or Saxons, after
that the Romans had left to govern here: moreover there were also found the
sculs and bones of men without coffins, or rather whose coffines (being of
great timber) were consumed: diverse great nails of iron were there found, such
as are used in the wheels of sh^d carts, being each of them as big as a
man's finger, and a quarter of a yeard long, the heads two inches over, those
nails Great nails of iron found in the field and fond opinions of men.
were more wondered at then the rest of things there found, and many opinions
of men were uttered of them, namely that the men there buried were murdered by
driving those nails into their heads, a thing unlikely, for a smaler nail
would more aptly serve to so bad a purpose, and a more secret place would
lightly be employed for their burial. But to set down what I have observed,
concerning this matter, I there beheld the bones of a man lying as I noted,
the head North, the feet South, and round about him, as thwart his head along
both his sides, and thwart his feet, such nails were found, wherefore I
coniectured them to be the nails of his Coffin, which had been a trough cut
out of some great tree, and the same covered with a planke, of a great
thickness, fastened with such nails: and therefore I caused some of the
nails to be reached up to me, and found under the broad heads of them, the
old wood, skant turned into dust or earth, but still retayning both the grane,
and the proper color, of these nails with the wood under the head thereof, I
reserved one as also the nether iaw bone of the man, the teeth being very
greate^ sound and fast fixed, which (amongst other many monumentes there found)
I have yet to show: but the nail lying dry is now by skaling greatly wasted.
And thus much for this part of Bishopsgate ward without the gate: for I have
in another place spoken of the gate, and therefore I am now to speak of that
other part of this ward, which lies within the gate.

And first to begin on the left hand of Bishopsgate street, from the gate ye
have certain Tenementes of old time pertaining to a Brotherhood of S.
Nicholas, granted to the parish Clerks of London, for two Chaplens to be kept
in the Chapple of S. Mary Magdalen near unto the Guilde hall of London, in the
27. of Henry the sixth, the first of these houses toward the North and against
the wall of the City, was sometime a large Inn or court called the Wrastlers
(of such a sign) and the last in the high street toward the South, was
sometime also a fair Inn called the Angel of such a sign: amongst these
said Tenementes was on the same street side a fair Entry or Court to the
common hall of the said parish Clerks, Clerks hall and their Alms houses
in, Bishopsgate street.
with proper Almeshouses seven in number, adjoining for poor parish Clerks,
and their wives, their widows, such as were in great years not able to
labor. One of these by the said Brotherhoode of parish Clerks was allowed
sixeteene pence the week, the other six had each of them nine pence the week,
according to the pattent thereof granted. This Brotherhoode amongst other
being suppressed. In the reign of Edward the sixth, the said Hall with the
other buildinges there, was given to Sir Robert Chester a knight of Cambridge
shier, against whom the parish Clerks commencing suite, in the reign of
Queen Marie, and being like to have prevailed, the said Sir Robert Chester
pulled down the hall, sold the Timber, stone, and lead, and thereupon the
suite was ended. The Almeshouses remain in the Queens hands, and people are
there placed, such as can make best friends: some of them taking the pension
appointed, have let forth their houses for great rent, giving occasion to the
Parson of the parish to challenge tithes of the poor, etc. Next unto this is
the small parish church of S. Etholburge virgin, Parish church of S. Etholburge.
and from thence some small distance is a large court called little S. Hellens:
because it pertayned to the Nuns, of S. Hellens, prio^y of S. Hellens, and
Almesehouses
and was their house, there are seven Alms rooms or houses for the poor,
belonging to the company of Lethersellers. Then somewhat more West is an other
Court with a winding lane, through which men come out against the west end of
S. Andrews undershaft Church. In this court stands the church of S. Hellens,
sometime a Priorie of black Nuns and in the same a parish church of S. Hellen,
Parish church of S. Hellen.
this Priorie long since was founded, before the reign of Henry the third, as
I have found in Records. William Basing Deane of Paul's, was the first
founder, and was there buried, and William Basing one of the Sheriffs of
London, in the second year of Edward the second was holden also to be a
founder, or rather an helper there: this priorie being valued at 314. pound two
shillinges six pence was surrendered the 25. of November, the thirty of Henry
the eight, the whole church (the partition betwixt the Nuns church, and parish
church being taken down) remains now to the parish: and is a fair parish
church, but wants such a steeple as Sir Thomas Gre^ham promised to have
builded, in recompense of ground in their church filled up, with his monument.
The Nuns hall and other howsing thereunto appertayning, was since purchased by
the Company of the Lethersellers, Le^thersellers hall.
and is their common Hall: which Company was incorporate in the 21. year of
Richard the second.

In the Church of S. Hellen, have ye these monumentes of the dead: Thomas
Langton Chaplen buried in the Quire, 1350. Nicholas Marshall, Ironmonger
Alderman, 1474. Sir William Sanctlo, and Sir William Sanctlo father and son,
Sir William Pickering, and Sir William Pickering father and son, Thomas
Williams Gentleman, 1495. John Langthorpe Esquier, 1510. Joan Coken wise to
John Coken Esquier, 1509. Mary Orrell wife to Sir Lewys Orrell Knight. Henry
Somer, Katheren his wife, Joan daughter to Henry Somer, wife to Richard, son
and heir to Robert Lord Poyinges, died a virgin 1420. Walter Huntington,
Esquier, Elizabeth Venner wife to William Venner Grocer, Alderman, one of the
Sheriffs, 1401. Robert Rochester Esquier Sargeant of the Pantrie, to Henry the
eight. John Swinflet, 1420. John Gower Steward of S. Helens, 1512. John
Faukconbridge Esquier, 1545. Hacket Gentleman of the kings Chapel, Elienor
daughter to Sir Thomas Butler, Lord Sudley, John Suthworth, Adam Frances Mayor
Nicholas Harp^fielde, Esquier, Thomas Saunderforde or Somerforde Alderman,
Alexander Cheyney, Sir John Crosbie Alderman, and Anne his wife, George
Fastolph, son to Hugh Fastolph, Robert Lynd, Sir Andrew Iud Mayor, Sir Thomas
Gresham Mercer etc.

Then have ye one great house called Crosbie place, because the same was
builded by Sir John Crosbie Of Crosbies place and of Sir John Crosbie.
Grocer, and Wolman, in place of certain Tenements, with their appurtenances
letten to him by Alice Ashfed Prioresse of S. Hellens, and the Covent for
ninety nine years, from the year 1466. unto the year 1565. for the annual
rent of eleven pound six shillings eight pence: this house he builded of stone
and timber, very large and beutifull, and the highest at that time in London:
he was one of the Sheriffs, and an Alderman in the year 1470. knighted by
Edward the fourth, in the year 1471. and deceased in the year 1475. so short
a time enjoyed he that his large and sump^uous building, he was buried in S.
Hellens, the parish church, a fair monument of him and his Lady, is raised
there: he gave toward the reforming of that church five hundred marks,
which was bestowed with the better, as appears by his Arms, both in the
stone work, roose of Timber, and glasing. I hold it a fable said of him, to
be named Crosby, of being found by a cross, for I have read of other to have
that name of Crosby, before him, namely in the year 1406. the seventh of Henry
the fourth, the said king gave to his servant John Crosby the wardship of Joan
daughter, and sole heir to John Iordaine Fishmonger, etc. This Crosbie might
be the Father or Grandfather to Sir John Crosbie.

Richard Duke of Gloucester, and Lord Protector, afterward king by the name
of Richard the third, was lodged in this house: since the which time among
other, Anthony Bonuice a rich merchant of Italy, dwelled there, after him
Jerome Serall, then William Bond Alderman, increased this house with building
of a Turret on the top thereof: he deceased in the year, 1567. and was buried
in S. Helens church: diverse Ambassadors have been lodged there: namely in the
year 1586. Henry Ramelius Chancellor of Germany, Ambassador unto the Queens
Majesty of England from Frederick the second of Denmark: an Ambassador of
France, etc. Sir John Spencer Alderman lately purchased this house, made great
reparations, kept his Maioralty there, and since builded a most large
warehouse near thereunto.

From this Crosbie place up to Leaden hall corner, and so down Grassestreete,
amongst other Tenementes, are diverse fair and large builded houses for
Marchantes and such like. Now for the other side of this ward, namely the
right hand, hard by within the gate is onefayre water Conduite, Water conduite
at Bishopsgate.
which Thomas Knesworth Mayor, in the year 1505. founded, he gave 60.l. the
rest was furnished at the common charges of the city: this conduite has since
been taken down, and new builded. David Wodrooffe Alderman gave twenty
pounds toward the conuayance of more water thereunto. From this conduite
have ye amongst many fair Tenementes, diverse fair Innes, large for receipt of
travelers and some houses for men of worship, namely one most spacious of all
other there about, builded of brick and timber, by Sir Thomas Gresham, Sir
Thomas Greshams house builded.
knight, who deceased in the year 1579. and was buried in S. Hellens church,
under a fair monument, by him, prepared in his life he appointed by his
Testament, this house to be made a College, as before is said of Readers.

Somewhat west from this house is one other very fair house, wherein Sir
William Hollies, kept his Maioralty, and was buried in the parish church of S.
Helen: Sir Andrew Iud^ S. Andrew Iud his almes^ houses.
also kept his Maioralty there, and was buried at S. Hellens: he builded
Almsehouses for six poor Almespeople near to the said parrish church, and
gave lands to the Skinners, out of the which they are to give 4. shillinges
every week to the six poor Almespeople eight pence the piece, and five and
twenty shillinges four pence, the year in coals amongst them for ever.

Then in the very west corner over against the East end of S. Martins Otswitch,
church (from whence the street windeth toward the South) you had of old
time a fair well with two buckets so fastened, that the drawing up of the one,
let down the other, but now of late that weil is turned into a Pumpe.

From this to the corner over against the Leaden hall, and so down Grass
street, are many fair houses for marchantes, and artificers, and many fair
Innes for Travelers even to the corner where that ward ends, over against
Grass church: and thus much for this Bishopsgate ward shall suffice, which
has an Alderman, two Deputies, one without the gate another within, common
Counselors six, Constables seven, Scauengers seven, for Wardmote inquest
thirteen, and a Beadle: it is taxed to the fifeteene at xxij.^.in London, and
in the Exchequer xxi.^.x.^.

Brodestreete ward.
THe next is Brodestreete ward, Brodestreete ward.
which begins within Bishopsgate, from the water conduite westward on both
the sides of the street, by Alhallowes Church to an iron grate on the
Channel, which runs into the watercourse of Walbrooke before ye come to the
Posterne called Moregate: and this is the farthest west part of that Ward.
Then have ye Brodestreete, whereof the ward takes name, which stretches out
of the former street, from the East corner of Alhallowes churchyard, somewhat
South to the parish church of S. Peter the Poor on both sides, and then by the
southgate of the Augustine Friars west, down Throkmorton street by the Drapers
hall, into Lothburie, to another grate of iron over the channel there, whereby
the water runs into the course of Walbroke, certain posts of timber are
there set up: and this is also the farthest West part of this ward, in the said
street. Out of the which street runs up Barthlemew lane south to the north
side of the Exchange, then more East out of the former street from over against
the Friars Augustines church south gate, runs up another part of
Brodestreet, south to a Pumpe over against S. Bennets church. Then have ye one
other street called Three needle street, Three needl^ street.
beginning at the well with two buckets, by Saint Martins Otoswich church wall.
This street runs down on both sides to Finkes lane, and half way up that
lane to a gate of a merchants house on the West side, but not so far on the
East, then the foresaid street, from this Finkes lane runs down by the
Royal Exchange to the Stocks, and to a place formerly called Scalding house,
or Scalding wicke, but now Scalding Alley, by the West side whereof under the
parish church of S. Mildred runs the course of Walbrooke: and these be the
bounds of this ward. Special Monuments therein are these: First the parish
church of Alhallowes in the wall, Parish church of Alhallowe^ in the wall.
so called of standing close to the wall of the city, in which have been
buried Thomas Durrem Esquire, and Margaret his wife. On the other side of that
street, amongst many proper houses possessed for the most part by Curryers is
the Carpenters hall: Carpenters hall.
which company was incorporated in the 17. year of King Edward the fourth.

Then East from the Curriers row, Curryers row^
is a long and high wall of stone enclosing the North side of a large garden
adjoining to as large an house, builded in the reign of King Henry the eight,
and of Edward the sixth, by Sir William Powlet, the Lord Treasurer of England:
through this garden which of old time consisted of diverse parts, now united,
was sometimes a fair foot way, Lane stopped up.
leading by the west end of the Augustine Friars church straight North, and
opened somewhat West from Alhallowes church against London wall toward
Moregate: which foot way had gates at either end locked up every night: but
now the same being taken into those gardens, the gates are closed up with
stone, whereby the people are forced to go about by S. Peter's church, and the
East end of the said Friars Church, and all the said great place and garden of
Sir William Powlet Sir William Powlet L. Treasurer his house. Brodestreet.
to London wall, and so to Moregate. This great house adjoining to the garden
aforesaid, stretches to the North corner of Brodestreete, and then ^urneth up
Brodestreete all that side to the East end of the said Friars church. It was
builded by the said Lord Treasurer, in place of Augustine Friars house,
cloister, and gardens etc. The Friars church he pulled not down, but the west
end thereof enclosed from the steeple, and quire is letten to the Dutch nation
in London to be their preaching place: the other part, namely, the steeple,
quire and side yles he reserved to household uses: as for stowage of corn,
cole and other things, his son and heir the Marquis of Winchester, sold the
Monumentes of noble men there buried in great number, the pauing stone, and
whatsoever (which cost many thousands) for one hundred pound, and in place
thereof made fair stabling for horses, he caused the lead to be taken off the
roofes of the church, and laid tyle in place thereof, which exchange of lead
for tyle, proved not so profitable as he looked for, but rather to his
disadvantage.

On the East side of this Brodestreete, which is the back part of Gresham
house Sir Thomas Greshams alm^s houses
in Bishopsgate street, be placed eight proper Alms houses, builded of
brick and timber, by Sir Thomas Gresham Knight, for eight alms men there
placed rent free, and receive each of them by his gift vj.pound,
xiij.shillings, iiij.pence, yearly for ever.

Next unto Pawlet house, is the parish church of S. Peter the Poor, so called
for a difference from other of that name, sometime peradventure a poor parish,
but at this present there be many fair houses, possessed by rich merchants
and other, buried in this church: Richard Fitz Williams merchant Tailor 1520.
Sir William Roch Mayor, 1540. Martin Calthrope Mayor^ 1588.

Then next have ye the Augustine Friars Church Friar Augu^tines Church, part
whereof is the Dutch church.
aforesaid, a large thing having a most fine spired steeple, small, high, and
straight, I have not s^ene the like: this Church was founded by Humfrey Bohum
Earl of Hereforde and Essex, in the year 1253. Reginald Cobham gave his
message in London to the enlarging thereof, in the year 1344. Humfrey Bohum
Earl of Hereford and Essex reedified this Church in the year 1354. whose
body was there buried in the quire. The small spired steeple of this church
was overthrown by tempest of wind, in the year 1362. but was raised of new
as now it stands, to the beautifying of the city: This house was valued at
57. pound etc. and was surrendered the 12. of November, the 30. of Henry the
eight.

There lie buried in this Friars church (amongst others) Edmond first son to
Ioane mother to king Richard the second, Guy de Maricke Earl of S. Paul,
Dame I Would, wife to Sir Thomas West, Dame Margaret West, Stephen Lindericle
Esquire, Sir Humfrey Bohum Earl of Hereford and Essex, Lord of Pembrooke,
Richard the great Earl of Arundell, Surrey, and Warren beheaded, 1397. Sir
Edward Arundell, and Dame Elizabeth his wife, Sir Frauncis Courtney, Earl of
Pembroke, which married Alice sister to the Earl of Oxford: Dame Lucie Knowles
of Kent, Sir Peter Grinfers of France, the Lord Vere Earl of Oxford, Ambrose
de Vere, son to the Earl of Oxforde, Sir Thomas Tadnam Knight, William
Bourser, Lord Fitz Warren, Sir Thomas de la Land Knight, Dame Ioane Noris the
Lady of Bedforde, Anne daughter to John Vicount Wells, Walter Neuel Esquire,
Sir John Manners Knight^ the wife of Sir David Cradocke knight, the mother to
the Lord Spencers wife, Sir Bartlemew Dadlegate, John son to Sir John
Wingfield, Sir Walter Mewes, Robert ne Wenton Esquire, Philip Spencer son to
Sir Hugh Spencer, Dame Isabell daughter to Sir Hugh. In the body of the
church, Dame Julian wife to Sir Richard Lacie, Sir Thomas Courtney son to
the Earl of Devonshire, and by him his sister, wedded to Cheuerstone, the
daughter of the Lord Beamont, two sons of Sir Thomas Morley, to wit William
and Ralph, Sir William Talmage Knight, Nicholas Blondell Esquire, Sir Richard
Chamberlain Esquire, John Halton gentleman, Sir John Gifford Knight, Thomas
Manningham Esquire, Sir William Kenude Knight, Sir William son to Sir Thomas
Terell, John Surell gentleman. In the east wing Margaret Barentin gentlewoman,
John Spicer Esquire, and Letis his wife, John le Percers Esquire, Roger Chibary
Esquire, Peter Morens Esquire, Thomas son to Sir William Beckland. James
Cuthing Esquire, John Chornet Esquire, William Kenley Esquire, Margery wife to
Thomas Band and daughter to John Huch, the Lord Mawris of Barkeley, and Earl
of Nothingham, and Dame Ioane his wife. In the west wing Sir John Terrell, and
Dame Katherine his wife, Sir Walter of Powle Knight, Sir John Blanckwell and
his wife, Dame Jane Said, daughter to Sir John Lee, Sir John Dawbeny, son
and heir to Sir Giles Dawbeny, William son to Sir Roger Scroope, Dame Ioane
Dawbeny wife to Sir William Dawbeny, Thomas Charles Esquire, Sir John Dawbeny
knight, and his son Robert, Sir James Bell Knight, Sir Oliver Manny Knight,
Henry Desky Esquire, Sir Diones Mordaske Knight, Sir Bernard Rolingcort, Sir
Peter Kayor knights, Sir William Tirell knight, Sir William his brother,
William Collingborne Esquire beheaded 1484. Sir Roger Clifford knight, Sir
Thomas Coke Mayor in the year 1462. William Edward Mayor 1471. Sir John Dawtry
Knight 1519. Dame Margaret Rade 1510.

On the south side and at the West end of this Church many fair houses are
builded, namely in Throgmorton street, Throgmorton street.
one very large and spacious, builded in the place of old and small
tenements, by Thomas Cromwell master of the kings Jewel house, after that
Master of the Rolls, then Lord Cromwell T. Cromwell his house.
Knight Lord privy seal, Uicker General, Earl of Essex, high Chamberlain
of England etc. This house being finished, and having some reasonable plot of
ground left for a garden, he caused the pales of the gardens adjoining to the
north part thereof on a sudden to be taken down 22. foot to be measured
forth right into the north of every man's ground, a line there to be drawn, a
trench to be cast, a foundation laid, and a high brick wall to be builded: my
father had a garden there, he had also an house standing close to his wall,
this house they loosed from the ground, and carried on rowlers into my fathers
garden, 22. foot ere my father heard thereof, no warning was given him, nor
other answer when he heard thereof, and spoke to the surueighers of that
wirke, but that their master, Sir Thomas commanded them so to do, no man
durst go to argue the matter, but each man lost his land: and so much of mine
own knowledge have I thought good to note, that the sudden rising of some
men, causes them in some matters to forget themselves. The company of the
Drapers The Drapers hall.
in London bought this house, and now the same is their common hall, this
company obtained of king Henry the sixth, in the 17. of his reign to be
incorporate. John Gidney was chosen to be their first M. and the 4. wardens
were, I. Wotton, I. Darbie, Robert Breton, and T. Cook. The arms The Drapers
arms.
granted to the said company by Sir William Bridges Knight, first Gartier, or
principal King at Arms of England in Blason are thus: Three sun beams
issuing out of three clouds of flame, crowned with three crowns imperials of
gold, upon a shield Azure. From this hall on the same side down to the grates
and course of Walbrooke have ye diverse fair houses for merchants and other,
from the which grates, back again on the other side in Lethbury Lethbury, or
Lothbury.
(so called in record of Edward the third. the 38. year, (and now corruptly
called Lothbury) are candlestick founders placed, till ye come to Bartholemew
lane, Bartholemew lane.
so called of S. Bartholmews church, at the southeast corner thereof. In this
lane also are diverse fair builded houses on both sides, and so likewise have
ye in the other street, which stretches from the Friars Augustins South gate,
to the corner over against S. Bennets church. In this street amongst other
fair buildings the most ancient was of old time an house pertaining to the
Abbot Abbot of S. Albones his Inn.
of S. Albons, John Catcher Alderman now dwells there: then is there a large
Free school Free school at S. Anthonies Hospital Three needle street.
pertaining to the late dissolved Hospital of S. Anthony: in this school has
been many good scholars trained up Now in three needle street, on the south
part thereof, the first monument at y^ east end by the well with 2. buckets or
pump is the parish Church of S. Martin, S. Martins Otoswich a parish church.
called Oteswich, of William Oteswich, and John Otoswich his son new founders
thereof. There be monuments in this Church, of William Constantine Alderman,
and Emme his wife. Katherine wife to Benedick Augustine, Sir William Drifield
knight, John Oteswich and his wife, under a fair monument on the south side,
John Churchman one of the Sheriffs in the year 1385. Richard Naylor Tailor
Alderman 1483. James Falleron, John Melchborne, Thomas Hey and Ellis his wife,
William Clitherow and Margaret his wife, Oliver and William sons to John
Woodrofe Esquire, Hugh Pemberton Tailor Alderman, 1500. and Katherine his wife,
Matthew Pemberton Merchant Tailor about 1514. he gave 50. pound to the
repayring of S. Laurence Chapel. The aforesaid John Churchman for William and
John Oteswich by license of Henry the fourth, the 6. of his reign gave the
aduowson or patronage of this church, four messuages and 17. shops with the
appurtenances in the parish of S. Martins Oteswich etc. to the master and
Wardens of Tailors and linen armourers, keepers of the Gwild, and fraternity
of S. John Baptist in London, and to their successors in perpetual alms, to
be employed on the poor brethren and sisters: whereupon (adjoining unto the
West end of this parish church) the said master and wardens builded about a
proper quadrant or squared court, seven alms houses, Taylers and linen
armorers their alms houses.
wherein they placed seven alms men, of that company, and their wives (if they
had wives) each of these 7. of old time had xiiij.^.the week, but now of later
time their stipend by the said master and Wardens has been augmented to the
sum of xxvj.^.the quarter, which is v.pound iiij.^.the year to each of them
besides coals, more to each of them xx^.the year by gift of Walter Fish
sometime master of that company and Tailor to her Majesty.

Some small distance from thence is the Merchant Tailors hal, Tailors and linen
armorers hall.
pertaining to the Guilde and fraternity of S. John Baptist, time out of mind,
called of Tailors, Antiquity of the Tailors feast by authority.
and linen armourers of London, for I find that King Edward the first in the
28. of his raygne confirmed this Guild by the name of Tailors and linen
armourers: and also gave to the brethren thereof authority every year at
midsommer to hold a feast, A pilgrim to travail for the Taylers now called
master purueyers of alms now called Wardens.
and to choose unto them a governor, or master with Wardens: whereupon the
same year 1300. on the feast day of the nativity of Saint John Baptist, they
chose Henry de Ryall to be their pilgrim for the master of this mystery (as
one that traveled for the whole company) was then so called until the 11. of
Richard the second: and the four wardens were then called purueyors of alms,
(now called quarterage) of the said fraternity. This Merchant Tailors Taylers
purchase their hal.
hal sometime pertaining to a worshipful gentleman named Edmond Crepin: he in
the year of Christ 1331. the sixth of Edward the third, for a certain sum of
money to him paid, made his grant thereof by the name of his principal
message in the wards of Cornehill, and Brodestreet, which Sir Oliver Ingham
knight did then hold, to Ihon of Yakesley the kings pauilion maker. Taylers
hall.
The 21. of Edward the fourth, Thomas Clarentius principal king of Herraldes,
for the south part of England, granted by his pattentes to the said
fraternity and guilde of S. Ihon Baptist, of Tailors and linen armourers, The
merchant Tailors armes^
to bear in a field silver, a pauilion between two mantels imperial, purple,
garnished with gold, in a chief Azure an holy lamb, set within a sun, the
creast upon the helm, a pauilion purple garnished with gold etc^ After this
King Henry the seventh, being himself a brother of this fraternity, or guild of
S. John Baptist of Tailors and linen Taylers and linen armorers incorporate
merchant Tailors.
armourers (as diverse other his predecessors Kings before him had been, to
wit Rychard the third, Edward the fourth, Henry the sixth, Henry the fifth, Henry
the fourth, and Richard the second: And for that diverse of that fraternity had
time out of mind, been great merchants, and had frequented all sorts of
marchandises into most parts of the world, to the honor of the kings realm,
and to the great profit of his subjects, and of his progenitors and the men of
the said mystery during the time aforesaid, had exercised the buying and
selling of all wares and merchandises, especially of woollen cloth, as well in
gross, as by retayle, throughout all this realm of England, and chiefly
within the said city, therefore he of his especial grace did change,
transfer and translate the Guilde aforesaid, and did incorporate them into
the name of the master and wardens of the Merchant Tailors, of the fraternity
of S. John Baptist in the city of London.

Some distance West from this the Merchant Tailors hall, is Finkes lane, Finke
lane^
so called of Robert Finke, and Robert Finke his son, James Finke, and
Rosamund Finke. Robert Finke the elder new builded the parish Church of Saint
Bennet, commonly called Finke of the founder, his tenementes were both of Saint
Bennets parish, and S. Martins Otelwich parish: the one half of this Finke
lane is of Brodestreete ward. to wit, on the west side up to the great and
principal house, and the same house wherein the said Finke dwelled: but on the
other side namely the East not so much toward Cornehill: then without this
lane in the foresaid three needle street, is the said parish Church of Saint
Bennet, a proper Church, Parish Church of S. Bennet Finke.
in which are these monumentes of the dead. Robert Simpson and Elizabeth his
wife, Roger Strange Esquire, Trerisse, William Coolby, John Frey, Thomas Briar
Plommer, 1410. etc.

Some distance west is the Royal Exchange, whereof more shall be spoken in the
ward of Cornehill, and so down to the little Conduite, called the pissing
Conduit, by the Stocks market, and this is the south side of three needle
street.

On the North side of this street from over against the East corner of S.
Martins Oteswich Church, have ye diverse fair and large houses till you come to
the hospital Hospital of S. Anthony sometime a Sinagogue of the Jews.
of S. Anthony, sometime a Cell to S. Anthonies of Vienna. For I read that
King Henry the third granted to the brotherhood of S. Anthony of Vienna, a
place amongst the Jews, which was sometime their Sinagogue, Patent record.
and had been builded by them about the year 1231 but the christians obtained
of the king that it should be dedicated to our blessed Lady, and since an
Hospital being there builded, was called S. Anthonies in London: it was founded
in the parish of S. Bennet Finke, for a master, two priests, one
schoolemayster, and 12. poor men: after this foundation amongst other things
given to this Hospital, one was a message and garden, and one other parcel
of ground contained 37. foot in length, and 18. foot in breadth in the parish
of ^. Bennet Finke: this was given to the Master of the Hospital, to the
enlarging of their Church and house to the same belonging, for a master,
fourteen priests, etc. in the seventh of Henry the sixth. King Henry the sixth
his gift to S. Anthonies Hospital.
Moreover king Henry the sixth, in the twentieth of his reign gave unto John
Carpenter Doctor of divinity, master of S. Anthonies hospital, and to his
brethren and their successors for ever his manor of Poninghton with the
apurtenances, with certain pensions and portions of Milborn, Turneworth,
Charlton, and up Wimborne, in y^ county of Southha^pton toward y^ maintenance
of 5. scholars in the university of Oxford to be brought up in the faculty of
arts, after the rate of ten pence the week, for every Scholar: so that the
said Scholars before their going to Oxforde, be first instructed in their
rudimentes of Grammar, at the College of Eaton, founded by the said king.

In the year 1474. Edward the fourth granted to William Say, Batcheler of
Divinity, master of the Hospital of S. Anthony, to have Priests, Clerks,
Scholars, poor men, and Brethren of the same Clarks or Lay men, Queristers,
Procters, Messengers, Servants in Household, and other things whatsoever, the
like as the Prior and Covent of S. Anthonies, of Vienna, etc. This Hospital
was annexed, united, and appropriated unto the Colegiate Church of S. George in
Windsor, about the year 1485, (as was reported) by Sir Anthony Baker
(master of the said Hospital,) to Sir John Wolsborne knight, and other
commissioners in the seven and thirtith of Henry the eight, since the said
annexing, to wit in the year 1499 the foureteenth of Henry the seventh, Sir
John Tate John Tate his gift to S. Anthonies Hospital.
sometime Ale Bruer, then a Merser, caused his Brue house called the Swan,
near adjoining to the said, Free Chapel, College, or Hospital, of S.
Anthony, to be taken down, for the enlarging of the Church, which was then
newly builded: toward the building whereof the said Tate gave great sommes of
money.

This goodly foundation having a free school and Almeshouses Free School and
Almosehouses.
for poor men (builded of hard stone) adjoining to the west end of the Church,
was of old time confirmed by Henry the sixth in the year 1447. The outward
work of this new church was finished in the year 1501. the said John Tate
deceased about the year 1514. and was there buried in a monument by him
prepared, as appears by an indenture tripartite, made between the said John
Tate, the Deane of Windsor, and William Milborne Chamberlain.

Walter Champion Draper, one of the Sheriffs of London, 1529. was buried
there, and gave to the Beademen twenty pound. The lands by year of this
Hospital were valued in the seven and thirty of Henry the eight to be fifety
five pound, six shillinges eight pence.

One Johnson (a Schoolemaister there) became a Prehendarie of Windsor, and then
by little and little followed the spoil of this Hospital: he first dissolved
the Quire, conveyed the plate and ornaments, then the Bells, and lastly put
out the Alms men Alms men put from their houses at S. Anthonies Hospital
from their houses, appointing them portions of twelve pence the week to each
(but now I hear of no such matter) their houses with other be now letten out
for rent, and the Church is a preaching place for the French nation.

This School house was commanded in the reign of Henry the sixth, and sithence
also above other: but now it is decayed, and come to nothing, by taking from
it, what thereunto belonged. Next is the Parrish Church of Saint Bartilmew Free
school of S. Anthonies decayed^ parish church of S. Bartilmew
at the end of Bartlemew Lane, Thomas Pike Alderman, with the help of
Nicholas Yoo, one of the Sheriffs of London, in the year 1438. new builded
this church, and were there buried: Sir John Frey knight, and Alderban, a
Gascoyne, were buried there. Sir William Cappell Mayor, 1509. added unto this
Church a proper Chapel on the south side thereof, and was buried there: Sir
Giles Chapple, James Wilforde. Tailor, one of the Sheriffs, 1499. appointed by
his Testament, a Doctor of Divinity, every Good Friday, for ever to preach
there, of Christ's Passion, from six of the clock, till 8. before noone, in
the said Church: John Wilforde Marchant-Taylor Alderman, 1544. Sir James
Wilforde, 1550. Sir George Barn Mayor, 1552. etc.

Then lower down toward the Stocks market is the parrish Church of S.
Christopher, parish church of S. Christopher.
but reedified to new: for Richard Shore one of the Sheriffs, 1506. gave money
toward the building of the steeple. There lie buried Richard Sherington
1392. who gave lands to that Church: the Lady Margaret Norforde 1406. John
Clauering 1421. who gave lands thereunto: John Gidney Mayor, 1427. William
Hampton Mayor, 1472. was a great benefactor, and glased some of the Church
windowes^ Sir William Martin Mayor 1492. Roger Achley Mayor, 1511. Robert
Thorn Merchant Tailor, 1532. he gave by his Testament in Charity more then
four thousand four hundred forty five pound. John Norryholme, Ralph Batte,
Allice Perciuall, Jane Drew, William Borresbie, John Beck Richard Sutten,
William Batte, James Well, Henry Beacher Alderman, 1570.

West from this Church have ye Skalding Alley, of old time, called Skalding
house, or Skalding Wike, Scalding house or Scalg^^d wicke.
because that ground for the most part was then employed by Poulters, that
dwelled in the high street, from the Stocks market to the great Conduit.
Their Poultrie which they sold at their stalles were skalded there, the street
does yet bear the name of the Poultrie, and the Poulters are but lately
departed from thence into other streets as into Grass street, and to the
ends of S. Nicholas flesh shambles. This Skalding Wike is the farthest west
part of Brodestreete ward, and is by the water called Walbrooke, parted from
Cheap ward: this Brodestreete ward has an Alderman with his Deputy, common
Counselors ten, Constables ten, Scauengers eight, Wardmote inquest thirteen,
and a Beadle. It is taxed to the fifteen, in London, at seven and twenty
pound, and accounted in the Exchequer after twenty five pound.

Cornhill Ward.
THe next ward toward the south, is Cornhill ward, Cornhill ward
so called of a corn market, time out of mind there holden, and is a part of
the principal high street, beginning at the west end of Leaden hall,
stretching down west on both the sides by the south end of Finckes lane, on
the right hand, and by the North end of Birchouers lane, on the left part of
which lanes, to wit, to the middle of them is of this ward and so down to the
Stocks market, and this is the bounds of this Ward. The upper, or East part of
this Ward, and also a part of Lymestreete ward has been (as I said) a
market place, especially for Corn, and since for all kind of victuals, as is
partly showed in Limestreete ward, yet it appears of record, that in the
year 1522. the Rippars of Rye and other places sold their fresh fish in Leaden
hall market, upon Cornhil, but foreign Butchers were not admitted, there to sell
flesh til the year 1533. and shortly after it was enacted, that the said
Butchers and other should sell their beef and mutton by weight, Fleshmarket at
Leadenhal and alteration of prices in a short time.
to wit beef not above a halfpennie the pound, and mutton halfpenny half
farthing: which act being devised for the great commodity of the realm, (as it
was then thought) has since proved far otherways, for before that time a fat
ox was sold at London, for six and twenty shillings 8.^. at the most, a fat
Wether for three shillings 4. pence, a fat Calfe the like price, a fat Lamb
for twelve pence, pieces of beef weighed two pounds and a half, at the
least, yea three pound or better for a penny on every Butchers stal in this
City: and of those pieces of beef thirteen or fourteen for twelve pence,
fat mutton for eight pence the quarter, and one hundred weight of beef for
four shillinges eight pence at the dearest: What the price is now, I need not
to set down, many men thought the same to raise in price: by mean that every
Grasier knew or supposed what weight every their beasts contained, and so
raising their price thereafter, the Butcher could be no gayner, but by likewise
raising his price: but the true causes of enhansing the prices both of those
and other victuals are not to be disputed here. etc. The Foreign Butchers for
a long time stood in the high street of Limestreete ward, twice every week
vz. Wednesday and Saturday, and were some gain to the Tennantes before whose
doors they stood, and into whose houses they set their blocks and stalles, on
the north side of that street, but that advantage being espied, they were
taken into Leaden hall, there to pay for their standinges to the Chamber of
London. Thus much for the market upon Cornhill.

The chief ornaments in Cornhil ward are these. First at the East end
thereof, in the middle of the high street, and at the parting of four ways,
have ye a water standarde, placed there in the year 1582. in manner following.

A certain German of Dutch man borne, named Peter Morris, having made an
Artificial Forcier, for that purpose, conveyed Thames water in pipes of Lead,
Standarde of Thames water by Leaden hall.
over the steeple of S. Magnus Church, at the north end of London bridge, and
from thence into diverse men's houses, in Thames street, New fish street and
Grassestreete, up to the northwest corner of Leaden hall, the highest ground of
all the City, The highest ground of the City of London.
where the wast of the maine pipe rising into this Standarde (provided at the
charges of the City) with four spoutes runs four ways, plentifully
serving to the commodity of the inhabitants near adjoining in their houses,
and also cleanses the Channels of the street toward Bishopsgate, Aldegate,
the Bridge, and the Stocks market.

Then have ye a fair Conduite of sweet water, castellated in the midst of
that ward and street. This Conduite was first builded of stone, in the year,
1282. by Henry Walls, Mayor of London, to be a prison for night walkers, and
other suspicious persons, and was called the Tun upon Cornhill, The Tun
upon Cornhill a prison house
because the same was builded somewhat in fashion of a Tonne standing on the
one end.

Also without the West side of this Tun, was a fair well A fair well upon
Cornhil.
of springing water, curbed round with hard stone. In the year 1298. certain
principal Citizens of London, brake up this prison called the Tun, and took
out certain prisoners for the which they were sharply punished by long
imprisonment, and great fines, as in another place I have showed.

In the year 1401. this prison house called the Tun was made a Cesterne for
sweet water conveyed by pipes of Lead from the town of Tyborne, and was from
thence forth called the conduite upon Cornhill: Conduite upon Cornhill.
Then was the wall planked over, and a strong prison made of Timber, called a
Cage, with a pair of stocks set upon it, on the top of which Cage was placed
a Pillory for the punishment of Bakers offending in the Assise of Bread: for
Millers stealeing of Corn at the Mill: and for baudes and scolds etc. Cage,
stocks and pillorievpon Cornhill.
In the year 1475. R. Drope Mayor, dwelling in that ward enlarged the Cestern
of this Conduite, with an east end of stone, and lead castelated in comely
manner. In the year 1546. Sir Martin Bows Mayor dwelling in Lombard street,
and having his back gate opening into Cornhill against the said Conduite,
Conduite upon Cornhil enlarged.
minded to have enlarged the Cesterne thereof with a west end, like as Robert
Drope before had don toward the East: view and measure of the plot was taken,
for this work, but the Pillorie and Cage being removed, they found the ground
planked, and the well aforesaid (worn out of memory) which well they revived
and restored to use, they set the Pillorie somewhat west from the well, and so
this work ceased.

On the North side of this street, from the East unto the West have ye diverse
fair houses for marchantes and other, amongst the which one large house is
called the Wey house, where marchandizes brought from beyond the seas, are to
be weighed at the Kings Beam: The way house or kings Beam upon Cornhil.
This house has a master, and under him four master Portars, with Portars
under them: they have a strong cart, and were used to have four great horses,
to draw and carry the wares from the merchants houses to the beam and back
again: now three horses serve the turn. Sir Thomas Louel Sir Thomas Louell his
gift to the Grocers.
knight builded this house, with a fair front of Tenementes toward the
street, all which he gave to the Grocers of London, himself being free of the
City, and a brother of that Company.

Then have ye the said Finckes lane, the southende of which lane on both the
sides is in Cornhill ward.

Then next is the Royal Exchange erected. The Burse upon Cornhill, or the
Royal Exchange.
In the year 1566. after this order, vz. certain houses upon Cornhill, and the
like upon the back thereof, in the ward of Brodestreete, with three Allies,
the first called Swan Alley, Swan Alley.
opening into Cornhill, the second called New Alley, New Alley.
passing throughout of Cornhil into Brodstreete ward, over against S.
Bartilmew lane, the third called S. Christophers Alley, S. Christophers Alley.
opening into Brodestreete ward, and into S. Christophers Parrish, containing
in all fourscore householdes: Eighty houses displaced for building of the
Burse.
were first purchased by the Citizens of London, for more then 353^.^. and were
sold for 478.^. to such persons as should take them down, and carry the
stuff from thence, also the ground or plot was made plain at the charges of
the City, The City charged with buildinges of the Burse.
and then possession thereof was by certain Aldermen, in name of the whole
Citizens given to Sir Thomas Gresham knight, Agent to the Queens Highness,
thereupon to build a burse, or place, for Marchantes, to assemble in, at his
own proper charges: and be on the seventh of June laying the first stone of
the foundation, being Brick, accompanied with some Aldermen, every of them
laid a piece of gold, which the workmen took up, and forthwith followed upon
the same with such diligence, that by the month of november in the 1567. the
same was covered with slate, and shortly after fully finished. In the year a
thousand five hundred seauentie on the 23. of January, the Queens Majesty,
Queen Elizabeth came to the Burse.
attended with her Nobillitie, came from her house at the Strande called
Sommerset house, and entered the city, by Temple Bar, through Fleetestreete,
Cheap, and so by the North side of the Burse, to Sir Thomas Greshams in
Bishopsgate street, where she dined, after dinner her Majesty returning
through Cornhill entered the Burse on the southside, and after that she had
viewed every part thereof above the ground, especially the Pawn, which was
richly furnished with all sorts of the finest wares in the City: she caused
the same Burse by an Herralde and a Trompet to be proclaimed the Royal
Exchange, and so to be called from thence forth and not otherwise.

Next adjoining to this Royal Exchange The Burse called the Royal Exchange.
remains one part of a large stone house, and is now called the Castle of
such a sign, at a Tavern door there is a passage throughout of Cornhill, into
Three needle street, the other part of the said stone house was taken down,
for enlarging the Royal Exchange: this stone house was said of some to have
been a Church (whereof it had no proportion,) of others a Jews house (as
though none but Jews had dwelt in stone houses) but that opinion is without
warrant: for in the first year of Richard the first, to prevent the
casualties of fire (which often had happened in the City, when the houses were
builded of Timber, The cause of stone houses builded in London.
and covered with Reed or Straw, Henry Fitz Alewin being Mayor, it was decreed
that from thencforth no man should build within the City, but of stone, until
a certain height, and to cover the same building with slate, or brent tyle,
and this was the very cause of such stone buildinges, whereof many have
remained till our time: but of late for winning of ground, they have been taken
down, and in place of some one of the^ being low, as but two stories above the
ground, many houses of four or five stories high are placed.

From this stone house down to the Stocks, are diverse large houses especially
for height, for Marchantes and Artificers.

On the south side of this high street is the parish church of S. Peter upon
Cornhill, Parish Church of S. Peter upon Cornhil.
which seems to be of an ancient building: but yet not so ancient as some
reports, for it has been all lately repaired, if not new builded, except
the steeple, which is ancient: the roof of this Church, and glasing was
finished in the reign of Edward the fourth, as appears by Arms of Noble
men, and Aldermen of London then living, there remains in this Church a table
wherein it is written, I know not by what authority, but of a late hand, that
king Lucius founded the same Church, to be an Archbishops sea, and made it the
Metropolitan, and chief Church of his kingdom, and that it so endured the
space of four hundred years, unto the coming of Augustine the Monk.

Ioceline of Furneis writes, that Thean the first Archbishop of London, in the
reign of Lucius, builded the said Church by the aid of Ciran, chief Butler
to king Lucius, and also that Eluanus the second Archbishop, builded a Library
Library of S. Peter's upon Cornhill now a Grammar school.
to the same church adjoining, and converted many of the Druides, learned men
in the Pagan law to Christianity. True it is that a Library there was
pertaining to this Parish Church of old time builded of stone, and of late
repaired with Brick, by the Executors of Sir John Crosbie Alderman, as his
Arms on the south end does witness.

This Library has been of late time, to wit, within these fifety years well
furnished of books, John Leyland John Leyland.
viewed and commended them, but now those books be gone, and the place is
occupied by a Schoolemaister, and his Usher, over a number of scholars
learning their Grammar rules etc. Notwithstanding before that time, a Grammar
school had been kept in this Parish as appears, in the five and twenty of
Henry the sixth, it was enacted by Parliament, that four Grammar schools
Grammar schooles^commanded by Parliament.
in London, should be maintained, vz. In the parishes of All-hallowes, in
Thames street. S. Andrew in Oldboorne, S. Peter's upon Cornhill, and S. Thomas
of Acars. The monumentes of the dead in this Church be these, of Sir William
Bowyer Mayor 1543. Sir Henry Huberthorn Mayor, 1546. Sir Christopher Morris,
Master Gunner of England, to king Henry the eight, Edward Elrington Esquier,
chief Butler to Edward the sixth, and diverse other that be defaced.

Then have ye the parish church of S. Michael Tharchangel, Parrish church of
S^ Michaell.
which has been a fair and beutifull Parish Church. But of late years
greatly blemished by the building of four Tenementes on the North side
thereof toward the street, in place of a green churchyard, whereby the
church is greatly darkened, and otherwise annoyed, the fair new steeple or
bell Tower was begun to be new builded in the 1421. which being finished, and
a fair ring of five belles therein placed. One Russe a Draper gave a sixth
Bell, which he named Russe after his own name, to be nightly rung at eight of
the clock: which bell usually rong by one man more then 100. years, of late
over hayled by 4. or 5. at once, has been thrice broken, and therefore not
rong as heretofore. Robert Drope Mayor buried 1485. on the North side of the
Quire, under a fair Tomb of Gray marble, gave to maids marriaiges 20.
pound, to the poor of that Ward 10. pound, shirtes and smockes 300. to the
poor at his burial 16. pound, gowns of brodecloth to the poor 100. to
prisons, Hospitals and Lazare houses liberally: he also gave his house in
Cornhill to be sold, and the price thereof to be spent on the amendment of high
ways: Iohane his wife afterward Uice Countess Lisle was also buried there
by her first husband, 1500. She gave fourscore and ten pounds in money, to
the beautifying of that church, notwithstanding the Tomb of them both is
pulled down and no monument remains of them. Peter Houghton late Alderman is
now buried in their vault 1596. John Grace Draper was buried 1439. Robert
Fabian Alderman, that wrote and published a Chronicle of England and of
France, 1511. lies there with this Epitaph.

Like as the day his course does consume,
And the new morrow springs again as fast,
So man and woman by natures custom,
This life to pass, at last in earth are cast,
Enjoy and sorrow, which he^^ their time do wast,
Never in one state, but in course transitory,
So full of change is of this world the glory.
His Monument is gone. Elizabeth Peak widow gave ye Patronage or gift of the
benefice to the Drapers, and lies buried in the belfrey 1518. Richard Garneham
1527. Edmond Trindel and Robert Smith my Godfathers, William Dickson and
Margaret his wife my Godmother did lie in the cloister under a fair Tomb, now
defaced. Thomas Stow and Thomas Stow my grandfather and father: John Tolus John
Tolus his gift.
Alderman 1548. he gave to John Willowby Parson of that Church to Thomas Lodge,
G. Hind, P. Bold Churchwardens, and to their successors toward the
reparations of that Church and the relief of the poor for ever, his tenement
with the appurtenances in the parish of S. Michael which he had lately
purchased, of Aluery Randolph of Badlesmeer in Kent: but the parish never had
the gift (nor heard thereof by the space of 40. years after) such was the
conscience of the executors to conceal it to themselves, and such is the
negligence of the parishioners (that being informed thereof) make no claim
thereunto. Philip Gonter that was Alderman for a time, and gave 400. pound to
be discharged thereof, was buried in the cloister about the year 1482. and
Anne his wife etc.

This parish church has on the south side thereof a proper cloister, and a
fair church yard, with a pulpet cross, not much unlike to that in Paul's
Churchyard. Sir John Hudstone Mayor, caused the same in his life time to be
builded, and he deceased, 1531. and was buried in a vawlt under the said
pulpet cross, Pulpet cross in S. Michael church yard.
he appointed lands for sermons to be preached there, but that is gone, and his
Tomb of marble, before the pulpet is taken away, amongst others, namely of
Doctor Yaxly one of the Physicians to King Henry the eight that was buried
there with his wife, under a Tomb of marble.

Then have ye Burcheouers lane, Burcheouers lane.
so called of Birchouer, the first builder and owner thereof, now corruptly
called Birchen lane, the North half whereof is of the said Cornehill ward,
the other part is of Langborne ward.

This lane and the high street near adjoining has been inhabited for the
most part with wealthy Drapers from Birchouers lane on that side the steete
down to the Stocks: in the reign of Henry the sixth, had ye for the most
part dwelling Fripperers or Upholders, Vpholders sellers of old stuff in
Cornhill.
that sold old apparel and household stuff.

I have read of a country man, that then having lost his hoode in Westminster
Hall, found the same in Cornehill hanged out tobe sold, which he challenged,
but was forced to buy, or go without it, for their stall (they said) was their
market. About this time also the Wine drawer of the Popes head Tavern Popes
head Tavern in Cornehil.
(standing without the door in the high street) took the same man by the
sleeue, and said, sir will you drink a pint of wine: Wine one pint for a
penny, and bread to drink it was given free in every Tavern.
whereunto be answered, a penny spend I may, and so drunk his pint, for
bread nothing did he pay.

This Popes head Tavern, with other houses adjoining, strongly builded of
stone, has of old time been all in one, pertaining to some great estate, or
rather to the King of this realm, The kings house in Cornehill.
as may be supposed both by the largeness thereof, and by the arms, to wit,
three Lions passant, which was the whole arms of England, before the reign of
Edward the third, that quartered them with the Arms of France, three Flower
de Luces.

These Arms of England supported Arms of England supported by Angels.
between two Angels, are fair and largely graven in stone on the fore front
toward the high street, over the door or stawle of one great house, lately
for many years possessed by M. Philip Guntar, the Popes head Tavern is on the
back part thereof, toward the south, as also one other house called the stone
house in Lombard street.

Others say, this was king John's house, which might so be, for I find in a
written copy of Matthew Paris his history, that in the year 1232. Henry the
third sent Hubert de Burgho Earl of Kent, to Cornehill Hubert de Burgho Earl
of Kent sent to Cornehill.
in London, there to answer all matters objected against him, where he wisely
acquitted himself. The Popes head Tavern has a foot way through, from
Cornehill into Lombard street. And down lower on the high street of Cornhill
is there one other way through by the Cardinals Hat Tavern, The Cardinals
hatte Tauerne^
into Lombard street. And so let this suffice for Cornehill ward.

In which be Governors an Alderman, his Deputy, Common Counselors four,
Constables four, Scauingers four, Wardemote inquest 16. and a Beadle: it is
charged to the fifteen, at xvj.pound.

Langborne ward, and Fennie about.
LAngborne ward Langborne ward, and sennie about.
is so called of a long borne of sweet water, which of old time breaking out
into Fenchurch street, ran down the same street and Lombard street, to the
West end of S. Mary Woolnothes Church, where turning south, and breaking it
self into many small shares, rilles or streams, it left the name of Share
borne lane, or south borne lane Shareborne or southborne lane.
(as I have read) because it ran south to the river of Thames. This Ward
begins at the West end of Aldegate ward, in Fenne church street, by the
Ironmongers hall, which is on the North side of that street, at a place called
Culuer alley, Culuer alley. Lane stopped up.
where sometime was a lane, through the which men went into Limestreete, but
that being long since stopped up for suspicion of thieves, that lurked there by
night (as is showed in Limestreet ward) there is now this said alley a tennis
court, etc.

Fenne Church street Fan church street.
took that name of a Fennie or Moorish ground so made by means of this borne
which passed through it, and therefore until this day in the Guildehall of
this city, that ward is called by the name of Langborne, and fennie about and
not otherwise: yet others be of opinion that it took that name of Faenum, that
is hey sold there, as Grass street took the name of Grass or herbs there
sold.

In the midst of this street stands a small parish church called S. Gabriel
Fen church, corruptly Fan church.

Helming Legget Esquire, by license of Edward the third, in the 49. of his
reign, gave one Tenement, with a curtilarge thereto belonging, and a garden
with the entry thereto leading, unto Sir John Hariot parson of Fenchurch, and
to his successors for ever, the house to be a Parsonage house, the garden to
be a churchyard, or bu^ying place for the parish. Parish church of S. Mary and
S. Gabriel.


Then have ye Lombard street, Lombard street.
so called of the Longobards, and other merchantes, strangers of diverse
nations assembling there twice every day, which manner continued until the 22.
of December in the year 1568. on which day the said marchantes began their
meeting in Cornehill at the Burse, since by her Majesty named the Royal
Exchange.

On the North side of this Ward is Limestreet, Limestreet.
one half whereof is of this ward, and therein on the west side is the
Pewterers hall, Pewterers hall
who were admitted to be a brotherhood, in the 13. of Edward the fourth.

At Limestreet corner is a fair parish Church of S. Dionys called Back church,
lately new builded: John Darby Alderman about the year 1446. added thereunto a
fair I Will or Chapel on the south side and was there buried: about the year
1466. he gave (besides sundry ornaments) his dwelling house, and others, unto
the said parish Church, Parish church of S. Diones.
John Master gent. was by his children buried there 1444: Thomas Bryttaine,
Robert Paget merchantaylor, one of the Sherifs 1536. Hugh Witch Mayor 1462. and
the Lady Witch: Sir Thomas Curteis Pewterer, then Fishmonger Mayor 1557. James
Haruie Ironmonger Mayor 1581. William Peterson Esquire, William Sherington: Sir
Edward Osborne Clothworker Mayor 1583. buried there.

Then in Lombardstreet is one fair parish church, called Alhallowes Parish
church of Alhallowes in Lombardstreet.
Grass Church in Lombardstreet, I so read it in evidences of record, for that
the Grass market went down that way, and was there kept, but the street was
far larger in breadth. This Church was lately new builded. John Warner armorer
and then Grocer Sheriff 1494. builded the South I Will, his son Robert Warner
Esquire finished it the year 1516. L. Trinitate.
The Pewterers were benefactors toward the North i will etc. The steeple or bell
Tower thereof was finished in the year 1544. about the thirty and sixth of
Henry the eight. The fair stone porch of this church was brought from the late
dissolved Priorie of S. John of Jerusalem, by Smithfielde, so was the frame for
their belles, but the belles being bought, were never brought thither, by
reason that one old Warner Draper, of that parish deceasing, his son young
Mark Warner would not perform what his father had begun, and appointed, so
that fair steeple has but one bell, as Friars were wont to use. The monuments
in this church be these, the said Warners and John Waldon Draper.

Next to this is the parish church of S. Edmond Parish church of S. Edmond in
Lombard street.
the King and Martyr in Lombard street, by the south corner of Birchouers lane.

This church is also called S. Edmond Grass church, because the said Grass
market came down so low. The monuments in this church are these: Sir John
Milborne Draper Mayor deceased, 1535. buried there by Dame Ioane, and Dame
Margaret his wives, under a tomb of touch. Humfrey Heyford, Goldsmith Mayor,
1477. Sir William Chester Draper, Mayor, 1560. with his wives amongst his
predecessors. Sir George Barn Mayor, 1586. etc.

From this church down Lombards street, by Birchouers lane (the one half of
which lane is of this ward) and so down, be diverse fair houses, namely one
with a very fair forefront toward the street, builded by S. Martin Bows
Goldsmith, since Mayor of London, and then one other, sometime belonging to
William de la Pole the kings merchant in the 14. of Edward the third, and
after him to Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, in the 14. of Richard the
second, and so down toward the stocks market, lacking but some three houses
thereof.

The south side of this Ward, begins in the East, at the chain to be
drawn thwart Mart lane, up into Fen church street, and so West, by the North
end of Minchen lane to S. Margarets Pattens street, or Roode lane, and down
that street to the midway toward S. Margarets church: then by Philpot lane,
Philpot lane.
(so called of Sir John Philpot that dwelled there, and was owner thereof) and
down that lane some six or eight houses on each side, is all of this ward.

Then by Grass church corner into Lombard street to S. Clements lane, S.
Clements lane.
and down the same to S. Clements church: then down S. Nicholas lane, and
down the same to Saint Nicholas church, and the same church is of this ward.
Then to Abchurch lane and down some small portion thereof: then down Sherborne
lane, a part thereof, and a part of Bearebinder lane be of this ward: and
then down Lombardstreet to the sign of the angel almost to the corner over
against the Stocks market: and these be the bounds of this ward.

On this south side have ye the parish church of Alhallowes, commonly called
Stane church, somewhat within Mart lane end, by the which church sometime passed
a lane called Cradocks lane, from Mart lane, winding by the north side of
Alhallows Stane church before said, into Fen church street, the which lane being
straightened by incrochments, is now called church alley. Parish church of
Alhallowes Stane church. Cradocks lane.
In this church there have been diverse fair monuments of the dead, namely of
John Costin Girdler, a great benefactor to that church: he deceased 1244. his
name remains painted on the church roof, if it had been in brass it would
not have remained there so long: he gave out of certain tenementes to the
poor of that parish an hundred quarters of charcoles yearly for ever. Sir
Robert Tesle knight of the holy sepulcher, and Dame Ioane his wife, about 1486.
Robert Stone, Sir John Steward, and Dame Alice his wife, Alice William and
John, wife and sons to Thomas Clarell, Agnes daughter to Thomas Niter Eent.
William Atwell, Felix daughter to Sir Thomas Gisers, and wife to Trauers,
Thomas Mason Esquire, Edmond Wartar Esquire, Ioane wife to John Chamberlain
Esquire, daughter to Roger Lewkner Esquire, William Friar, John Hamburger
Esquire, Hugh Moresby, Gilbert Prince Alderman, Oliver Chorley gentleman, Sir
John Writh (or Writhesley) alias Garter, principal King at Arms, sometime
laid under a fair tomb in the quire, now broken down and gone. Ioane wife to
Thomas Writhesley, son to Sir John Writhesley, Gartar, daughter and heir to
William Hall Esquire, John Writhesley the younger, son to Sir John Writhesley
and Alienor, Elianor second wife to John Writhesley, daughter and heir to
Thomas Arnalde, and Agnes his second wife, John Writhesley son of Thomas,
Agnes Arnold, first married to William Writhesley daughter of Richard
Warmeforde, Barbara Hungerford, daughter to Sir John Writhesley, wife to
Anthony Hungerford, son to Sir Thomas Hungerford of Denna^pney in the
counti^ of Gloucester: John Bostoke Esquire, Christopher Hol^, Sir Richard Tate
knight ambassador for King Henry the eight, buried there 1554. his monument
remains yet, therest being all pulled down, and swept out of the church,
where through the Church Warden was forced to make a large ^ xij.^ year spent
in broomes, besides the carriage away of stone and brass at his own charge.
Then is the parish church of S. Nicholas Acon or Hacon, Parish church of S.
Nicholas Hacon.
(for so have I read it in records) in Lombarde street. Sir John Bridges
Draper Mayor 1520. newly repaired this church and imbattailed it, and was there
buried: Frances Boyer Grocer one of the Sheriffs was buried there, 1580. with
other of the Boyers. So was Julian, wife to John Lambard Alderman mother of
William Lamberd, yet living. Then is there in the high street a proper parish
church of S. Mary Woolnoth, Parish church of S. Mary Wolnoth.
of the nativity, the reason of which name I have not yet learned: this church
is lately new builded. Sir Hugh Brise Mayor in the first year of Henry the
seventh keeper of the kings exchange at London, and one of the governors of the
kings mint in the Tower of London, under William L. Hastings, the 5. of Edward
the fourth deceased 1496. he builded in this church a chapel, called the
charnel, as also part of the body of the church and of the steeple, and gave
money toward the finishing thereof, besides the stone which he had prepared:
he was buried in the body of the church, Guy Brice or Boys was buried there,
Dame Joan wife to Sir William Peach, Hugh Acton Tailor, Thomas Nocket Draper
1396. Simon Air 1459. John Meager Pewterer, and Emme his wife in S. John's
chapel, Sir John Pierciuall Merchant tailor Mayor, about 1504. Thomas Roch and
Andrew Michael Uinteners, and Joan their wife: William Hilton Marchantaylor,
and Tailor to K. Henry the eight, was buried there 1519. under the chapel of
S. George, which chapel was builded by George Lufken sometime Tailor to the
Prince, Robert Amades Goldsmith master of the kings jewels: Sir Martin Bows
Mayor buried about 1569. he gave lands for the discharge of that Langborne ward
of all fifteenes Langborne ward discharged of fifteens
to be granted to the King by Parliament: George Hasken, Sir Thomas Ramsey late
Mayor, etc. Thus have ye seven parish churches in this ward. One hall of a
company, diuiers fair houses for merchants, and other monuments none. It has
an Alderman his deputy, common Counselors 8. Constables 15. Scauengers 9. men
of the Wardemote inquest 17. and a Beadle. It is taxed to the fifteen in
London at xxj.pound. In the Exche^^uer at xx.^.x.^.

Billinsgate ward
BIllinsgate ward, Billinsgate ward.
begins at the west end of Towerstreete ward, in Thames street, about
Smartes Key, and runs down along that street on the south side, to S.
Magnus church at the Bridge foot, and on the north side of the same Thames
steeete, from over against Smarts Key till over against the North west Corner
of S. Magnus Church aforesaid: on this North side of Thames street, is S.
Marie hill lane, up to S. Margarets Church, and then part of S. Margarets
Pattens street, at the end of S. Mary hill lane: Next out of Thames street is
Lucas lane, and then Buttolph lane, and at the northend thereof Philpot lane,
then is Rothar lane, of old time so called, and thwart the same lane is little
Eastcheape, and these be the bounds of this Billinsgate ward. Touching the
principal ornaments within this ward. On the southside of Thames street,
beginning at the East end thereof, there is first the said Smartes key,
Smartes key.
so called of one Smart sometime owner thereof, the next is Billinsgate,
Billinsgate.
whereof the whole ward takes name, the which (leaving out the fable, thereof
faigning it to be builded by king Beline ^ Briton, long before the incarnation
of Christ) is at this present a large Water gate, Port or Harbrough for ships
and Boats, commonly ariuing there with fi^h both fresh and salt, shell fishes,
salt, Orenges, Onions, and other Fruits and Roots, Wheat, Rye, and Grain of
diverse sorts, for service of the City, and the parts of this Realm
adjoining. This Gate is now more frequented then of old time, when the Queens
Hith was more used as being appointed by the kings of this Realm, to be the
special or only port for taking up of al such kind of marchandizes brought
to this city by strangers and Forrenners, and the draw bridge of Timber at
London bridge was then to be raised or drawn up for passage of ships with
tops thither. Touching the ancient customs of this B^llinsgate, Customs of
Billinsgate.
I have not read in anyrecorde, more then that in the reign of Edward the
third, every great ship landing there, paid for strandage two pence, every
little ship, with Orelockes a penny, the lesser boat called a Battle, a
halfepenny: of two quarters of corn measured the king was to have one Farthing
of a Comb, of Corn a penny, of every weight going out of the City a
halfepenny, of two quarters of sea coal measured a farthing, and of every
Tun of Ale going out of England beyond the seas, by Merchant strangers four
pence, of every thousand Herring, a farthing, except the Franchises etc.

The next to this is Somars key, Sommars Key.
which likewise took that name of one Somar dwelling there, as did Lion key
Lion Key,
of one Lion owner thereof, and since of the sign of a Lion.

Then is there a fair Wharfe or Key, called Buttolphes Buttolphes wharfe.
gate by that name so called in the times of William the Conqueror, and of
Edward the Confessor, as I have showed already in the description of the
Gates.

Next is the parish church of S. Buttolph, Parish church of S. Buttolph,
a proper Church, and has had many fair monumentes therein, now defaced and
clean gone: notwithstanding I find by Testimonies abroad, that these which
follow were buried there, to wit, Roger Coggar, 1384. Andrew Pikeman, and Joan
his wife, 1391. Nicholas James Ironmonger one of the Sheriffs, 1423. John
Raynewel Fishmonger, and William his Father, the said John Rainwel was Mayor
1426. and deceasing 1445. was buried there with this Epitaphe.

Citizens of London, call to your remembrance,
The famous John Rainewel, sometime your Mayor,
Of the Staple of Callis, so was his chance.
Here lies now his Corpse, his soul bright and fair,
Is taken to heavens bliss, thereof is no despair.
His acts bear witness, by matters of record,
How charitable he was, and of what accord,
No man has been so beneficial as he,
Unto the City, in giving liberality,etc.
He gave a stone house, to be a Reuestrie to that Church for ever: more, he
gave lands, and Tenementes to the use of the Comminaltie, that the Mayor and
Chamberlain should satisfy unto the discharge of all persons, inhabiting the
wards of Belinsgate, Downegate, and Aldegate, Billinsgate ward, Dow^gate
ward, and Aldgate ward discharged of all fifteenes.
as often as it shall happen any fifeteene, by Parliament of the king to be
granted, also to the Exchequer in discharge of the Sheriffs ten pound
yearly, which the Sheriffs used to pay for the Fearme of Southwarke, so that
all men of the Realm, coming or passing with carriage should be free quitted
and discharged of all Tole and other paymentes, before time clamed by the
Sheriffs: Further that the Mayor and Chamberlain, shall pay yearly to the
Sheriffs, eight pound, so that the said Sheriffs take no manner Tole or
money, of any person of this Realm, for their goods, Marchandizes, victuailes,
and carriages, for their passages at the great gate of the bridge of the city,
nor at the gate called the draw bridge etc. The overplus of money coming of
the said Lands and Tenementes, divided into even portions, the one part to
be imployled to instore the Grayners of the City, with wheat for the
relief of the poor Comminaltie, and the other Moity to clear and cleanse the
shelues, and other stoppages of the river of Thames etc.

Stephen Forstar Fishmonger, Mayor in the year, 1454. and Dame Agnes his wife,
lie buried there: William Bacon Haberdasher, one of the Sheriffs 1480. was
there buried, besides many other persons of good worship, whose monumentes are
all destroyed by greedy men of spoil.

This parish of S. Buttolph is no great thing, notwithstanding diverse strangers
are there harbored as may appear by a presentment, not many years since made
of strangers The number of strangers.
inhabitants in the ward of Billinsgate in these words. In Billinsgate ward
were one and fifty householdes of strangers, whereof thirty of these
househouldes inhabited in the parrish of S. Buttolph in the chief and
principal houses where they give twenty pound the year for a house lately
letten, for four marks, the nearer they dwell to the waterside, the more they
give for houses, and within thirty years before there was not in the whole
ward above three Netherlanders, at which time there was within the said
parish leauied for the help of the poor, seven and twenty pound, by the
year, but since they came so plentifully thither, there cannot be gathered
above eleven pound, for they will not contribute to such charges as other
Citizens do. Thus much for that south side of this ward.

On the north side is Bosse Alley, Bosses alley and the Bosse of Billinsgate.
so called of a Bosse of spring water continually running, which stands by
Billinsgate, against this Alley, and was sometimes made by the Executors of
Richard VVhitington.

Then is S. Mary hill lane, S. Mary hill lane
which runs up North from Billinsgate, to the end of S. Margaret Pattens,
commonly called Roode lane, and the greatest half of that lane is also of
Billinsgate ward. In this S. Marie hill Parish church of S. Mary hill.
lane is the fair parish church of S. Marie called on the hill, because of the
ascent from Billinsgate.

This church has been lately builded, as may appear by this that follows.
Richard Hackney one of the Sheriffs in the year 1322. and Alice his wife
were there buried, as Robert Fabian writes, saying thus. In the year 1497. in
the month of April, as laborers dug for the foundation of a wall, within
the Church of S. Marie hill near unto Billinsgate, they found a Coffin of
rotten Timber, and therein the Corpse of a woman, whole ofskin, and of bones
vndeseuered, and the iointes of her arms pliable, without breaking of the
skin, upon whose sepulcher this was engraven. Here lain the bodies of
Richard Hackney and Allice Alice Hackney found uncorrupted more then 170.
years after she was buried.
his wife, the which Richard was Sheriff in the fifteenth of Edward the
second, her body was kept above ground, three or four days without noysance,
but then it waxed unsavory: and so was again buried. John Mordan
stocke-Fishmonger was buried there, 1387. Nicholas Exton Fishmonger Mayor,
1387. William Cambridge Mayor, 1420 William Phillip Sergeant at Arms, 1473.
Robert Revel one of the Sheriffs 1490. gave liberally toward the new
building of this Church, and steeple, and was there buried, William Remington
Mayor, 1500. Sir Thomas Blanke Mayor, 1582. William Holstocke Esquier,
Controller of the kings ships. Sir Cutberte Buckle Mayor, 1594.

This lane on both sides is furnished with many fair houses for Marchantes and
has at the North end thereof, one other lane called S. Margaret Pattens,
because of old time Pattens were there usually made and sold: but of later
time, this is called Roode lane, of a Roode there placed, in the Church yard
of Saint Margaret, S. Margaret Patents la^^
whilst the old Church was taken down, and again newly builded, during
which time the oblations made to this Roode, were employed toward building of
the church: but in the year 1538. about the 23. of May in the morning, the
said Roode was found to have been in the night proceeding (by people unknown),
Parish chur^^ of S. Marga^ pattentes.
broken all to pieces, together with the Tabernacle, wherein it had been
placed. Also on the 27, of the same month, in same parrish amongst the
Basketmakers, a great and sudden fire happened in the night season, which
within the space of three hours consumed more then a dozen houses, and nine
persons were brent to death there, and thus ceased that work of this Church,
being at that time nigh finished to the steeple.

The lane on both sides beyond the same church to the midway toward Fenchurch
street is of Billinsga te ward.

Then again out of Thames street, by the west end of S. Mary hill Church,
runs up one other lane of old time called Roape lane, Rope lane o^^ Lucas
lane.
since called Lucas Lane, of one Lucas owner of some part thereof, and now
corruptly called Love lane, it runs up by the East end of a parish Church of
Saint Andrew Hubbert, or Saint Andrew in East Cheap: This Church and all the
whole Lane called Lucas Lane is of this Billinsegate ward.

Then have ye one other lane out of Thames street, called Buttolph lane,
because it rises over against the Parrish Church Parish church of S. Andrew^
Hubbert.
of S. Buttolph, and runs up North by the East end of S. Georges Church, to
the West end of S. Androwes Church and to the south end of Philpot lane.

This Parrish Church of Saint George in Buttolph lane, Buttolph lan^
is small, but the Monumentes for two hundred years past are well preserved,
from spoil whereof, one is of Adam Bamme Mayor, one thousand three hundred
ninety seven, Richard Bamme Esquier, his son of Gillingham in Kent, 1452.
John Walton Gentleman, 1401. Parish church of S. George.
Marpor a Gentleman, 1400. John, Saint John Merchant of Leauaunt, and Agnes his
wife, 1400. William Combs Stock Fishmonger, one of the Sheriffs, 1452. who
gave forty pound, toward the works of that Church. John Stokar Draper one of
the Sheriffs, 1477. Richard Drylande Esquier, and Katherine his wife,
Daughter to Morris Brune Knight, Lord of Southuckenton in Essex, Steward o
the Household to Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, 1487. Nicholas Partrich one of the
Sheriffs, 1519. William Forman Mayor, 1538. James Mounforde Esquier. Surgeon
to king Henry the eight, buried. 1544. Thomas Gayle Haberdashar. 1540. Nicholas
Wilforde Merchant Tailor and Elizabeth his wife, about the year. 1551. Hugh
Spencer Esquier, 1424. Edward Heywarde 1573. etc.

Then have ye one other lane called Rother Lane or Red Rose Lane, Rother lane
or Red rose lane.
of such a sign there, now commonly called Pudding Lane, because the Butchers
of Eastcheape, have their skalding house for Hogs there, and their Puddinges
with other filth of Beasts, are voided down that way to their dung boats on
the Thames.

This Lane stretches from Thames street to little EastCheape chiefly
inhabited, by Basketmakers, Turners, and Butchers: and is all of Billins gate
ward. The Garland in little East Cheap, sometime a Brewhouse, with a Garden
on the backeside adjoining to the Garden of Sir John Philpot, was the chief
house in this East Cheap, it is now divided into sundry small Tenementes, etc.

This Ward has one Alderman, and his Deputy, common Counselors Constables
eleven, Scauengers six, for the Wardmote inquest fourteen and a Beadle, it
is taxed to the fifteen in London, at two and thirty pound, and in the
Exchequer at one and thirty pound ten shillinges.

Bridge ward within.
BRidgewarde within, Bridgeward within.
so called of London Bridge, which Bridge is a principal part, of that ward,
and begins at the stulpes on the southende by Southwarke, runs along the
bridge, and North up Bridgestreete, Bridge stree^ or new Fishstreete.
commonly called (of the Fishmarket) New Fishstreete, from Fishstreete hill, up
Grassestreete, to the North corner of Grass Church, all the bridge is
replenished on both the sides with large, fair and beautiful buildings,
inhabitants for the most part, rich Marchantes, and other wealthy Citizens,
Mercers and Haberdashers.

In new fishstreete be Fishmongers, and fair Tauerns: on Fishstreete hill, and
Grassestreete, men of diverse Trades, Grocers and Habardashers.

In Grassestreete have ye one fair Conduite of sweet water, castellated with
Crest and Uente, made there by the appointment of Thomas Hill Mayor in the
year 1484. who gave by his Testament, one hundred marks toward the
conuayance of water Water Conduire in Grassestreete.
to this place. It was begun by his Executors, in the year, 1491. and
finished of his goods whatsoever it cost.

On the east side of this Bridge ward, have ye the fair Parrish Church of S.
Magnus, Parish church of S. Magnus.
in the which church have been buried many men of good worship, whose
monumentes are now for the most part utterly defaced. I find Henry Yeuele
Freemason to Edward the third, Richard the second, and Henry the fourth, who
deceased 1400. his monuments yet remains: William Brampto^, John Michel
Mayor 1436 John French Baker, Yeoman of the Crown, to H. the 7.1510 Robert
Clarke Fishmonger 1521. Richard Turk one of the Sheriffs 1549. William Steed
Alderman, Richard Morgan knight, chief Justice of the common place 1556,
Robert Branch Girdler, 1567. Robert Belgraue Girdler, William Brame, John
Coupe^ Fishmonger Alderma^, who was put by his turn of Maioratly, deceased,
1571. in the parish of S. Christopher, but was buried there, as in the Parish
where he was borne. Robert Harding Salter one of the Sheriffs, 1568. Simon
Low, Merchant Tailor Esquier.

Then is the parrish Church of S. Margaret Parish church of S. Margaret upon
Fishstreete.
on Fishstreete hill, a proper Church, but monumentes it has none: a foot way
passes by the South side of this Church, from Fishstreete hill into Rotherlane.
Up higher on this hill is the parish Church of S. Leonard, parish church of S.
Leonard milk church.
Milk church so termed of one William Melker, an especial builder thereof,
but commonly called S. Leonardes in East Cheap, because it stands at East
Cheap corner. Monumentes there be of the Doggetes, namely, Walter Dogget
Uintner, one of the Sheriffs, 1380. John Dogget Uintner, and Allice his wife,
about 1456. this John Dogget gave lands to that Church, William Dogget, etc.

This Church, and from thence into little East cheap to the east end of the
said Church, is of the Bridge ward.

Then higher in Grassestreete is the parish Church of Saint Bennet, called
Grass Church, Garish church ^f S. Bennet. ^rasse church, Customs of Grass
street market.
of the Herb market there kept: this Church also is of the Bridge ward, and
the farthest North end thereof: some monumentes remain there undefaced, as of
John Harding Salter, 1576. John Sturgeon, Chamberlain of London, etc. The
customs of Grass church market, in the reign of Edward the third, as I have
read in a book of Customs were these: every Foreign cart laden with corn, or
malt coming thither to be sold, was to pay one half penny, every Foreign
cart bringing cheese two pence every cart of corn and cheese together, (if the
cheese be more worth then the corn) two pence, and if the corn be more worth
then the cheese, it was to pay a halfepennie, of two horses laden with corn or
maulte, the Bayliffe had one farthing, the cart of the Franchise of the Temple
and of S. Martins le grand, paid a Farthing: the cart of the Hospital of S.
John of Jerusalem, paid nothing for their proper goods, and if the corn were
brought by Merchants of sell again, the load paid a halfepennie, etc.

On the west side of this ward, at the north end of London bridge is a part of
Thames street, Thames street.
which is also of this ward, to wit so much as of old time was called Stock
Fishmonger Row, of the stockfishmongers Stockfishmonger row. Ebgate lane.
dwelling there, down west to a water gate, of old time called Ebgate, since
Ebgatelane, and now ye old swan, which is a common stayre on ye Thames, but the
passage is very narrow by means of incrochments. On this south side of Thames
street about the midway betwixt the bridge foot, and Ebgate lane, stands the
Fishmongers hall, Fishmongers hall.
and diverse other fair houses for merchants. These Fishmongers were sometime
of two several companies, to wit, Stocke-fishmongers, and salt fishmongers,
Stockfishmongers an^ salt Fishmongers united.
and were united in the year 1536. in the 28. of Henry the eight, their Hall
to be but one, in the house given unto them by the Lord Fanhope, in the parish
of S. Michael Crooked lane, whereas before they had several halles, in Thames
street twain, in new fishstreet twain, and in old fish street twain, in all
six several halles. Fishmongers had six several halles.
This company was so great as I have read in the records of the Tower: now
worn out of knowledge to the company, who be not able so much as to show the
reason, why they were joined in fellowshippe with the Goldsmithes, and do give
their arms, etc. On that south side of Thames street, have ye Drink water
wharfe, Drinkewater wharfe and fish wharfe,
and Fish Wharfe in the parish of S. Magnus. On the North side of Thames street
is S. Martins lane, a part of which lane is also of this ward, to wit, on the
one side to a well of water, and on the other side as far up as against the
said well. Then is S. Michaels lane, part whereof is also of this. Ward up to
a well there etc. Then at the upper end of new fishstreete, is a lane turning
toward S. Michaels lane, and is called crooked lane, Crooked lane
of the crooked windings thereof. Above this lanes end, upon Fishstreet hill,
is one great house, for the most part builded of stone, which pertained sometime
to Edward the black prince, Edward the black prince.
son to Edward ye 3. who was in his life time, lodged there. It is now altered
to a common hosterie, having the black bell for a sign: Above this house at the
top of fishstreet hill is a turning into great Eastchepe, and so up to the
corner of Lombard street, over against the Northwest corner of Grass church,
and these be the whole bounds of this Bridge ward within: the which has an
Alderman and his deputy, for the Common counsel 16. Constables 15.
Scauingers 6. for the Wardemote inquest 16. and a Beadle. It is taxed to the
fifteen in London at fifty pound, and in the exchecquer at 49. pound, ten
shillings.

Candlewicke street ward.
CAndlewicke street, or Candlewright street ward, Candlewicke street of
Candlewiright street ward.
begins at the East end of great Eastcheape it passes west through
Eastcheape to Candlewright street, and through the same down to the North end
of Suffolk lane, on the south side, and down that lane by the west end of S.
Laurence churchyard, and that is the farthest west part of that Ward. The
street of great Eastcheape is so called of the market there kept, in the East
part of the city, as West cheap is a market so called of being in the west.
Great Eastcheape.


This East cheap is now a flesh market of Butchers there dwelling, on both
sides of the street, it had sometime also Cooks mixed amongst the Butchers,
and such other as sold victuails ready dressed of all sorts. Eastcheape a
Cooks row.
For of old time when friends did meet, and were disposed to be merry, they
went not to dine and suppe in Tauernes, for they dressed not meats to be sold,
but the cooks, where they called for meat what them liked, which they always
found ready dressed at a reasonable rate, as I have before showed. In the
year 1410. the 11. of Henry the 4. upon the even of S. John Baptist, the
kings sons, The kings sons beaten in Eastcheape, there was no t^u^rne then
in Eastcheape.
Thomas, and John being in Eastcheape at supper, (or rather at breakfast, for
it was betwixt 2. and 3. of the clock after midnight) a great debate happened
between their men and other of the court, which lasted one hour, even till the
Mayor and Sheriffs with other citizens appeased the same: for the which
afterward the said Mayor Aldermen and Sheriffs were sent for to answer
before the king, his sons and diverse Lords, being highly moved against the
city. At which time William Gascoyne, chief Justice required the Mayor and
Aldermen, for the citizens, to put them in the Kings grace: whereunto they
answered that they had not offended, but (according to the law) had done their
best in stinting debate, and maintayning of the peace: upon which answer the
king remitted all his ire, and dismissed them. And to prove this Eastcheape, to
be a place replenished with cooks, it may appear by a song called London
lick penny, made by Lidgate the Monk of Berrye, in the reign of Henry the
fifth, in the person of a cuntreyman coming to London, and traveling through
the same: In westcheape In west cheap linen cloth sold but no silks spoken of.
(says the song) he was called on to buy fine lawne, Paris thread, cotton
Umple, and other linen clothes and such like (he speaks of no silks) In
Cornehill to buy old apparel, and household stuff, where he was forced to buy
his own hoode, which he had lost in Westminster hall: in Candlewright street
Drapers proffered him cheap cloth, in Eastcheape the cooks cried hot ribs
of beef roasted, pyes well baked, and other victuailes: there was clattering of
pots, harp, pipe, and sawtry, yea by cock, nay by cock, for other greater
oaths were spared: some sang of Ienken and Julian etc. all which melody liked
well the passenger, but he wanted money to abide by it, and therefore gat him
into Grauesend barge and home into Kent. Fripparia. Vpholders upon Cornehill,
sellers of old apparel and household stuff Eastcheape.
Candlewright or Candlewicke street Candlewright or Candlewike street, wike is
a wirking place.
took that name (as may be supposed) either of Chaundlers or makers of
candles, both of wax and tallow: for Candlewright is a maker of candles, or of
Week which is the cotton or yearne thereof: or otherwise Wike, which is the
place where they use to work them, as Scalding wike by the stocks market was
called of the Powlters scalding and dressing their powltry there: and in diverse
countries, Dayrie houses or cottages, wherein they make butter and cheese, are
usually called Wickes. There dwelled also of old time diverse Weauers Weauers
in Candlewike street.
of woollen clothes, brought in by Edward the third. For I read that in the
44. of his reign the weauers brought out of Flaunders, Weauers brought out of
Flanders and Brabant.
were appointed their meetings to be in the churchyard of S. Laurence
Poultney, and the Weauers of Brabant in the churchyard of S. Mary Sommerset.
There were then in this city weauers of diverse sorts. to wit, of Drapery, of
Tapery, and Naperie. These weauers of Candlewright street being in short time
worn out, their place is now possessed by rich Drapers sellers of woollen
cloth, etc. On the North side of this ward, at the west end of East cheap
have ye S. Clements lane, S. Clements lane parish church of S. Clement in west
Cheap.
a part whereof on both sides is of Candlewike street ward, to wit somewhat
North beyond the parish church of S. Clement in East cheap. This is a small
church, void of monuments, other then of Frauncis Barnam Alderman, who deceased
1575. and of Benedick Barnam his son, Alderman also 1598. Next is S. Nicholas
lane for the most part on both sides of this ward, almost to S. Nicholas
church. Then is Abchurch lane, Abchurch lane.
which is on both the sides, almost wholly of this ward, ye parish church there
(called of S. Marie Abchurch, Parish church of S. Mary Abchurch.
Apechurch, or Upchurch, as I have read it) stands somewhat near unto the
south end thereof, on a rising ground: it is a fair church, and has the
monuments of John Long Esquire of Bedfordshire 1442. John Wikenson Alderman
1519. William Iawdrell Tailor, 1440. Sir James Hawse Mayor, 1574. Sir John
Branch Mayor, 1580. John Miners, William Kettle etc. On the South side of this
ward, beginning again at the East, is S. Nicholas lane S. Nicholas lane.
which lane, is almost wholly of this ward, on both sides down toward
Thamestreete, to a well or pump there, On the East side of this lane is crooked
lane Crooked lane.
aforesaid by S. Michaels church, toward new fishstreet. One the most ancient
house in this lane is called the leaden porch, Leaden portch in Crooked lane.
and belonged sometime to Sir John Merston knight: the 1. of Edward the 4. The
parish church of this S. Michaels Parish church of S. Michael in Crooked lane.
was sometime but a small and homely thing, standing upon part of that ground,
wherein now stands the parsonage house: and the ground there about was a
filthy plot, by reason of the butchers in East chepe, who made the same their
Laystall. John Loueken stockfishmonger Mayor builded in the same ground this
fair church of S. Michaell and was there buried in the quire, under a fair
tomb with the Images of him, and his wife in Alabaster: the said church has
been since increased with a new quire and side chaples by Sir William Walworth
stockfishmonger Mayor, sometime servant to the foresaid John Loueken, also the
tomb of Loueken was removed and a flat stone of gray marble garnished with
plates of copper laid on him as it yet remains in the body of the church:
this William Walworth is reported to have slain Jack Straw in Smithfield, and
there to have been therefore knighted by the king, but that is not true, for
Jack Straw being afterward taken, was first adjudged by the said mayor, and
then executed by the loss of his head in Smithfield, howbeit true it is that
this William Walworth Praise of Wiliam Walworth for his manhood in aresting of
Wat Tylar.
being a man wise, learned, and of an incomparable manhood arrested Watt Tiler
a presumptuous rebel, upon whom no man durst lay whereby he delivered the
King and kingdom from most wicked tiranie of Traitors. The Mayor The Mayor was
well armed, and had on his head a Basonet.
arrested him on the head with a sound blow, whereupon Wat Tylar furiously
stroke the Mayor with his dagger, but hurt him not, by reason he was well
armed: the Mayor having received his stroke, drew his basiliarde, and
grievously wounded Wat in the neck, and withal gave him a great blow on the
head: in the which conflict an Esquire of the kings house, called John
Cauendish drew his sword, and wounded Wat twice or thrice even to the death:
and Wat spurring his horse, cried to the commons to revenge him: the horse bare
him about 80. foot from the place, and there he fell down half dead, and by
and by they which attended on the king environed him about, so as he was not
seen of his company: many of them thrust him in in diverse places of his body,
and drew him into the Hospital of S. Bartholomew, from whence again the Mayor
caused him to be drawn into Smithfield, and there to be beheaded. In reward
of this service, (the people being dispersed) the king commanded the Mayor to
put a Basenet on his head, and the Mayor requesting why he should so do, the
king answered, he being much bound unto him would make him knight: the Mayor
Mayor made knight and otherwise rewarded.
answered, that he was neither worthy nor able to take such estate upon him,
for he was but a Merchant and had to live by his merchandise only:
notwithstanding the king made him to put on his Basenet, Order of making a
knight for service in the field.
and then with a sword in both his hands he strongly struck him on the neck as
the manner was then, and the same day he made three other citizens knights,
for his sake in the same place: to wit, John Philpot, Nicholas Brembar, and
Robert Launde Alderman. Aldermen knighted. College sou^ded.
The king gave to the Mayor 100.^. land by year, and to each of the other 40.^.
land yearly, to them and their heirs for ever.

After this in the same year the said Sir William Walworth founded in the said
parish church of S. Michael, S. Michaels Crooked lane.
a College of a master and 9. priests or Chaplens, and deceased 1385. was
there buried in the Chapel by the Quire: but his monument^ Monument of Sir W.
Walworth defaced and since falsified, and so remains.
being amongst other by bad people defaced, in the reign of Edward the 6. and
again since renewed by the Fishmongers, who for lack of knowledge, what before
had been written in his Epitaph, followed a fabulous book, and wrote Jack
Straw in steed of Wat Tylar, and therefore have I the more at large discoursed
of this matter.

It has also been and is now grown to a common opinion, that in reward of
this service done, by the said William Walworth against the rebel. King
Richard added to the arms of this City (which was argent, a plain cross
Gulas) a sword or dagger, (for so they term it) whereof I have read no such
record, but rather that which sounds to the contrary: Dunt^orne.
For I find that in the fourth year of Richard the second in a full assembly
made in the upper chamber of the Guildhall, summoned by this William Walworth,
then Mayor, as well of Aldermen as of the common counsel in every ward, for
certain affairs concerning the king, it was there by common consent agreed
and ordained, that the old seal of the Old seal of the Mayoralty broken, and
a new seal made.
office of the Maioraltie of the city being very small, old, unapt, and
uncomely, for the honor of the city, should be broken, and one other new should
be had, which the said Mayor commanded to be made artificially, and honorable
for the exercise of the said office thereafter in place of the other: in which
new seal, besides the images of Peter, and Paul, which of old were rudely
engraven, there should be under the feet of the said images, a shield of the
arms of The arms of this city were not altered, but remain as before.
the said city perfectly graued, with two Lions supporting the same with two
sergeants of arms, an other part, one and two tabernacles, in which above
should stand two angels, between whom above the said images of Peter and Paul
shall be set the glorious Uirgine: this being done, the old seal of the Office
was delivered to Richard Odiham Chamberlain, who brake it, and in place
thereof, was delivered the new seal to the said Mayor to use in his office, of
maioraltie, as occasion should require. This new seal seems to be made
before W. Walworth was knighted, for he is not here entitled Sir, as
afterward he was: and certain it is that the same new seal then made, is
now in use and none other in that office of the Maioraltie: which may suffice
to answer the former fable, without showing of any evidence sealed with the
old seal, which was the cross and sword as now etc.

Now the other monuments in that church Simon Mordon Mayor, 1368. was buried
there, John Olney Mayor 1446. Robert March Stockfishmonger gave two pieces of
ground to be a churchyard: John Radwell Stockefishmonger, buried 1415.
George Gowre Esquire, son to Edward Gowre Stockfishmonger Esquire, 1470.
Alexander Purpoint Stockfishmonger, 1373. Andrew Burel Gentleman of Greyes
Inn, 1487. John Shrow Stockfishmonger 1487. With this Epitaph.

Farewell my friends the tide abides no man
I am departed hence, and so shall ye.
But in this passage the best song that I can
Is requiem eternam, now Jesus grant it me,
When I have ended all mine adversity,
Grant me in Paradise to have a mansion,
That shed^t the blood for my redemption.
John Fenkell one of the Sheriffs, 1487. was knighted, and gave 40.^. to this
church, the one half for his monument. John Pattes^ey Mayor, 1441. Thomas Ewen
Grocer, bare half the charges in building of the steeple, and was buried,
1501. William Combs Gent. of Stoke by Gilford in Surrey 1502. Sir John Brudge
Mayor, 1530. gave 50.^. for a house called the College College house in
crooked lane.
in Crooked lane, he lies buried in S. Nicholas Hacon. Walter Faireford,
Robert Bar, Alexander Heyband, John Motte, John Gramstone, John Brampton,
John Wood Stockfishmonger, 1531. Sir Henry Amcots Mayor, 1548. etc. Hard by
this S. Michaels church, on the south side thereof, in the year 1560. on the
5. of July through the shooting of a gun, which brake in the house Houses in
Crooked lane blown up with gunpowder.
of one Adrian Arten. a dutch man and set fire on a firkin and barrel of
gunpowder, four houses were blown up, and diverse other sore shattered: 11.
men and women were slain, and 16. so hurt and bruised, that they hardly escaped
with life.

West from this S. Michaels lane is S. Martins Orgar lane, S. Martins
Orgorlane, and parish church.
by Candle wick street, which lane is on both sides down to a well replenished
with fair and large houses for merchants, and it is of this ward: one of which
houses was sometime called Beachamps Inn as pertaining unto the^ of that
family. Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, commonly for his time was
lodged there.

The parish church of S. Martin Orgor Parish church of S. Martin Orgar.
is a small thing. William Crowmer Mayor, builded a proper chapel on the south
side thereof, and was buried there 1533. John Matthew Mayor 1490. Sir William
Huet Mayor, 1559. With his Lady and daughter, wife to Sir Edward Osborne, Raph
Tabinham Alderman, Alice wife to Thomas Winslow, Thorudon, Benedicke Reding,
Thomas Harding, James Smith, Richard Gainford Esquire. VVinslow Gent. John Bold
etc. Then is there one other lane called S. Laurence, of the parish church
there. This lane down to the south side of the churchyard, is of Candlewicke
street ward. The parish church of S. Laurence Parish church of S. Laurence
Poultney made a College.
was increased with a chapel of Jesus by Thomas Cole, for a master and
Chaplens, the which chapel and parish church was made a College of Jesus,
and of Corpus Christi, for a master and seven chaplens, by John Poultney
mayor, and was confirmed by Edward the third, the 20. of his reign, of him was
this church called S. Laurence Poultney in Candlewickestreet, which College
was valued at 79.^.17.^.xj.^ and was surrendered in the reign of Edward the
sixth. Robert Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex, and Henry Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex,
were buried there. Alderman Beswicke was buried there, John Olyfe Alderman,
Robert Brown and others. Thus much for this ward, and the antiquities thereof.
It has now an Alderman his Deputy, Common Counselors 8 Constables 8.
Scauengers 6. Wardemote inquest men 12. and a Beadle. It is taxed to the
fifteen at xvj.pound.

VValbrooke ward.
WAlbrooke ward Walbrooke ward.
begins at the west end of Candlewicke street ward. It runs down
Candlewicke street west toward Budge row. It has on the north side thereof
S. Swithens lane, so called of S. Swithens a parish Church by London stone:
this lane is replenished on both the sides with fair builded houses, and is
wholly of Walbrooke ward. The said parish church of S. Swithen Parish church
of S. Swithen.
stands at the southwest corner of this lane, and has been lately new
builded: for license was procured to new build and increase the said church
and steeple, and churchyard, in the year 1420. Sir John Hend Draper Mayor was
an especial benefactor thereunto, as appears by his arms in the glass
windows, even in the tops of them, which is in a field silver, a chief Azure,
a Lion passant silver, a Cheueron azure, three Escalops silver: he lies buried
in the body of this church with a fair stone laid on him but the plates and
other inscriptions are defaced, Roger Depham Alderman was buried there: John
Butler Draper one of the Sheriffs 1420. Raph Iocoline Mayor a benefactor
buried in a fair tomb, William White Draper, one of the Sheriffs, 1482.

On the north side of this church and churchyard is one fair and large builded
house, sometime pertaining to the Prior of Tortington Prior of Tortington his
Inn.
since that to the Earls of Oxford, Oxford place by London stone.
and now to Sir John Heart Alderman: which house has a fair garden belonging
thereunto, lying on the West side thereof. On the back side of two other fair
houses in Walbrook, in the reign of Henry the seventh, Sir Rychard Empson
Empson and Dudley.
knight dwelled in the one of them, and Edmond Dudley Esquire in the other:
either of them had a door of intercourse into this garden, wherein they met and
consulted of matters at their pleasures. In this Oxford place Sir Ambrose
Nicholas kept his mayoralty, and since him y^ said Sir John Heart did likewise.

On the south side of this high street, near unto the channel, is pitched
upright a great stone called London stone London stone.
fixed in the ground very deep, fastened with bars of iron, and otherwise so
strong lie set, that if carts do run against it through negligence, the
Wheels be broken, and the stone it self unshaken.

The cause why this stone was there set, the very time when, or other memory
hereof, is there none, but that the same has long continued there, is
manifest, namely since (or rather before) the time of the conquest: for in the
end of a fair written Gospel book given to Christ's church in Canterbury,
by Ethelstane king of the west Saxons, I find noted of Lands or Rentes in
London belonging to the said church, whereof one parcel is described, to ly
near unto London stone. Liber Trinitate Antiquity of London stone.
Of later time we read that in the year of Christ 1135. the first of king
Stephen a fire which began in the house of one Ailwarde, near unto London
stone consumed all east to Ealdegate, in the which fire the Priorie of the holy
Trinity was brent, and west to S. Erkenwalds shrine in Paul's Church: and
these be the eldest notes that I read thereof.

Some have said this stone to have been set, as a mark in the middle of the
city within the walls: but in truth it stands far nearer unto the river
of Thames, then to the wall of the city, some others have said the same to be
set for the tendering and making of paymentes by debtors to their creditors, at
their appointed days, and times, till of later time, paymentes were more
usually made at the font in Pontes church, and now most commonly at the Royal
Exchange, some again have imagined the same to be set up by one John or
Thomas Londonstone dwelling there against, but more likely it is, that such men
have taken name of the stone, rather then ^he stone of them, as did John at
Noke, Thomas at Style, William at Wall or at Well, etc.

Down west from this parish church and from London stone, have ye Walbrooke
corner: from whence runs up a street, north to the Stocks, called
Walbrooke, because it stands on the east side of the same brook by the bank
thereof, and the whole ward takes name of that street. VValbrooke street.
On the east side of this street and at the north corner thereof, is the
stocks market, which had this beginning. About the year of Christ 1282.
Henry Wales Mayor, caused diverse houses in this City to be builded toward
the maintenance of London bridge, namely one void place near unto the parish
church, called Woole church, on the north side thereof, where sometime (the way
being very large and broad) had stood a pair of stocks, Stocks market.
for punishment of offenders, this building took name of these stocks, and
was appointed by him, to be a market place for fish and flesh in the midst of
the city, other houses he builded in other places, as by the patent of Edward
the first, it does appear dated the 10. of his reign. After this in the year
1322. the 17. of Edward the second a decree was made by Hamond Chickwell
Mayor, that none should sell fish or flesh out of the markets appointed, to wit
Bridge street, The midst of the City.
East cheap, Old fishstreete, S. Nicholas shambles, and the said Stocks upon
pain to forfeite such fish or flesh as were sold, for the first time, and the
second time to loose their freedom, which act was made by commandment of the
king under his letters patents dated at the Tower, the 17. of his reign, and
then was this stocks let to ferme for six and forty pound thirteen
shillinges four pence by the year. This Stocks market was again begun to
be builded in the year 1410. in the 11. of Henry the 4. and was clean
finished in the year next following. Robert Fabian.
In the year 1543. John Coutes being Mayor, there was in this Stocks market
for Fishmongers 25. boordes or stalles which rented yearly to thirty four
pound thirteen shillinges four pence, there were for Butchers 18. boordes or
stalles rented at 41.^.16.^.4.^, and there were also chambers above, 16. rented
at 5.^.13,^.4.^. parish church of S. Mary Wool church


Next unto this Stocks is the parish church of S. Mary Woll Church, so called
of a Beam placed there, even in the church yard (as it seems) for the same
was thereof called Wool church Haw, of the Tronage, or weighing of Woole there
used, and to verify this, I find amongst the customs of London, written in
French, in the reign of Edward the second, a chapter entitled Les customs
de Wolchurch haw, wherein is set downs what was there to be paid for every
Parcel of Wool weighed. This Tronage or weighing of Wool Tronage or weighing
of wool caused the church to be named Wool church haw.
till the sixth of Richard the second, was there continued, and until that John
Churchman builded the custom house upon Woolkey, to serve for the said
Tronage, as is before showed in the Towerstreete ward: This church is
reasonable fair and large, and was lately new builded, by license granted in
the 20. of Henry the sixth, with condition to be builded 15. foot from the
Stocks market for sparing of light to the same. The Parson of this church is
to have four marks the year for Tith of the said Stocks, paid him by the
masters of the Bridge house, by a special decree made the second of Henry the
seventh. John Wingar Grocer Mayor, 1504, was a great helper to the building of
this church, and was there buried 1505. he gave unto it by his Testament, two
large Basins of silver, and 20.^. in money, also Richard Shore Draper, one of
the Sheriffs 1505. Was a great benefactor in his life, and by his Testament
gave 20.^. to make a portch at the west end thereof, and was there buried,
Richard Hatfield of Steplemorde^ in Cambridge shire, lies intombed there,
1467. Edward Deoly Esquier, 1467. John Handford Grocer, made the Fount of that
church very curiously wrought, painted and gilded, and was there buried: John
Archer Fishmonger 1487. etc. From the Stocks market, and this Parrish Church
East up into Lombarde street, some seven or eight houses on a side, and also
on the south side of Woll Church, have ye Bearebinder lane, Berebinder lane
which is of this Walbrooke ward, then down lower in the street called
Walbrooke is one other fair Church of S. Stephen, lately builded on the east
side thereof, for the old church stood on the west side, in place where now
stands the Parsonage house, and therefore so much nearer, the brook even on
the bank. Robert Chichley Mayor in the year 1428. the sixth of Henry the sixth,
gave to this Parrish of S, Stephen Parish church of S. Stephen by Walbrook.
one plot of ground, containing 208, foot and a half in length, and 66. foot
in breadth, thereupon to build their new church, and for their churchyard: and
in the seventh of Henry: the sixth, the said Robert one of the founders, laid
the first stone for him self, the second for William Stondon Mayor, with whose
goods the ground that the church stands on, and the housing with the ground
of the churchyard was bought by the said Chichley for 200. marks, from the
Grocers which had been letten before for 26. marks the year. Robert
Wittingham Draper laid the third stone, Henry Barton then Mayor etc. The said
Chichley gave more 100.^. to the said work, and bare the charges of all the
timber work on the Procession way, and laid the lead upon it of his own cost,
he also gave all the timber for the rooffing of the two side Isles, and paid
for the carriage thereof. This church was finished in the year 1439. the
breadth thereof is 67. foot, and length 125. foot, the church yard 90. foot,
in length, and 37. in breadth and more. Robert Wittingham (made knight of the
Bath) in the year 1432. purchased the patronage of this church from John Duke
of Bedford, uncle to Henry the sixth, and Edward the fourth, in the second of
his reign, gave it to Richard Lee, then Mayor There be monumentes in this
church of Thomas Southwell first Parson of this new church, who lies in the
quier, John Dunstable Master of Astronomy, and Music in the year 1453. Sir
Richard Lee Mayor, who gave the said Patronage to the Grocers, Sir Rowland
Hill Mayor, 1549. Sir Thomas Pope first Treasurer of the augmentations, with
his wife dame Margaret. John Kirkbie Grocer 1578. Sir John Cootes Mayor, 1542,
Sir John York knight, Merchant Tailor,1549. Edward Iackman Sheriff, 1564,
Richard Achley Grocer, Doctor Owyn Physician to king Henry the eight, and
others.

Lower down from this parish church be diverse fair houses namely one wherein
of late Sir Richard Baker a knight of Kent was lodged, and one wherein dwelled
master Thomas Gore a merchant famous for Hospitality. On the West side of this
Walbrooke street, over against the Stocks market, is a part of the high
street, called the Poultrie, on the south side west, till over against S.
Mildredes Church, and the Skalding Wike, is of this ward. Then down again
Walbrooke street some small distance, is Buckles Bury, a street so called of
Buckle Buckles bery,
that sometime was owner thereof, part of which street, on both sides 3. or 4.
houses to the course of the Brook is of this ward, and so down Walbrooke
street, to the south corner: from whence west down Budge Row, some small
distance to an Alley and through that Alley south by the west end of S. John's
church upon Walbrooke, by the south side, and east end of the same, again to
Walbrooke corner. This parrish church is called S. John upon Walbrooke, because
the west end thereof is on the very bank of Walbrooke, by Horshew Bridge,
Horshew bridge.
a Bridge over the Brook in Horsebridge lane. This church was also lately new
builded: for about the year 1412. license was granted by the Mayor, and
Comminalty, to the Parson and Parish there, for the enlarging thereof, with a
piece of ground on the north part of the Quire, 21. foot, in length, 17. foot,
in breadth, and 3. inches, and on the south side the Quire, one foot of the
common soil: There be no monuments in this church of any account, only
William Combarton Skinner, who gave lands to that church, was there buried,
1410. and John Stone Tailor one of the Sheriffs 1464. was likewise buried
there. On the south side of Walbrooke ward from Candlewicke street, in the
mid way betwixt London stone, and Walbrooke corner, is a little lane with a
turnepike in the midst thereof, and in the same a proper parish church called
S. Mary Bothaw, Parish church of S. Mary Bothaw.
or Boatehaw, by the Erber: this church being near unto Downgate on the river
of Thames, has the addition of Boathaw or Boat haw, of near adjoining to an
haw or yard wherein of old time, boats were made, and landed from Downgate to
be mended, as may be supposed, for other reason I find none why it should be
so called. Within this Church, and the small Cloistrie adjoining, diverse noble
men and persons of worship have been buried, as appears both by Arms in the
windows, by the defaced Tombs, and printe of plates torn up and carried
away, there remain only, of John West Esquier, buried there in the year 1408.
Thomas Huntley Esquier 1539. but his monument is defaced. The Erbar The Erbar.
is an ancient place so called, but is not of Walbrooke ward, and therefore
out of that lane, to Walbrooke corner, and then down till over against the
south corner of S. John's church upon Walbrooke. And this is all that I can say
of Walbrooke ward. It has an Alderman, and his Deputy, common Counselors
eleven, Constables, nine, Scauengers six, for the Wardmote inquest, thirteen
and a Beadle, it is taxed to the fifeteene in London, to forty pound and in the
Exchequer to thirty nine pound.

Downgate ward.
DOwngate ward Downgate ward.
begins at the southend of Walbrooke ward, over against the east corner of
S. John's Church, upon Walbrooke, and descends on both the sides to Downgate,
on the Thames, and is so called of that down going or descending thereunto:
and of this Downgate the ward takes name. This ward turns into Thames
street westwarde, some ten houses on a side, to the course of Walbrooke but
east in Thames street, on both sides to Ebgate or old swan, and over against
Cbgate the land side has many lanes turning, as shall be showed, but first, to
begin with the high street called Dowgate at the upper end thereof, is a fair
Conduite of Thames water, castellated, and made in the year 1568, at charges
of the Citizens, and is called the Conduit upon Downgate. Conduite upon
Downgate.
The descent of this street, from the said Conduite to the watergate, called
Downgate, is such that in the year 1574. on the fourth of September in the
afternoon there fell a storm of rain, where through the channels suddenly
arose, and ran with such a swift course toward the common Shores, that a lad
of 18. years old A lad of 18. years old drowned in the chennell^
minding to have leapt over y^ channel near unto the said Conduite was taken
with the stream, and carried from thence toward the Thames with such a
violence that no man with staves, or otherwise could stay him, till he came
against a cart wheel, that stood in the said water gate, before which time
he was drowned, and stark dead. On the west side of this street, is the
Tallow Chandlers hall, a very proper house, which Company was incorporated in
the second year of Edward the fourth. Somewhat lower stands the Skinners
hall, a very fair house, also which was sometime called Copped hall Copped
hall now Skinners hall.
by Downgate in the parish of S, John upon Walbrooke. In the 19. year of
Edward the second, Ralph Cobham possessed it with five shops, etc.

Then was there a College of Priests called Ihesus Commons, Ihesus Commons.
a house well furnished with brass, pewter, napery plate, etc. besides a fair
Library well stored with books, all which of old time was given to a number
of Priests, that should keep commons there, and as one left his place by
death, or otherwise, an other should be admitted into his room, but this order
within this thirty years being discontinued, the said house was dissolved,
and turned to Tenementes.

Down lower have ye Elbow lane, Elbow lane.
and at the corner thereof was one great stone house, called Old hall, it is
now taken down, and diverse fair houses of Timber placed there, this was
sometime pertaining to William de pont le arch, william de pont arch his house.
and by him given to the Priorie of S. Mary Ouery in Southwarke, in the reign
of Henry the first. In this Elbow lane is the Inholders hall, Inholders hall.
and other fair houses: this lane runs west, and suddenly turns south
into Thames street, and therefore of that bending is called Elbow lane. On the
east side of this Downgate street, is the great old house, before spokn of,
called the Erber, The Erber S. Mary Bothhaw.
near to the Church of S. Mary Bothaw, Geffery Scroope held it, by the gift of
Edward the third, in the fourteenth of his reign, it belonged since to John
Neuell Lord of Raby, then to Richard Neuell Earl of Warwick, Neuell, Earl of
Salisbery was lodged there, 1457. then it came to George Duke of Clarence, by
the gift of Edward the fourth, in the fourteenth of his reign, it was lately
new builded by Sir Thomas Pullison Mayor, and was afterward inhabited by Sir
Frances Drake, that famous Warrier. Next to this great house, is a lane turning
to Bush lane, (of old time called Carter lane, of Carts, and Car men having
stables there) and now called Chequer lane, or Chequer Alley, of an Inn called
the Chequer.

In Thames street, on the Thames side west from Downegate is Greenewitch lane
Greenewitch lane or Friar lane.
of old time so called, and now Friar lane of such a sign there set up. In
this lane is the Ioynars hall. Ioynars hall
and other fair houses. Then is Granthams lane so called of John Grantham
sometime Mayor and owner thereof, whose house was very large and strong, builded
of ston, as appears by gates arched yet remaining, Ralph Dodmer, first a
Brewer, then a Mercer Mayor 1529. dwelled there, and kept his Maioralty, in
that house, it is now a Brewhouse, as it was before.

Then is Dowgate whereof is spoken in an other place. East from this Downgate,
is Cousin lane, Cousin lane.
named of one William Cousin that dwelled there, in the fourth of Richard the
second, as diverse his Predicessors, Father, Grandfather, etc. had done before
him. William Cousin dwelling there, was one of the Sheriffs, in the year,
1306. the 34. of Edward the 1. That house stands at the south end of the
lane, having an old and artificial conuayance of Thames water into it, and is
now a Dyehouse called Lambardes message. Adjoining to that house, there was
lately erected an engine, to convey Thames water unto Downgate Conduite
aforesaid. A gin to convey Thames water to Dow^^ gate Conduit.
Next to this lane on the East, is the Stele house, or Stele yard Steleyarde
for Marcha^tes of Almaine.
(as they term it) a place for Marchahtes of Almaine, that used to bring
hither, as well Wheat, Rye, and other grains, as Cables, Ropes, Mastes,
Pitch, Tar, Flax, Hemp, Wainscotes, Wax, Steel, and other profitable
marchandires: unto these Marchantes, in the year 1259. Henry the third, in
the 44. of his reign, at the request of his brother Richard Earl of
Cornwell, king of Almaine, granted that all and singular the marchantes, having
a house in the City of London, commonly called Guilda Aula Theutonicorum,
Gil^ala Theutonicoru^.
should be maintained and vpholden through the whole Realm, by all such
Freedoms, and free vsages, or Liberties, as by the king and his noble
Progenitors time they had and inoyed, etc. Edward the first renewed and
confirmed that Charter of Liberties, granted by his Father. And in the tenth
year of the same Edward, Henry Wales being Mayor, a great contreuersie did
arise between the said Mayor, and the marchantes of the Haunce of Almaine,
about the reparations of Bishopsgate then likely to fall, for that the said
marchantes enjoyed, diverse Privileges, in respect of maintayning the said
gate, which they now denied to repair: for the appeasing of which controversy
the king sent his writ to the Treasurer, and Barons of his Exchequer,
commanding that they should make inquisition thereof, before whom the merchants
being called, when they were not able to discharge themselves, since they
inioyed the liberties to them granted, for the same, a precept was sent to the
Mayor, and Sheriffs, to distraine the said marchantes, to make the
reparasions, namely Gerard Marbod Alderman of the Hance, Ralph, de Cussarde a
Citizen of Collen, Ludero de Deneuar, a Burges of Triuar, John of Aras, a
Burges of Triuon, Bart^am of Hamburdge, Gadestalke of Hundondale, a Burges of
Triuon, John de Dele a Burges of Munstar, then remaining in the said City of
London: for them selves, and all other marchantes of the Haunce, and so they
granted 210. marks sterlinges, to the Mayor and Citizens, and undertook that
they and their successors should from time to time repair the said gate, and
bear the third part of the charges in money, and men to defend it when need
were, and for this agreement the said Mayor and Citizens granted to the said
merchants their liberties, which till of late they have inioyed, as namely
amongst other, that they might lay up their grain which they brought into this
realm in Innes, and sell it in their garners, by the space of 40. days after
Merchants of the Haunce of Almaine lice^sed to lay up their corn in garners,
but to sell it within 40. days after.
they had laid it up: except by the Mayor and citizens they were expressly
forbidden, because of dearth or other reasonable occasions. Also they might
have their Alderman as they had been accustomed, foreseen always that he
were of the city, and presented to the Mayor and Aldermen of the city so often
as any should be chosen, and should take an oath before them to maintain
justice in their courts, and to behave themselves in their office according to
law, and as it stood with the customs of the city. Thus much for their
privileges: whereby it appears that they were great merchants of corn
brought out of the east parts hither, in so much that the occupiers of
husbandry in this land were enforced to complain of them for bringing in such
abundance, when the corn of this realm was at an easy price: whereupon it
was ordained by parliament Act of Parliament for corn brought from beyond seat.
that no person should bring into any part of this realm, by way of
merchandise, any wheat, Rye, or Barlie, growing out of the said realm at any
time, when then the quarter of wheat exceeded not the price of vj.^.viij.^.Rye
iiij.^.the quarter, and Barlie iij.^.the quarter, upon for^eyture the one half
to the king, the other half to the seasor thereof. These merchants of the
Haunce had their Guildhall in Thames street in place aforesaid, by the said
Cousin lane. Their hall is large builded of stone with three arched gates
toward the street, the middlemost whereof is far bigger then the other, and
is seldom opened, and the other two be mured up, the same is now called the
old hall.

Of later time to wit, in the 6. of Richard the 2. they hired one house next
adjoining to their old hall, which sometime belonged to Richard Lions a famous
Lapidary, one of the Sheriffs of London in the 49. of Edward the 3. and in the
4. of Richard the 2. by the rebels of Kent, drawn out of that house, and
beheaded in West Cheap: this also was a great house with a large wharfe on the
Thames, and the way thereunto was called Windgoose or Wildgoose lane, Windgoose
lane.
which is now called Windgoose alley, for that the same alley is for the most
part builded on by the stilyard merchants.

The Abbot of S. Albons had a message here with a Key given to him in the 34.
of Henry the 6. Then is one other great house which sometime pertained to John
Reynwel Stockfishmonger Mayor, and it was by him given to the Mayor, and
communaltie to the end that the profits thereof should be disposed in deeds of
piety: which house in the 15. of Edward the fourth, was confirmed unto the
said merchants in manner following vz. Pattent.
It is ordained by our sovereign Lord and his parliament, that the said
merchantes of Almaine, being of the company called the Guildhall Teutonicoru^,
that now be or hereafter shall be, shall have hold and enjoy to them and their
successors for ever, the said place called, the stele house, yielding to the
Mayor and communalty an annual rent of 70. pound, 3. shillings, four pence,
etc.

In the year 1551. and the fifth of Edward the sixth through complaint of our
English marchantes, the liberties of the stilyarde Stilyard put down.
merchants was seized into the kings hands, and so it rests.

Then is church lane, Church lane.
at the west end of Alhallows church called Alhallowes the more Parish church
of Alhallowes the more.
in Thames street, for a difference from Alhallowes the less in the same
street: it is also called Alhallowes ad foenum in the Ropery, because hay sold
near thereunto at hey wharse, and of ropes of old time made or sold in the
high street. This is a fair church with a large cloister on the South side
thereof about their churchyard, but foulely defaced and ruinated. The church
also has had many fair monuments, but now defaced: there remains in the
quire some plates on grave stones on these persons, namely of William
Lichfield, Doctor of Divinity, who deceased the year 1447. he was a great
student, and compiled many books both moral and divine, in prose and in verse,
namely one entitled the complaint of God unto sinful man. He made in his time
3083. sermons, as appeared by his own hand writing, and were found when he
was dead. One other plate there is of John Brickles Draper, who deceased in the
year 1451. he was a great benefactor to that church, and gave by his testament
certain tenements, to the relief of the poor etc. At the East end of this
church goes down a lane, called hey wharfe lane, Hey wharfe lane.
now lately a great brewhouse was builded there by one Pot: Henry Campion
Esquire, a Beer brower used it, and so does Abraham his son now possesses
it. Then was there one other lane sometime called Wolses gate, Welsey lane.
now out of use, for the lower part thereof upon the bank of Thames is builded
upon by the late Earl of Shrewsbury, and the other end is builded on and
stopped up by the Chambarlaine of London. John Butler Draper one of the
Sheriffs in the year 1420. dwelled there: he appointed his house to be sold
and the price thereof to be given to the poor, it was of Alhallowes parish the
less. Then is there the said parish church of Alhallows Parish church of
Alhallowes the less.
called the less, and by some Alhallowes on the sellers, for it stands on
vaults: it is said to be builded by Sir John Poultney sometimes Mayor, the
steeple and quire of this Church stands on an arched gate, being the entry to
a great house called Cold Harbrough: Cold Harbrough.
the quire of late being fallen down, is now again at length in the year 1594.
by the parishioners new builded. Touching this Cold Harbrough, I find that in
the 13. of Edward the 2. Sir John Abel knight, demised or let unto Henry Stow
Draper all that his capital message called the Cold Harbrough in the parish
of Alsaints ad foenum, and all the purtenances within the gate, with the key
which Robert Hartford citizen, son to William Hartford had, and ought, and
the foresaid Robert paid for it the rent of 33.^. the year. This Robert
Hartford being owner thereof, as also of other lands in Surrey, deceasing
without issue male, left two daughters his coheires, to wit, Idonia, married to
Rir Raph Bigo^, and Maude married to Sir Stephen Cosenton knights, between
whom the said house and lands were parted. After the which John Bigot son to
the said Sir Raph, and Sir John Cosenton didsel their moities of Cold Harbrough
unto John Poultney son of Adam Poultney the 8. of Edward the third. This Sir
John Poultney dwelling in this house, and being four times Mayor, the said
house took the name of Poultneyes Inn. Notwithstanding this Sir John Poultney
the 21. of Edward the 3. by his charter gave and confirmed to Humfrey de Bohume
earl of Hereford and Essex, his whole tenement called Cold Harbrough, with
all the tenements and key adjoining, and apurtenances sometime pertaining to
Robert de Hereford, on the way called Hey wharfe lane etc. for one Rose at
Midsomer, to him and to his heirs for all services, if the same were demanded.
This Sir John Poultney deceased 1349. and left issue by Margaret his wife,
William Poultney, who died without issue, and Margaret his mother was married to
Sir Nicholas Louell knight etc. Phillip. S. Clear gave two messuages
pertaining to this Cold Harbrough, in the Ropery, toward the enlarging of the
parish church, and churchyard, of All saints, called the less in the 20. of
Richard the 2. In the year 1397. the 21. of Richard the 2. John Holland Earl
of Huntington was lodged there, and Richard the 2. his brother dined with him,
but in the next year following I find y^ Edmond Earl of Cambridge had this
house and was there lodged in the year 1398. notwithstanding the said house
still retained the name of Poultneyes Inn, in the reign of Henry the 6. the
26. of his reign, and not otherwise. It belonged fithence to H. Holland Duke
of Excester, and he was lodged there in the year 1472. In the year 1485.
Richard the third by his letters Pattents granted and gave to John Writh, alias
Garter, principal king of Arms of English men, and to the rest of the kings
Herralds and Pursiuantes of arms, all that message with the apurtenances,
called Cold Erber in the parish of All saints, the little in London, and to
their successors for ever. Dated at Westminster the 2. of March, anno regni
primo without fine or fee: how y^ said Herralds departed therewith I have not
read, but in the reign of H the eight. Cuthbert Tunstal Bishop of Durham, was
lodged there, since the which time it has belonged to the earls of Shrewsbury,
by composition (as is supposed) from the said Cuthbert Tunstall. The last
deceased Earl took it down, and in place thereof builded a great number of
small tenements now letten out for great rents, to people of all sorts. Then is
the Dyers Hall The Diers hall.
made a brotherhood or Euild in the fourth of Henry the sixth and appointed to
consist of a guardian or warden and a communalty the 12. of Edward the 4. Then
be there diverse large Brewhowses, and others till ye come to Ebgate lane, where
that ward ends in the East, On the North side of Thames street be diverse
lanes also, the first is at the south end of Elbow lane, before spoken of,
West from Downegate, over against Greenwich lane: then be diverse fair houses
for merchants and others all along that side. The next lane east from Downegate
is called Bush lane, Bush lane.
which turns up to Candlewicke street, and is of Downegate ward. Next is
Suffolk lane, Suffolk lane.
likewise turning up to Candlewicke street, in this lane is one notable Grammar
school, founded in the year 1561. by the master, wardens and assistants of
the Merchantaylors, Marchantaylors school.
in the parish of Saint Laurence Poultney. Richard Hills sometime master of
that company, having before given 500. pound toward the purchase of an house,
called the Manor of the Rose, The mannar of the Rose.
sometime belonging to the Duke of Buckingham, wherein the said school is kept.
Then is there one other lane which turns up to S. Laurence hill, and to the
southwest corner of S. Laurence S. Laurence lane.
churchyard: then one other lane called Poultney lane, Poultney lane.
that goes up (of this ward) to the southeast corner of S. Laurence
churchyard, and so down again, and to the west corner of S. Martin Orgar lane,
and over against Ebgate lane, and this is all of Downegate ward, the thirteenth
in number lying East, from the water course of Walbrook, and has not any one
house of the west side of the said brook. It has an Alderman, his Deputy,
Common Counselors nine, Constables 8. Scauengers 5. for the Wardemote inquest
14. and Bedle, it is taxed to the fifteen in London at 36. pound, and in the
Exchequer at 34.^.10 ^.

Wards on the west side of Walbrooke, and first of Vintry ward.
NOw I am to speak of the other wards, twelve in number, all lying on the west
side of the course of Walbrooke: and first of the Vintry ward, Wards on the
West of Walbrooke^ and first of Vintry ward.
so called of Uintners, and of the Uintrie, a part of the bank of the River of
Thames, where the merchantes of Bordeaux craned their wines, out of Lighters,
and other vessels, and there landed and made sale of them within forty days
after, until the 28. of Edward the first, at which time the said merchantes
complained that they could not sell their wines, paying poundage, neither there
hire houses or sellers to lay them in, and it was redressed by virtue of the
kings writ, directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, dated at Carla
Veroke (or Carlisle) since the which time many fair and large houses with vaults
and sellers for stowage of wines and lodging of the Bordeaux merchants have
been builded in place, where before time were Cooks houses: for Fitzstephen in
the reign of Henry the 2. writes, that upon the rivers side, between the
wine in ships, and the wine to be sold in tauernes, was a common cookerie or
cooks row. etc. as in another place I have set down: whereby it appears
that in those days (and till of late time) every man lived by his professed
trade, Every man lived by his several professed trade.
not any one interrupting an other. The cooks dressed meat, and sold no wine,
and the Tauerner sold wine, and dressed no meat for sale etc. This ward
begins in the East, at the west end of Downgate ward, as the water course of
Walbrooke parts them, to wit at Granthams lane, on the Thames side, and at
Elbow lane on the land side: it runs along in Thames street west, some
three houses beyond the old Swan, a Brewhouse on the Thames side, and on the
land side some three houses west, beyond S. James at Garlic Hith. In breadth
this ward stretches from the Uintrie North to the wall of the West gate of the
Tower Royal: the other North part is of Cordwayner street Ward. Out of this
Royal street by the South gate of Tower Royal runs a small street, east
to S. John's upon Walbrooke, which street is called Horshewbridge,
Horshewbridge street.
of such a bridge sometime over the brook there, which is now vaulted over.
Then from the said south gate west, runs one other street, called
Knightriders street, Knightriders street.
by S. Thomas Apostles church, on the north side, and Wringwren lane, by the
said church, at the west end thereof, and to the East end of the Trinity
Church, in the said Knightriders street, where this ward ends, on that south
side the street: but on the north side it runs no farther then the corner
against the new builded Tavern, and other houses, in a plot of ground, where
sometime stood Ormond place, yet have ye one other lane lower down in Royal
street, stretching from over against S. Michaels church, to, and by the North
side of S. James Church by Garlike Hith, this is called Kerion lane, Kerion
lane.
and thus much for the bounds of Uintrie ward. Now on the Thames side west
from Granthams lane, have ye Herberlane, Harber lane, or Brikels lane Simpsons
lane
or Brikels lane, so called of John Brikels, sometime owner thereof. Then is
Simpsons lane of one Simpson, or Emperors head lane of such a sign: then the
three Cranes lane, Painted Tavern, or three Cranes lane.
so called not only of a sign of 3. Cranes, at a Tavern door, but rather of
3. strong Cranes of timber, placed on the Uintrie wharfe by the Thames side, to
crane up wines there, as is before showed: this lane was of old time, to wit,
the 9. of Richard the 2. called painted Tavern lane, of the Tavern being
painted. Then next over against S. Martins church, is a large house builded of
stone, and timber with vaults for the stowage of wines, and is called the
Uintry. The Vintrie^ Record
There dwelled John Gisers Uintner, Mayor of London and Constable of the Tower,
and then was Henry Picard Uintner, Mayor. In this house Henry Picard feasted 4.
kings in one day (as in my Summarie I have showed.) Then next is Uanners lane,
so called of one Vannar Vanner lane or church lane^
that was owner thereof, it is now called church lane, of the coming up from
the wharfe to S. Martins church. Next is Broad lane Broad lane.
for that the same is brother for the passage of carts, from the Uintry wharfe,
then be the other lanes. At the Northwest corner of this lane, is the parish
clearks hall, parish clearks hall.
lately by them purchased, since they lost their old hall in Bishopsgate
street. Next is Spittle lane Spittle lane or Stodres lane.
of old time so called, since Stodies lane of the owner thereof, named Stodie.
Sir John Stodie Uintner Mayor in the year 1357. gave it with all the Quadrant,
wherein Uintners hall The Vintners hall.
now stands, with the tenements round about unto the Uintners: the Uintners
builded for themselves a fair hall there, and also 13. Alms houses, Alms
houses of the Vintners.
for 13. poor people, which are kept of charity, rent free. These Uintners as
well Englishmen as strangers borne, were of old time great Bordeaux merchants,
of Gascoyne Bordeaux Merchants Gascoin wine 4. pence the gallon.
and French wines, diverse of them were Mayors of this city, namely John
Adrian Uintner, Reginald at Conduct, John Oxenford, Henry Picard that feasted
the kings of England, France, Scotland, and Ciprus. John Study that gave
Stodios lane to the Uintners: the four last were Mayors in the reign of
Edward the third, and yet Gascoine wines were then to be sold at London, not
above iiij.pence, nor Reynish wine above six pence the gallon. The kings sons
supped in the Vintrie^
William More Uintner Mayor, in the reign of Richard the second. In the reign
of Henry the fourth, the young prince Henry, Thomas Duke of Clarence, John Duke
of Bedford, and Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, the kings sons, being at supper
amongst the merchants of London in the vintrie, in the house of Jews John,
Henry Schogan H. Scogan.
sent to them a ballad beginning thus.

My noble sons and eke my Lords dear,
I your father, called unworthily,
Send unto you, this ballad following here,
Written with mine own hand full rudely,
Although it be that I not reverently
Have written to your estates, I you pray
Mine uncunning, takes benignely,
For Gods sake, and hearken what I say.
Then follow of verse 23. staves, containing a persuasion from losing of time,
follily in lust, and vice, but to spend the same in virtue and in godliness, as
ye may read in Geffrey Chawcer Chaucer, fol.^ 334. and 335.
his works lately printed. The successors of those Uintners and wine Drawers
that retailed by the gallons, pottell, quart, and pynte, were all incorporated
by the name of wine tunners, Wine tunners incorporated the 15. of H. the sixth.
in the 15. of Henry the sixth. Having thus much not without travail, and some
charges noted for the antiquity of these Uintners, The Vintoners one of the
12. principal companies The readiest to speak not always the wisest men.
about two years since or more I repaired to the common hall of that company,
and there showed, and read it in a court of Assistance, requiring them as being
one of the principal companies in this city (of whom I meant therefore to
write the more at large) if they knew any more which might ^ound to their
worship or commendation, at their leisure to send it me, and I would join it to
my former collection: at which time I was answered by some that took upon them
the speech, that they were none of the principal, but of the inferior
companies, and so willing me to leave them I departed, and never since heard
from them, which has somewhat discouraged me any farther to trauail amongst
the companies to learn ought at their hands. Next is Palmers lane now called
Anchor lane: Palmers lane or anchor lane plummers hal.
the plummers have their hal there, but are tennants to the Uintners. Then is
Worcester house, Worster house.
sometimes belonging to the Earls of Worcester, now divided into many
tenementes. Then is the Old swanne, Old Swanne
a great Brewhouse: And this is all on the Thames side, that I can note in this
ward.

On the land side in the royal street is Pater noster lane, pater noster lane.
and the fair parish church of S. Michael called Pater noster church in the
Royal: this church was new builded and made a college of S. Spirit, and S.
Mary, founded by Richard Whittington Mercer, 4. times Mayor, for a master, 4.
fellows masters of Art, clearks, conducts, chorists, etc. and an alms house
called Gods house, or hospital Parish church of S. Michaels pater noster a
College one Almesehouse or Hospital.
for thirteen poor men, one of them to be Tutor, and to have xvj.^.the week
the other twelve each of them to have xiiij.^. the week for ever, with other
necessary provisions, an hutch with three locks, a common seal etc.

These were (as the manner was then) bound to pray for the good estate of
Richard Whitington, and Alice his wife their founders, and for Sir William
Whitington knight, and Dame Joan his wife, and for Hugh Fitzwaren, and Dame
Molde his wife, the fathers and mothers of the said Richard Whitington, and
Alice his wife, for king Richard the second, and Thomas of Wodstocke Duke of
Gloucester, special Lords and Promoters of the said Richard Whitington, etc.
The license for this foundation was granted by king Henry the fourth the
eleventh of his reign, and in y^ twelfth of the same kings reign, the Mayor
and Commonalty of London, granted to Richard Whitington a vacant piece of
ground, thereon to build his College in the Royal, all which was confirmed
by Henry the sixth, the third of his reign, to John Couentrie, Ienkin
Carpenter, and William Grove Executors to Richard VVhitington. This foundation
was again confirmed by Parliament, the tenth of Henry the 6 and was suppressed
by the statute of Edward the 6.

The Almsehouses with the poor men do remain, and are paid by the Mercers,
this Richard Whitington, Richard whitington thrice buried.
was in this Church three times buried first by his Executors under a fair
monument, then in the reign of Edward the 6. the Parson of that Church
thinking some great riches (as he said) to be buried with him, caused his
monument to be broken, his body to be spoiled of his Leaden sheet, an^ again
the second time to be buried: and in the reign of Queen Mary, the
parishioners were forced to take him up to lap him in lead as before to bury
him the third time, and to place his monument, or the like over him again,
which remains and so he rests. Thomas Windford Alderman, was buried in
this Church, 1448. Arnold Macknam Uintener, a merchant of Burdious. 1457. Sir
Hacre Tanke, or Hartancleux knight of the Garter, Sir Edmond Mulshew knight,
near to Thomas Cokham Recorder of London, the Lady Kyme, Sir William Oldhall
knight, 1460. William Barnocke, Sir John Young Grocer Maier, 1466. Agnes
daughter to Sir Iohu Young, first married to Robert Sherington, after to Robert
Mulleneux, then to William Cheynne^ Esquier, John Having Gentleman, William
Roswel Esquier, William Postar Clarke of the Crown, 1520. Sir William Bailey
Draper Mayor, 1533. with Dame Katheren his wife, leaving xvi. children. John
Heydon mercer, Sheriff 1582. who gave Legacies to the thirteen Alms men, and
otherwise for a Lecture

At the upper end of this street, is the Tower Royal, Tower Royal builded
about Henry the I. as may be supposed.
whereof that street takes name, this Tower and great place was so called of
pertaining to the kings of this Realm, but by whom the same was first
builded, or of what antiquity the same has continued, I have not read more
then that in the reign of Edward the first, the 2. 4. and 7. years, it was
the Tenement of Simon Beawmes, also that in the 36. of Edward the 3. the same
was called the Royal in the parish of S. Michaell de pater noster, and that in
the 43. of his reign, he gave it by the name of his Inn, Frosarde.
called the Royal, in the city of London, in value xx.l.by year, unto his
College of S. Stephen at Westminster: notwithstanding in the reign of
Richard the 2. it was called the Queens Wardrope, as appears by this that
follows: king Richard having in Smithfielde overcome and dispersed his
Rebels, he, his Lords and all his Company, entered the City of London, with
great joy, and went to the Lady Princess The Lady Princes lodged in the Tower
Royal.
his mother, who was then lodged in the Tower Royal, called the Queens
Wardrope where she had remained three days, and two nights, right sore
abashed: but when she saw the king her son, she was greatly rejoiced and
said. Ah son, what great sorrow have I suffered for you this day. The king
answered and said, certainly Madam, I know it well, but now rejoice and
thank God, for I have this day, recovered mine heritage, and the Realm of
England which I had near hand lost.

This Tower seems to have been at that time of good defense, for when the
Rebels had beset the Tower of London, and got possession thereof, taking from
thence whom they listed, as in mine Anales I have showed, the princess being
forced to fly came to this Tower Royal, where she was lodged and remained
safe as ye have heard: and it may be also supposed that the king himself was
at that time lodged there. I read that in the year 1386. Lion king of Armonie,
being chased out of his Realm, by the Tartarians, received innumerable gifts
of the King, King Richard lodged in the Tower Royal
and of his Nobles, the king then lying in the Royal: where he also granted
to the said king of Armonie, a Charter of a thousand pounds by year during
his life, this for proof may suffice, that kings of England have been lodged
in this Tower, though the same of later time has been neglected, and turned
into stabling, for the kings horses, and now letten out to diverse men, and
divided into Tenementes. In Horsebridge street, is the Cutlers hall, Cutlars
hall.
which sometime belonged to Simon Dolesley Grocer Mayor, in the year 1359,
they of this Company, were of old time divided into three arts, or sorts of
Workmen, to wit, the first were Smithes, Forgers of Blades, and therefore
called Bladers, and diverse of them proved welthie men, as namely, Walter
Nele, Blader, Bladers or BladeSmithes
one of the Sheriffs, the 12, of Edward the third, deceased 1352. and buried
in S. James Garlic hith: he left lands to the mending of high ways, about
London, betwixt Newgate and Wicombe, Aldgate and Chelmessorde, Bishopsgate and
Ware, Southwarke and Rochester, etc. The second, were makers of Haftes,
Haftemakers.
and otherwise garnishers of Blades, the third sort, were sheathmakers,
Shethmakers.
for swords, Daggers and knives. In the 10. of Henry the 4. certain
ordinances were made betwixt the Bladers, and the other Cutlars, and in the 4.
of Henry the 6. they were all three Companies, drawn into one Fraternity, or
Brotherhoode, by the name of Cutlars.

Then is Knight ridars street, Knightridar street.
so called (as is supposed) of Knights well armed and mounted, at the Tower
Royal, riding from thence through that street, west, to Creed lane, and so
out at Ludgate, toward Smithfield, when they were there to turney, Just, or
otherwise to show their Actiu^ties before the king and states of the Realm. In
this street is the Parish church of S. Thomas Thapostle, Parish church of S.
Thomas the Apostle.
by Wringwren lane, Wringwren lane.
a proper church, but monumentes of antiquity be there none, left undefaced,
except some Arms in the Windows, as also in the stone work, which some
suppose to be the Arms of John Barnes Mercer, Mayor of London, in the year
1371. Henry Causton Merchant, was a Benefactor, and had a Chantry, there about
1396. Thomas Roman, had also a Chantry there, about 1396. Fitzwilliams also a
Benefactor, had a Chantry there, more Sir William Littlesbery, alias Horn,
(for king Edward the fourth so named him) because he was a most excellent
Blower in a horn, he was a Salter, and Merchant of the staple, Mayor of
London in the year 1487 and was buried in this church having appointed by his
testament the bells to be changed for 4. new bells of good tune and sound, but
that was not performed: he gave 500. marks to the repairing of high ways,
betwixt London and Cambridge, his dwelling house, with the garden, and
appurtenances in the said parish, he devised to be sold, and bestowed in
charitable actions, as his executors, would answer before God: his house
called the George in Bredstreete, he gave to the Saltars, they to find a
Priest in the said Church, to have six pound thirteen shillinges four pence
the year, to every Preacher at Paul's Cross, and at the Spittle four pence,
for ever, to the Prisoners of Newgate, Ludgate, Marshalsey, and kings Bench,
in victuailes ten shillinges at Christmas, and ten shillinges at Easter for
ever which are not performed. John Martin Butcher, one of the Sheriffs was
buried there, 1533. etc. Then west from the said Church on the same side, was
one great message, sometime called Ipris Inn, Ipris Inn.
so called of William of Ipres a Flemming the first builder thereof. This
William was called out of Flanders, with a number of Flemminges to the aid of
king Stephen, against Maude the Empress, in the year 1138. and grew in favor
with the said king, for his service, so far that he builded this his house,
near unto Tower royal, King^ Stephen lodgee in the Tower Royal.
in the which Tower it seems the king was then lodged, as in the heart of the
City, for his more safety.

Robert Earl of Gloucester brother to the Empress being taken was committed to
the custody of this William to be kept in the Castle of Rochester, till king
Stephen was also taken, and then the one was delivered in exchange for the
other, and both set free: this William of Ipres gave Edredes Hith, now called
the Queens Hith, to the Prior and Chanons of the Holy Trinity in London: he
founded the Abbey of Boxley, in Kent, etc. In the first of Henry the second,
the said William with all the other Flemminges, fearing the indignation of the
new king departed the land, but it seems that the said William was shortly
called back again, and restored both to the kings favor, and to his old
possessions here, so that the name and family continued long after in this
realm, as may appear by this which follows. In the year 1377, the 51 of
Edward the third, the Citizens of London, minding to have destroyed John of
Gaunt D. of Lancaster, and Henry Percy Marshall, (for causes showed in my
Annals) sought up and down, and could not find them, for they were that day
to dine with John of Ipris at his Inn, which the Londoners wist not of, but
thought the Duke and Marshall had been at the Sauoy, and therefore, poasted
thither: but one of the Dukes knights seeing these things, came in great have
to the place where the Duke was, and after that he had knocked and could not
be let in, he said to Haueland the Porter, if thou love my Lord and thy
life, open the gate, with which words he got entry, and with great fear he
tells the Duke, that without the gate were infinite numbers of armed men, and
unless he took great heed, that day would be his last, with which words
the Duke leapt so hastily from his Oisters, that he hurt both his legs against
the form: wine was offered, but he could not drink for have and so fled with
his fellow Henry Persie out at a back gate, and entering the Thames, never
stayed rowing, until they came to a house near the Manor of Kenington,
Kenington besides Lamb hith.
where at that time the princess lay, with Richard the young Prince, before
whom he made his complaint, etc.

Over against Ipres Inn in Knightriders street, at the corner toward S,
James, at Garlic Hith, was sometime a great house builded of stone, and
called Ormond place, for that it sometimes belonged to the Earls of Ormonde,
Ormond place.
king Edward the fourth in the fifth of his reign, gave to Elizabeth his wife,
the Manor of Greenewitch, with the Town and Park in the County of Kent, he
also gave this Tenement called Ormonde place with all the appurtenances to the
same, situate in the parish of S. Trinity, in Knightridars street in London,
this house is now lately taken down and diverse fair Tenementes are builded
there, the corner house whereof is a Tavern. Then lower down in Royal
street, is Kerion lane, Kerion lane.
of one Kerion sometime dwelling there. In this lane be diverse fair houses for
Merchants, and amongst others is the Glasiars hall. Glasiars hall
At the south corner of Royal street, is the fair parish church of S.
Martin, called in the Uintry, parish church of S. Martin in Vintry.
this Church was new builded about the year 1399. by the Executors of Matthew
Columbars a stranger born, a Burdieur merchant, of Gascoyne, and French wines,
his Arms remain yet in the East Window, and is between a Cheueron, 3.
Columbins: there lie buried in this church, Sir John Gisors Mayor, 1311. Henry
Gisors his son, 1343. and John Gisors his brother 1350. he gave to his son
Thomas his great mansion house, called Gisors hall in the parish of S. Mildred
in Bredstreete, this Thomas had issue John, and Thomas, John made a Feofment,
and sold Gisors hall, Gisors hall corruptly called Sopars hal
and other his lands in London, about the year 1386. Thomas deceased 1395.
Henry Venner, Bartilmew de la vauch, Thomas Cornwalles one of the Sheriffs
1384. John Cornwalles Esquier, 1436 John Mustrell Uintner, 1424. William
Hodson, William Castleton, John Gray, Robert Dalusle Barbar, in the reign of
Edward the 4, with this Epitaph. Epitaph


As flowers in field thus passes life,
Naked then clothed fable in the end.
It shows by Robert Dalusse, and Alison his wife.
Christ them save from power of the fiende.
Sir Ralph Austrie Fishmonger Mayor, new roofed this Church with timber,
covered it with lead, and beutifully glased it, he deceased, 1494. and was
there buried, with his two wives, Ralph Austrye his son gentleman William
Austrye and other of that name, Bartrand wife to Grimond Descure Esquire, a
Gascoyne, and merchant of wines 1494, Thomas Batson, Allice Fowler, Daughter
and heir to John Howton, wife to John Hulton, James Bartlet, and Alice his
wife, William Fennor, Roger Cotton, Robert Stockar, John Pemberton, Philip de
Plasse, John Stapleton, John Mortimor, William Lee, William Hamstede, etc.

Then is the parish Church of S. James, parish Church of S. James Garlycke hith.
called at Garlic hith or Garlic hiue, for that of old time on the bank,
of the river of Thames, near to this Church Garlic was usually sold, this
is a proper church, whereof Richard Rothing, one of the Sheriffs, 1326. is
said to be the builder: and lies buried in the same, so was Walter Nele
Blader one of the Sheriffs, 1337. John of Oxenforde Uintenar Mayor, 1341,
Richard Goodcheape, John de Crissingham, and John VVithers. Monumentes
remaining there, Robert Gabeter Esquier, Mayor of Newcastle upon Tine, 1310.
John Grisors, William Tilingham, John Stanley, Nicholas Staha^, Robert de
Luton, 1361. Richard Lions a famous merchant of wines, and a Lapidary,
sometime one of the Sheriffs, beheaded in Cheap, by VVat Tyler, and other
rebels in the year 1381. his picture of his grave stone very fair and large,
is with his hair rounded by his ears, and curled, a little bearde forked, a
gown girt to him down to his feet, of branched damask wrought with the
likeness of flowers, a large purse on his right side hanging in a belt, from his
left shoulder, a plain whoode about his neck, kiuering his shoulders, and
hanging back behind him. Sir John Wrotch, Fishmonger Mayor, 1361. deceased
1407. Thomas Stonarde of Oxfordshire, John Bromar Fishmonger, Alderman, 1474.
the lady Stanley, mother to the Lord Strange, the Countise of Huntington, the
Lady Harbart, the Lord Strange, Sir George Stanley, Gilbert Bouet, 1398. a
Countis of Gloucester, and one of her children, VVillia^ More, Uintener Mayor,
1395. VV. Venor Grocer Mayor, 1389. Robert Chichley Mayor, 1421. James Spencer
Uintonar Mayor 1543. etc. And thus an end of Uintry ward, which has an
Alderman with a deputy, common Counselors nine, Constables nine, Scauengers
four, Wardmote inquest fourteen and a Beadle. It is taxed to the fifteen,
in London, at six and thirty pound, and in the Exchequer at thirty five pound,
five shillinges.

Cordwainer street ward
THe next is Cordwainer street ward, Cordwainer street warde^
taking that name of Cordwainers, or Shoemakers, Curriars, and workers of
Leather dwelling there: for it appears in the records of H. the 6. the ninth
of his reign, that an order was taken then for Cordwainers and curriars in
Corney street, and Sopars lane.

This ward begins in the East, on the west side of Walbrook, and runs
west through Budge Row Budge Kow.
(a street so called of the Budge Fur, and of Skinners dwelling there) then up
by Saint Anthonines church through A^theling (or Noble street) as Leyland
terms it, commonly called Wathling street, Watchling street.
to the Red Lion, a place so called of a great Lion of Timber placed there at
a gate, entering to a large Court, wherein are diverse fair and large shops
well furnished with broad clothes, and other draperies of all sorts to be
sold, and this is the farthest west part of this ward.

On the South side of this street from Budge Row, lies a lane turning down
by the west gate of the Tower Royal, and to the south end of the stone wall,
beyond the said gate is of this ward, and is accounted a part of the Royal
street, against this west gate of the Tower Royal, is one other lane, that
runs west to Cordwainer street, and this is called Turnebase lane:
Turnebase lane.
on the south side whereof is a piece of Wringwren lane to the northwest corner
of S. Thomas church the Apostle. The^ again out of the high street called
Wathling, is one other street which runs thwart the same, and this is
Cordwainer street Cordwainer street.
whereof the whole ward takes name, this street begins by west Cheap and
Saint Mary Bow church is the head thereof on the west side, and it runs down
south through that part which of later time was called Hosiar lane, Hosiar lane
in Cordwainer street.
now Bow lane, and then by the west end of Aldmary church, to the new builded
houses, in place of Ormond house, and so to Earlicke hill, or hith, to Saint
James church, the upper part of this street toward Cheap was called Hosiar
lane of Hosiars dwelling there in place of Shoomakers: but now those Hosiars
being worn out by men of other Trades (as the Hosiars had worn out the
Shomakers) the same is called Bow lane of Bow church. On the west side of
Cordwainers street is Basing lane, Bassing lane.
right over against Turn basse lane. This Basing lane west to the back gate
of the Red Lion, in Wathling street, is of this Cordwainers street ward.

Now again on the North side of the high street in Budge Row, by the East end
of S. Anthonines church, have ye S. Sithis lane S. Sythes lane
so called of S. Sithes church (which stands against that lanes end: and this
place is wholly of Cordwayner street ward: and also the south side of Needlers
lane, Nedelers lane.
which reaches from the north end of S. Sithes lane, West to Sopars lane. Then
somewhat west from S. Anthonines church is that Sopars lane, Sopars lane.
which took that name not of making soap there, as some have supposed, but of
one Alleyne le Sopar, in the 9. of Edward the second. Then in Bow lane (as they
new call it) is Goose lane, Goose lane.
by Bow church, W. Essex Mercer had tenemen^es there in the 26. of Edward the 3.

Then from the south end of Bow lane, up Watheling street, till over against
the red Lion: And these be the bounds of Cordwayner street ward. Touching
monuments therein, first you have the fair parish church of S. Anthonines
Parish church of S. Anthonine.
in Budge row, on the North side thereof. This church was lately reedified by
Thomas Knowls Grocer Mayor, and by Thomas Knowles his son, both buried there,
with Epitaphes, of the father thus.

Here lies graven under this stone,
Thomas Knowles, Epitaph of Tho. Knowles
both flesh and bone
Grocer and Alderman, years forty
Sheriff, and twice Mayor truly,
And for he should not lie alone,
Here lies with him his good wife Ioane,
They were together sixty year,
And nineteen children they had in feere etc.
Thomas Holland Mercer was there buried 1456. Thomas Windent Mercer Alderman,
and Katherine his wife, Thomas Hind Mercer, 1528. He was a benefactor to this
church, to Aldemary church, and to Bow: Hugh Acton Merchantaylor buried 1520.
He gave 36. pound to the repayring of the steeple of this church: Simon
Street Grocer lies in the Church wall toward the south, his arms be three
Colts, and his Epitaph thus.

Such as I am, such shall you be,
Grocer of London sometime was I,
The Kings Wayar more then years twenty,
Simon Street Simon Street his Epitaph.
called in my place,
And good fellowship feign would trace,
Therefore in heaven, everlasting life
Jesus send me, and Agnes my wife:
Kerlie Merlie, my words were tho,
And Deo gratias I coupled thereto,
I passed to God in the year of grace
A thousand four hundred it was, etc.
William Dauntsey Mercer one of the Sheriffs buried 1542. Henry Collet Mercer
Mayor, a great benefactor to this church, the pictures of him, his wife, ten
sons, and ten daughters remain in the glass window on the North side of
the church: but the said Henry Collet was buried at Stebunhith. Henry Halton
Grocer, one of the Sheriffs, deceased 1415. Thomas Spite Merchantaylor 1533.
and Roger Martin Mercer Mayor deceased, 1573. Next on the south side of Budge
row by the West corner thereof, and on the East side of Cordwayner street, is
one other fair church, called Aldemary church, Parish church of Aldmary.
because the same was very old, and elder then any church of Saint Mary in the
city, till of late years the foundation of a very fair new church was laid
there by Henry Keble Grocer, Mayor, who deceased 1518. and was there buried in
a vault by him prepared, with a fair monument raised over over him on the
North side the quire, now destroyed and gone, he gave by his testament 1000. ^.
toward the building of that church, Richard Chawcer Richard Chaucer father to
Geffrey Chaucer the poet, as may be supposed.
Uintner gave lands to that church, and was there buried, 1348. John Briton,
Raph Hollande Draper one of the Sheriffs deceased 1452. William Tailor Grocer
Mayor deceased, 1483. He discharged that ward of fifteenes to be paid by the
poor, Thomas Hind Mercer buried in S. Anthonines, gave 10. fodar of lead to
the covering of the middle Isle of this Aldemary church, Charles Blunt Lord
Montioy was buried there, about the year 1545. he made or glased the East
window, as appears by his Arms: his Epitaph made by him in his life time
thus.

Willingly have I sought, and willingly have I found,
The fatal end that wrought thither as duty bound:
Discharged I am of that I ought to my cuntry by onest wou^d
My soul departed Christ has bought, the end of man is ground.
Sir William Laxton Grocer Mayor, deceased 1556. was buried in the vault,
prepared by Henry Keble principal founder of that church for himself but now
his bones are unkindly cast out, his monuments pulled down, and the bodies of
the said Sir William Laxton and of Sir Thomas Lodge Grocer Mayor, are laid in
place, with monuments over them for the time, till an other give money for
their place, and then away with them.

At the upper end of Hosiar lane toward west chepe, is the fair parish church
of S. Mary Bow, Parish church of S. Mary Bow.
called de Arcubus, of the stone Arches or Bows on the top of the steeple, or
bell Tower thereof, which arching was as well on the old steeple, as on the new
for no other part of the church seems to have been arched at any time, yet
has the said church never been known by any other name, then S. Mary Bow, or
le Bow: neither is that church so called of the court there kept, but the said
Court takes name of the place wherein it is kept, and is called the court of
the arches, but of what antiquity or continuation I cannot declare.

This church is of Cordwayner street ward, and for diverse accidents happening
there has been made more famous then any other parish church of the whole
City or suburbs. First we read that in the year 1090. and the third of
William Rufus, by tempest of wind the roof of the church of S. Mary Bow ion
Chepe was ouerturned, Roof of Bow church ouerturned by tempest.
wherewith some persons were slain, and four of the Rasters of 26. foot in
length with such violence were pitched in the ground of the high street, that
scantly four foot of them remained above ground, which were feign to be cut
even with the ground, because they could not be plucked out (for the City of
London was not then paused.)

In the year 1196. William Fitz Osbert, a seditious traitor, took the
steeple af Bow, Bow ste^ple fortified with munitions.
and fortified it with munitions and victuailles, but it was assaulted, and
William with his accomplices were taken, though not without bloodshed, for he
was forced by fire and smoke to forsake the church, and then by the Judges
condemned, he was by the heels drawn to the Elmes in Smith field and there
hanged with nine of his fellows. Such was the end of this deceauer, a man of
an evil life, a secret murderer, a filthy fornicator, a polluter of
concubines, and (amongst other his detestable factes) a false accuser of his
elder brother, A false accuser of his elder brother in the end was hanged: God
amend or shortly send such an end to such false brethren.
who had in his youth brought him up in learning, and done many things for his
preferment.

In the year 1271. a great part of the steeple of Bow fell down Bow Steeple
fell down,
and slew many people men and women. In the year 1284. the 13. of Edward the
first. Laurence Ducket Goldsmith, having grievously wounded one Raffe Crepin in
west Chepe, fled into Bow church, into the which in the night time entered
certain evil persons, friends to the said Raffe, and slew the said Laurence
lying in the steeple, and then hanged him up, placing him so by the window, as
if he had hanged himself, and so was it found by inquisition: for the which
fact Laurence Ducket Laurence Ducket han^ged in Bow steeple.
being drawn by the feet was buried in a ditch without the City, but shortly
after by relation of a boy, who lay with the said Laurence at the time of his
death, and had hid him there for fear, the truth of the matter was disclosed,
for the which cause a certain woman named Alice, that was chief causer of the
said mischief was burned, and to the number of 16. men were drawn and hanged
besides others, that being richer, after long imprisonment were hanged by the
purse.

The church was interdicted, Bow Church interdicted.
the doors and windows were stopped up with thorns, but Laurence was taken
up, and honestly buried in the churchyard.

This parish church of S. Mary Bow by mean of incrochment and building of
houses without, wants room in their Church yard for burial of their dead.
John Rotham or Rodham citizen and Tailor, by his testament dated the year
1465. gave to the Parson and Church wardens there for ever, a certain garden
in Hosiar lane, to be a churchyard, which so continued near 100. years. But
now is builded on and is a private man's house. The old steeple of this church
was by little and little reedified, and new builded up, at the least so much as
was fallen down, many men giving sums of money to the furtherance thereof,
so that at length, to wit, in the year 1469. it was ordained by a common
counsel, that the Bow bell should be nightly rong at nine of the clock.
Bow bell to be rong nightly at nine of the clock.
Shortly after, John Down Mercer, by his testament dated 1472. according to
the trust of Reginald Longdon, gave to the Parson and churchwardens of S. Mary
Bow, two tenements with the apurtenances, since made into one, in Hosiar lane,
then so called, to the maintenance of Bow bell, the same to be rong as
aforesaid, and other things to be observed, as by the will appears. Robert
Harding Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs 1478. gave to the new work of that
steeple 40. ^. John Haw Mercer 10. ^. Doctor Allen 4. ^. Thomas Baldry 4. ^.
and other gave other sums, so that the said work of the steeple was finished
in the year 1512. The Arches or Bows Bow or Arches on Bow steeple.
thereupon, with the lanthornes, five in number, to wit, one at each corner,
and one on the top in the middle: upon the arches were also afterward finished
of stone, brought from Cane in Normandy, delivered at the Customers Key for
iiij.^.vj.^.the tun, William Copland Tailor, the kings Merchant, and Andrew
Fuller Mercer, being churchwardens, 1515. and 1516. It is said that this
Copland gave the great Bell, which made the fifth in the ring, and to be called
the Bow bell, and so to be used to be rong nightly at nine of the clock. I
have also been informed, that this bell was first rong as a knell at the
burial of the same Copland. It seems that the lanthornes on the top of this
steeple, were meant to have been glased, and lights in them to have been
placed nightly in the winter, whereby trauailers to the City might have the
better sight thereof, and not to miss of their ways. In this parish also was
a Grammar school Grammar school in Bow churchyard.
by commandment of king Henry the sixth, which school was of old time kept in
an house for that purpose prepared in the churchyard, but that school being
decayed as others about this city: the school house was let out for rent, in
the reign of Henry the eight, for iiij.^.the year, a sellar belonging to the
parsonage for ij.^.the year, and two vaults under the church for 15. ^. both.

The monuments in this church be these: viz. of Sir John Couentrie Mercer
Mayor, 1425. Richard Lambert Alderman, Nicholas Alwine Mercer Mayor, 1499.
deceased 1505. Robert Harding Goldsmith one of the Sheriffs 1478. John Look
one of the Sheriffs 1461. Edward Banks Alderman Haberdasher 1566. John Ward,
William Pierson Scriuener, and Attorney in the common place. In a proper
Chapel on the south side the church stands a tomb, eleuate and arched, of
some unknown founder. Ade de Buke Hatter glased the chapel and most part of
the church, and was there buried: all other monuments be defaced. Without the
North side of this church of S. Mary Bow, toward west Chepe stands one fair
building of stone, called in record Seldam, a shed, A shed or standing for the
king called crown silde.
which greatly darkeneth the said church, for by means thereof all the
windows and doors on that side are stopped up: This building was made by K.
Edward the third, upon this occasion. In the reign of the said king diverse
iustings were made in London betwixt Sopars lane and the Cross in Chepe:
Iusting in west Cheap.
for the standard stood not then in place where now it is, namely one great
iusting was there in the year 1330. the fourth of Edward the third, whereof is
noted thus. About the feast of S. Michael there was a great and solemn iusting
of all the stout Earls, Barons and nobles of the realm, at London in West
Cheap, betwixt the great cross and the great conduit, nigh Sopars lane, which
iusting lasted three days: where Queen Philip with many Ladies fell from a
stage of timber, notwithstanding they were not hurt at all: wherefore the Queen
took great care to save the Carpenters from punishment, and through her prayer
(which she made on her knees) she pacified the king and counsel, and thereby
purchased great love of the people. After which time the king caused this silde
or shede to be made, and strongly to be builded of stone, for himself, the
Queen, and other estates to stand in, and there to behold the iustings and
other shows at their pleasure. And this house for a long time after served to
that use, namely in the reign of Edward the third, and Richard the second, but
in the year 1410. Henry the fourth, in the 12. of his reign, confirmed the
said shed, or building, with all shops, sellers, and edifices whatsoever
appertaining, called Crounsilde Croundsilde.
(and in the 8. of the same H. called Tamarside) situate in the Mercery in west
Chepe, in the parish of S. Mary de Arcubus in London, and a certain shop in
the said parish, between the same shed and the kings high way of west Cheap,
annexed to the said shed, with two shops, sellers and edifices whatsoever, as
well builded, or any way being over the said shop, as over the entry of the
said shed, which were holden of him in burgage, as all the City of London is,
and which were worth by year in all issues, according to the true value of
them, vij.pound xiij.^.iiij.^.as was found by inquisition thereof before
Thomas Knowles Mayor, and Eschetor in the said City. Notwithstanding which
grant the kings of England, and other great estates, as well of foreign
countries repayring to this realm, as inhabitants of the same, have usually
repaired to this place, therein to behold the shows of this City, passing
through West Cheap, namely the great watches accustomed in the night, on the
even of S. John Baptist, and S. Peter at Midsommer, the examples whereof were
over long to recite, wherefore let it suffice briefly to touch one. In the
year 1510. the 2. of Henry the eight, K. Henry the eight came in the likeness
of a yoman of his guard, to the kings head in Cheap
on S. John's even at night, the king came to this place, then called the kings
head in Cheap, in the liuerie of a yoman of the guard, with an halberd on his
sholder, (and there beholding the watch) departed privily, when the watch was
done, and was not known to any but to whom it pleased him, but on S. Peter's
night next following, he and the Queen came royally riding to the said place,
and there with their nobles beheld the watch of the City, and returned in the
morning. This church of S. Mary, with the said shede of stone, all the housing
in or about Bow Church yard, and without on that side the high street of
Cheap to the standarde be of Cordmayner street ward. These houses were of old
time but shedes: for I read of no housing otherwise on that side the street,
but of diverse shedes from Sopars lane to the standard, etc. Amongst other I
read of three shops or shedes, by Sopars lane pertaining to the Priorie of the
holy Trinity within Aldegate: the one was let out for 28. ^. one other for 20.
^. and the third for xij. ^. by the year: Moreover that Richard Goodchepe
Mercer, and Margery his wife, son to Iordain Goodchepe, did let to John
Dalings the younger Mercer, their shed and chamber in west Cheap, in the parish
of S. Mary de Arches, for iij.^.iiij.^.by the year. Also the men of
Bredstreete ward contended with the men of Cordwayner street ward, for a selde
or shede, opposite to the standard on the South side, and it was found to be of
Cordwainer street ward, W. Waldorne being then Mayor, the 1. of Henry the 6.
Thus much for Cordwainer street ward: which has an Alderman, his Deputy,
Common Counselors 8. Constables 8. Scauengers 8. Wardemote inquest men 14. and
a Beadle. It stands taxed to the fifteen in London at 72. ^. 16. ^. in the
Exchequer at 72. pound.

Cheap Ward.
NExt adioining is Chepe ward, Cheap ward.
which also begins in the East, on the course of Walbrooke, in Buckles bury,
and runs up on both the sides to the great Conduit in Cheap. Also on the
south side of Buckles berie a lane turning up by S. Sithes Church, and by S.
Pancrates church, through Needlers lane, on the north side thereof, and then
through a piece of Sopars lane, on both sides up to Chepe, be all of Chepe
ward. Then to be begin again in the east upon the said course of Walbrooke,
is S. Mildreds church in the Poultrie, on the north side, and over against the
said church gate, on the south to pass up all that high street called the
Poultrie, to the great conduit in Chepe, and then Chepe it self, which
begins by the east end of the said Conduit, and stretches up to the North
East corner of Bow lane, on the south side, and to the standard on the North
side, and thus far to the west is of Cheap ward. On the south side of this
high street is no lane turning south out of this ward, more the^ some small
portion of Sopars lane, whereof I have before written. But on the North side of
this high street is Conyhope lane, about one quarter of Old Jury lane, on
the west side and on the East side almost as much to the sign of the Angel.
Then is Iremongers lane, all wholly on both sides, and from the North end
thereof through Catton street, West to the North end of S. Laurence lane, and
some 4. houses west beyond the same on that side, and over against Ironmongers
lane end on the North side of Catton street up by the Guildhal, and S.
Laurence church in the Jury is altogether of Chepe ward. Then again in Chepe
more toward the west is S. Laurence lane before named, which is all wholly of
this ward, and last of all is Honey lane, and so up to the standard on that
North side of Chepe: and so stand the bounds of Chepe ward.

Now for antiquities there, first is Buckles berie, so called of a manor, and
tenementes pertaining to one Buckle, Buckles bury of one Buckle.
who there dwelled, and kept his courts. This Manor is supposed to be the
great stone building, yet in part remaining on the south side the street,
which of late time has been called the old Barge, of such a sign hanged out
near the gate thereof. This Manor or great house has of long time been
divided and letten out into many tenements: and it has been a common speech
that when the Walbrooke Barges towed up Walbrook unto Buckles berie.
did l^e open, barges were rowed out of the Thames, or towed up so far, and
therefore the place has ever since been called ye Old barge, Also on the
north side of this street directly over against the said Buckles berie was one
ancient and strong tower of stone the which king Edward the third in the 32.
of his reign, did grant to his College or free Chapel of S. Stephen at
Westminster, by the name of his Tower called Seruesse Tower at Service Tower by
Walbrook
Buckles bery: this Tower of late years was taken down, by one Buckle a
Grocer, meaning in place thereof to have set up and builded a goodly frame of
Timber, but the said Buckle greedily laboring to pull down the old Tower, a
piece thereof fell upon him which so bruised him that his life was thereby
shortened, and an other that married his widow, set up the newly prepared
frame of timber, and finished the work.

This whole street called Buckles bury on both the sides throughout, is
possessed of Grocers and Apothecaries toward the west end thereof, on the
south side, breaks out one other short lane called in records Peneritch
street, Penerich street.
it reaches but to Saint Sythes lane, and S. Sythes Parish church of S. Sith
or Bennit shrog.
Church is the farthest part thereof, for by the west end of the said Church
begins Needelars lane, Needelars lane
which reaches to Sopars lane as is aforesaid, this small parish Church of S.
Since has also an addition of Bennet shorn (or Shrog, or Shorehogge) for by all
these names have I read it, but the auncientest is Shorn, wherefore it seems
to take that name of one Benedict Shorn, sometime a Citizen, and
Stockefishmonger of London, a new builder, repayrer or Benefactor thereof, in
the reign of E. the second, so that Shorn is but corruptly called Shrog, and
more corruptly Shorehog.

There lie buried in this Church Richard Lincoln Felmonger, 1548. John Fresh
Mercer Mayor 1394. John Rochforde and Robert Rochforde, John Hold Alderman,
Henry Froweke, Mercer Mayor, a thousand four hundred thirty five Edward
Warrington, John Morris, John Huntley, Sir Ralph Waren Mercer Mayor, 1553, Sir
John Lion Grocer Mayor, 1554. these two last have monumentes, the rest are all
defaced.

Then in Needelars lane have ye the parish church of Saint Pancrate, Parish
church of S. pancrate Justices charged to punish such assel be^s from their
churches Elizabeth 14.
a proper small church, but diverse rich Parishioners therein, and has had of
old time many liberal benefactors, but of late such as (not regarding the
order taken by her Majesty) the least bell in their church being broken, have
rather sold the same for half the value, then put the parish to charge with
new casting: late experience has proved this to be true, besides the spoil
of the monumentes there. In this Church there are buried Sir Aker, John Aker,
John Barens Mercer, Mayor, 1370. John Beston and his wife, Robert Rayland, John
Hamber, John Gage, John Rowley, John Lamb, John Hadley Grocer, Mayor, 1379.
Richard Gardener Mercer, Mayor, 1478. John Stockton Mercer, Mayor, 1470. John
Dane Mercer, John Parker, Robert Marshall Alderman, 1439. Robert Corcheforde.
Robert Hatfield, and Robert Hatfielde, Nicholas Wilfilde, and Thomas his son,
the monumentes of all which be defaced and gone. There do remain of Robert
Burley 1360. Richard Wilson, 1525. Robert Packenton Mercer, ^slaine with a
Gunne shot at him in a morning, the thirteenth of Noue^ber as he was going to
morrow Mass, from his house in Cheap, to S. Thomas of Acars in the year
1536. the murderer was never discovered, but by his own confession made when
he came to the Gallows at Banbery to be hanged for Fellonie. Thomas VVardbury
Haberdasher 1545. James Huish Grocer. 1590. Ambrose Smith etc. Then is a part
of Sopars lane turning up to Cheap, by the assent of Stephen Abunden, Mayor,
the Peperars in Sopars lane were admitted to sell all such spices, and other
wares, as Grocers now use to sell, retayning the old name of Peperars in
Sopars lane, Pepperars in Sopars lane.
till at length in the reign of Henry the sixth the same Sopars lane was
inhabited by Cordewainers and Curriars, after that the Peperars or Grocers had
seated themselves in a more open street, to wit in Buckles bury, where they
yet remain. Thus much for the south wing of Cheapeward.

Now to begin again on the bank of the said Walbrooke, at the east end of
the high street, which is the maine body of The Poultrie.
this ward: first over against the parish church of S. Mildred, on the south
side of the Poultrie, up to the great Conduite, have ye diverse fair houses,
sometimes inhabited by Poulters, now by Grocers, Haberdashers, and Upholders,
at the west end of this Poultrie, on the south side, have ye the great
Conduite, The great Conduite in Cheap.
which is the beginning of west Cheap. This Conduite was the first sweet
water that was conveyed by pipes of lead under ground, to this place in the
City, from Padington it was castellated with stone and cesterned in lead which
was begun in the year 1285. Henry Wales being then Mayor. This Conduite was
again new builded by Thomas Ilame one of the Sheriffs in the year, 1479.
beyond this Conduite, on the south side of Cheap be now fair and large houses,
for the most part possessed of Mercers up to the north corner of Cordwainer
street, corruptly called Bow lane, which houses in former time were but
shedes (or shops) with solars over them, as of late one of them remained at
Sopars lane end, wherein a woman sold seeds, roots, and herbs, but those
sheddes or shops, by incrochmentes on the high street, are now largely builded
on both sides outward, and also upward toward heaven, some three, four, or
five stories on high. etc.

On the north side of the Poultrie, is the proper parish church parish church
of S. Mildred
of S. Mildrede, which was new builded upon Walbrooke, in the year 1457. John
Saxton then Parson gave 32. pounds toward the building of the new Quire there
which now stands upon the course of Walbrook, Level Puery, and Richard
Kesto^ have their Arms in the east Windows as Benefactors.

All the rooffing of that Church is garnished with the Arms of Thomas
Aschehul, one of the Churchwardens in the year 1455. who was there buried,
Thomas Morsted Esquire and Surgeon to king Henry the 4. 5. and 6. one of the
Sheriffs of London, in the year 1436. gave unto this Church a parcel of
ground containing in length from the course of Walbrooke, toward the west, 45.
foot, and in breadth, from the Church toward the north 35. foot, being
within the gate of Skalding house, or Skalding Wike in the said parish, to make
a Churchyard wherein to bury their dead, Richard Shore Draper, one of the
Sheriffs 1505. gave fifteen pound for making a portch, to this church. Buried
here, as by his monumentes appears: John Hildy Poulter, 1416, John Kendall
1468, John Garland 1476. Robert Bois, 1485: and Simon Lee, Poulters, 1487.
Thomas Lee of Essex, Gentleman, William Haclingridge, Christopher Feliocke,
1494. Robert Dreyton Skinner. 1484. John Christopherson, Doctor of Physic,
1524. William Turner Skinner, 1536. Blase White Grocer, 1558. Thomas Hobson
Haberdasher. 1559, William Hobson Haberdasher, 1581. and Thomas Tusser
Gentleman, 1580 with this Epitaph.

Here Thomas Tusser, clad in earth does lie,
That sometime made the points of husbandry,
By him then learn thou may, here learn we must,
When all is done we sleep and turn to dust,
And yet through Christ to heaven we hope to go,
Who reads his books shall find his faith was so.
On the north side of the church yearde remain two tombs of marble, but not
known of whom or otherwise then by tradition, it is said they were of Thomas
Monshampe, and William, Brothers about 1547. etc.

Of the name of this street, called the Poultrie, I have before spoken as also
of the lane called Skalding house, or Skalding wike etc. On this north side
some four houses west from Saint Mildred church, is a prison house pertaining
to one of the Sheriffs, and is called the Compter in the Poultrie, and has
been there kept time out of mind, for I have not read of the original
thereof. Somewhat west from this Comptar, Compter in the poultrie.
was sometime a proper Chapel, Chapel of Corpus Christi.
of Corpus Christi, and S. Marie, at Coniehopelane end in the parish of S.
Mildrede, founded by one named Ionyrunnes, a Citizen of London, in the reign
of Edward the third, where was a Guilde or Fraternity, that might dispend in
lands better then twenty pound by year, it was suppressed by Henry the eight,
and purchased by one Hobson, a Haberdasher, who turned this Chapel into a
fair warehouse, and shops toward the street, with lodginges over them. Then
is Conningshop lane, Cony hope lane.
of old time so called of a sign of three Conies, hanging over a Poulters
stall at the lane end. Within this lane stands the Grocers hall, Grocers
hall.
which Company being of old time called Peperars, were first incorporated by
the name of Grocers Grocers hall first purchased and then builded by the
Grocers.
in the year 1345, at which time they elected for Custos or Guardian of their
Fraternity, Richard Oswine, and Lawrence Halliwel, and twenty Brethren were
then taken in, to be of their scocietie.

In the year 1411. the Custos or Guardian, and the Brethren of this Company,
purchased of the Lord Robert Fitzwaters, one plot of ground with the building
thereupon in the said Conyhope lane for 320. marks, and then laid the
foundation of their new common hall.

About the year 1429. the Grocers had license to purchase 500. marks land,
since the which time near adjoining unto the Grocers hall, the said Company
has builded seven Alms houses, Seven Almeshouses by the Grocers hall.
for seven aged poor Alms people. Thomas Knoles Grocer Mayor, gave his
Tenement in S. Anthonines Churchyard, to the Grocers, toward the releef of the
poor Brethren in that Company, also Henry Keeble Grocer Mayor, gave to the
seven Alms people six pence the piece weekelie for ever, which pension is now
increased by the Masters to some of them, two shillinges the piece weekelie,
and to some of them less etc.

West from this Conyhope lane is the old Jury, whereof some portion is of
Cheap ward, as before is showed. At the south end of this lane, is the Parish
church of S, Mary Colechurch, Parish church of S. Mary Colechurch.
so named of one Cole^ that builded it, this church is builded upon a vault
above ground, so that men are forced to ascend up thereunto by certain steps. I
find no monumentes of this church, more then that Henry the fourth granted
license to William Marshall and others to found a Brotherhoode of S. Katheren
therein, because Thomas Becker, and S. Edmond the Archbishop were baptized
there. Next to that is Mercers Chapel, sometime an Hospital Hospital of S.
Thomas of Acars.
entitled of S. Thomas of Acon, or Acars near to the great Conduite in Cheap,
for a Master and Brethren, militia hospitalis, etc. says the record of
Edward the third, the 14. year, it was founded by Thomas Fitz the balde de
he^ly, and Agnes his wife, sister to Thomas Becket, in the reign of Henry the
second, they gave to the master and brethren the lands with the appurtenances,
that sometime were Gilbert Beckets father of the said Thomas, in the which he
was borne, there to make a church: there was also a Charnell and a Chapel
over it, of S. Nicholas and S. Stephen, this Hospital was valued to dispend
277.^.3.^.4.^. it was surrendered the 30. of Henry the 8. the ^1. of October,
and was since purchased by the Mercers, by means of Sir Richard Greshain, and
was again set open on the Eve of S. Michaell, 1541. the 33. of Henry the
eight, it is now called the Mercers Chapel, Mercers Chapel and hall.
and therein is kept a free Grammar School A free schole in the Hospital of
S. Thomas Acon.
as of old time had been accustomed, and had been commanded by Parliament:
there is also a preaching in the Italian tongue to the Italians and others on
the Sondaies. Here be many monumentes remaining, but more have been defaced:
James Butler Earl of Ormond, and Dame Johan his Countise, the eight of Henry
the sixth, John Norton Esquier, Stephen Cauandish Draper, Mayor, 1362. Thomas
Cauandish, William Cauandish, Thomas Ganon called Pike, one of the Sheriffs,
1410. Hungate of Yorkshire, Ambrose Cresacre, John Trusbut Mercer, 1437.
Thomas Norland Sheriff, 1483. Sir Edmond Sha Goldsmith Mayor, 1482. Sir Thomas
Hill knight, Henry Frowicke, Thomas Ilam Sheriff 1479. Lancelot Laken
Esquier, Ralph Tylney Sheriff, 1488. Garth Esquier, John Rich, Sir William
Butler Grocer Mayor, 1515. William Brown Mercer Mayor, 1513. John Look 1519.
Sir Thomas Baldry, Mercer Mayor, 1523. Sir William Lock, Mercer Sheriff,
1548. Sir John Allen Mercer Mayor, 1525. deceased 1544. Sir Thomas Leigh
Mercer, Mayor, 1558. Sir Richard Malory Mercer Mayor, 1564, Humphrey
Baskaruile Mercer Sheriff 1561. Sir George Bond Mayor, 1587, etc.

Before this Chapel toward the street, there was builded a fair and
beutifull Chapel, arched over with stone, and thereupon the Mercers hall,
Mercers hall.
a most curious piece of work: Sir John Allen before named being founder
thereof was there^ buried: but since his Tomb is removed into the great old
Chapel, and his Chapel is made into shops, and letten out for rent, by his
successors the Mercers. These Mercers were enabled to be a Company the 20. of
Richard the second, and king Henry the sixth, in the third of his reign, at
the request of John Couentrie, John Carpenter, and William Grove granted to the
Mercers, to have a Chaplain and Brotherhoode for reeleefe of such of their
Company, as came to decay by misfortune on the sea. Next beyond the Mercers
Chapel in Ironmonger lane, Ironmongers lane.
so called of Ironmongers dwelling there, in the 8. of Edward the first. In
this lane is the small parish church of S. Martin S. Martins Pomery in
Ironmonger lane.
called Pomery upon what occasion certainly I know not, S. Lawrence lane.
but it is supposed to be of Apples, growing there where now houses are lately
builded, for my self have seen the large void places there, monuments in
this church be there none to account of.

Farther west is S. Lawrence lane, S. Lawrence lane.
so called of S. Lawrence church, which stands directly over against the
north end thereof, antiquities in this lane I find none other, then that among
many fair houses, there is one large Inn, for receipt of Travelers, called
Blossoms Inn, but corruptly Bosoms Inn, and has to sign S. Lawrence the
Deacon, in a Border of blossoms Blossoms Inn
or flowers. Then near to the Standard in Cheap is Honey lane Honey lane.
so called not of sweetness thereof, being very narrow and somewhat dark,
but rather of often washing and sweeping, to keep it clean. In this is the
small parish church called Alhallowes in Honey lane, Parish church of Alhallowes
Honey lane.
there be no monumentes in this church worth the noting. Without this lane is
the Standarde in Cheap, Standarde in Cheap.
which John Wels Grocer Mayor 1430. caused to be made with a small Cesterne for
fresh water, having one Cock continually running, when the same is not turned
nor locked, this was finished by his Executors. Thomas Knoles, and John Chichley
they purchased license of Henry the sixth, to convey water, to make the
Conduite, now whether the Standarde in West Cheap so often spoken of in former
times, be the same and stood just in this place, or elsewhere, or that the same
were remoueable, may be some question: for it is manifest that in the reign
of Edward the third, and at other times when the great iustinges, and other
running on horseback were practiced betwixt the great Cross, and the great
Conduite at Sopars lane end, there was no such Standarde, or other Obstacle
between them, neither was that street paued with hard stone as now it is, we
read that in the year 1293, three me^ had their right hands stricken off at the
Standard in Cheap, Men executed in west Cheap
for rescuing of a Prisoner, it is very likely therefore that the old Cross
in Cheap (which was then newly builded) was also the Standarde.

In the year 1326. the Citizens took Walter Stapleton Bishop of Excester and
beheaded him with other at the Standarde in Cheap: In the year 1399. King
Henry the fourth caused the Blanch Charters made by Richard the second, to be
burnt at the Standarde in West Cheap. In the year 1381. Wat Tylar be headed
Richard Lions and others in Cheap. In the year 1461. John Dauie had his hand
stricken off at the Standarde in Cheap, also Jack Cade the Rebel beheaded the
Lord Say at the Standarde in Cheap, etc. Thus much for the Body of Cheap
ward may suffice. Then follows Catte street Ca^streete.
(so called in Records the 24. of Henry the sixth, now corruptly Catteten
street, which begins at the north end of Ironmonger lane, and runs to the
west end of Saint Lawrence church as is before showed. On the north side of this
street is the Guilde hall The Guilde hall and courts kept. ^^ber Flit wed
of this City, wherein the Courts for the City be kept, namely the 1. Court
of common Counsel 2. The court of the Lord Mayor, and his Brethren the
Aldermen 3. The court of Hustinges 4. the court of Orphans 5. the two courts
of the Sheriffs 6. the court of the Wardmote 7. the court of Hallmote 8. the
court of requests commonly called the court of conscience 9. the
Chamberlaines court for Prentizes, and making them free. This Guilde hall
says Robert Fabian, was begun to be builded new in the year 1411. the
twelfth of Henry the fourth, by Thomas K^oles then Mayor, and by his Brethren
the Aldermen, and the same was made of a little Cottage, a large and great
house, as now it stands: toward the charges whereof the Companies gave
large beneuolences, also offenses of men were pardoned for sums of money
toward this work, and there was extraordinary fees raised, Fines,
Amercementes, and other things employed during seven years, and a
continuation thereof three years more, all to be employed to this building.

The first year of Henry the sixth John Couentrie, and John Carpentar Executors
to Richard Whitington, gave toward the pauing of this great hall twenty
pound, and the next year fifteen pound more to the said pauement, with hard
stone of Purbecke, they also glased some Windows thereof and of the Majors
Court, on every which window the Arms of Richard Whitington are placed. The
foundation of the Majors court was laid in the third year of the reign of
Henry the sixth, and of the Portch on the South side of the Majors court, in the
fourth of the said king. Then was builded the Majors Chamber, and the counsel
chamber, with other rooms above the stairs: last of all a stately porch
entering the great hall was erected, the front thereof toward the south, being
beautified with images of stone, such as is showed by these verses following,
made about some 30. years since, by William Elderton, at that time an Attorney
in the Sheriffs courts there.

Though most the images be pulled down, Verses made on the images over the
Guild hall gate.

And none be thought remain in town,
I am sure there be in London yet
Seven images such and in such a place,
As few or none I think will hit,
Yet every day they show their face,
And thousands see them every year,
But sew I think can tell me where,
Where Jesus Christ aloft does stand,
Law and learning on either hand, Names of images.

Discipline in the Devils neck,
And hard by her are three direct,
There Justice, Fortitude and Temperance stand,
Where find ye the like in all this land.
Diverse Aldermen glased the great hall, and other courts as appears by their
Arms in each window. William Hariot Draper Mayor 1481. gave 40. pound to the
making of two lovers in the said Guildhal, and toward the glasing thereof. The
Kitchens Kitchens by the Guildhall builded.
and other houses of office, adjoining to this Guildhall were builded of later
time, to wit, about the year 1501. by procurement of Edmond Shaw Goldsmith
Mayor: since which time the Mayors feasts have been yearly kept there, which
before time were kept in the Tailors hall, and the Grocers hall. Nicholas Alwin
Grocer Mayor 1499. deceased 1505. gave by his testament for a hanging of
tapestrie, to serve for principal days in the Guildhall, 73. pound. 6. ^. 8.
^. Now for the Chapel or College of our Lady Mary Magdalen, and of
All-saintes by the Guildhall, Chapel or College at Guildhal.
called London College, I read that the same was builded about the year
1299. And in a Record I find that Peter fanelore, Adam Frauncis, and Henry
Frowike Citizens gave one Message with the apurtenances in the parish of Saint
Fawstar to William Bramton Custos of the Chauntrie, by them found in the said
Chapel, with four Chaplens, and one other house in the parish of S. Giles
without Criplegate, in the 27. of Edward the third, which was about the year
1353. Moreover I find that Richard the 2. in the 20. of his reign, granted
to Stephen Spilman, Mercer, license to give one message, 3. shops, and one
garden, with the apurtenances, being in the parish of S. Andrew Hubbard, to the
Custos and chaplens of the said chapel, and to their successors for their
better relief and maintenance for ever.

King Henry the 6. in the eight of his reign gave license to John Barnard
Custos, and the chaplens to build of new the said chapel or college of
Guildhall, and the same Henry the 6. in the 27. of his reign, granted to the
parish Clearkes in London and Guilde of S. Nicholas, for two Chaplens by them
to be kept in the said Chapel Chapel or College at Guildhal new builded.
of S. Mary Magdalene, near unto the Guildhall, and to keep 7. alms people.
Henry Barton Skinner Mayor. founded a Chaplen there, Roger Depham Mercer, and
Sir William Langford knight, had also chaplens there. This chapel or
college had a Custos, 7. chaplens, 3. clearkes, and four Queristers.

Monumentes there have been sundry, as appears by the tombs of marble yet
remaining, seven in number, but all defaced. The uppermost in the quire on the
South side thereof above the Reuestrie door, was the tomb of John Wells John
Wels a principal benefactor to Guildhall college.
Grocer Mayor, 1431. The likeness of wells are graven on the tomb, on the
Reuestrie door, and other places on that side the Quire. Also in the Glass
window over this tomb, and in the East window is the likeness of wells, with
hands elevated out of the same wells, holding scrowles, wherein is written
Mercy, the writing in the East window being broken yet remains Wells. I
found his arms also in the South glass window, all which do show that the
East end and South side the Quire of this chapel, and the Reuestrie were by
him both builded and glased: on the North side the Quire the tomb of Thomas
Kneseworth Fishmonger Mayor 1505. who deceased 1515. was defaced, and within
these 44. years again renewed by the Fishmongers: two other tombs lower
there are, the one of a Draper, the other of a Haberdasher, their names not
known: Richard Stomine is written by in the window by the Habardasher, under
flat stones do lie diverse Custos of the Chapel, chaplens and officers to the
chamber. Amongst others John Clipstone priest, sometime Custos of the library
of the Guildhall 1457. An other of Edmond Alison priest, one of the Custos of
the library 1510. etc. Sir John Langley Goldsmith, Mayor 1576. lies buried in
the vault, under the tomb and monument of John Wells before named. This
chapel or college (valued to dispense xij.^.viij.^.ix.^.by the year) was
surrendered amongst other, the chapel remains to the Mayor and communaltie,
wherein they have service weekly, as also at the election of the Mayor, and at
the Mayors feast, etc.

Adjoining to this chapel on south side was sometime a fair and large
library, Library at Guildhal.
furnished with books, pertaining to the Guildhall and college: These books
(as it is said) were in the reign of Edward the 6. sent for by Edward Duke of
Sommerset, Lord Protector, with promise to be restored shortly: men laded from
thence three Carriers with them, but never returned. This library was builded
by the executors of R. Whittington, and by William Bury: the arms of
Whittington are placed on the one side in the stone work, and two letters, to
wit, W. and B. for William Bury, on the other side: it is now lofted through,
and made a store house for clothes. Southwest from this Guildhall, is the fair
parish church of S. Laurence Parish church of S. Laurence in the Jury.
called in the Iunie, because of old time since the reign of William
Conqueror (that first brought Jews from Roan into this realm) many Jews
inhabited there about, until that in the year 1290. the 18. of Edward the
first they were wholly and for ever by the said king banished The Jews
banished England, the number of them. The tooth of some monstrous fish, as I
take it.
this realm, having of their own goods to bear their charges, till they
were out of his dominions. The number of the Jews at that time banished were
15060. persons whose houses being sold, the king made of them a mighty mass
of money. This church is fair and large, and has some monuments, as shall be
showed. I my self more then 60. years since have seen in this church the
shanke bone of a man (as it is taken) and also a tooth of a very great bigness
hanged, up for show in chains of Iron upon a pillar of stone, the tooth
(being about the bigness of a man's fist) is long since conveyed from thence^
the thigh or shanke bone of 25. inches A shank bone of 25. inches long, of a
man as is said, but might be of an Oliphant,
in length by the rule, remains yet fastened to a post of timber, and is not
so much to be noted for the length, as for the thicknes, hardness, and strength
thereof, for when it was hanged on the stone pillar, it fretted with moving the
said pillar, and was not it self fretted, nor (as seems) is not yet lightened
by remaining dry: but where or when this bone was first found or discovered I
have not heard, and therefore rejecting the fables of some late writers I
ouerpasse them. There lie buried in this church Elizabeth wife to John
Fortescue, Katherine Stoketon, John Stratton, Phillip Albert, John Fleming,
Phillip Agmondesham, William Skywith, John Norlong, John Baker, Thomas Alleyne,
William Barton Mercer, 1410. William Melrith Mercer, one of the Sheriffs,
1425. Simon Bartlet Mercer 1428. Walter Chartsey Draper one of the Sheriffs,
1430. Richard Rich Esquire of London the father, and Richard Rich his son
Mercer one of the Sheriffs, 1441. deceased 1469. with this Epitaph.

Respice quod opus est praesentis temporis aeuum,
Omne quod est, nihil est praeter amare Deum.
This Richard was father to John, buried in S. Thomas Acars, which John was
father to Thomas, father to Richard L. Rich, etc. John Pickering, honorable
for service of his Prince, and for the English Merchantes beyond the seas, who
deceased 1448. Godfrey Bollen Mercer Mayor, 1437. Thomas Bollen his son
Esquire of Norfolk 1471. John Atkenson, gentleman, Dame Mary S. Maure, John
Waltham, Roger Bonifant John Chayhee, John Abbot, Geffrey Filding Mayor 1452.
and Angel his wife 1517. Simon Benington Draper, and Joan his wife, John
Marshall Mercer Mayor 1493. Thomas Burgoine gentleman Mercer 1517. a Countess
of Cornwall and Chester, but her name and time is not there apparent, Sir
Richard Gresham Mayor 1537. Sir Michell Dormer Mayor 1541. Robert Charsey one
of the Sheriffs 1548. Sir William Row Ironmonger Mayor 1593. Thus much for
Cheap ward, which has an Alderman, his Deputy, Common Counselors xj.
Counstables xi. Scauengers ix. for the Wardemote inquest xij. and a Beadle. It
is taxed to the fifteen at 72. pound, sixteen shillings, and in the
Exe^equer at 72. pound.

Colemanstreet Ward.
NExt to Cheap ward on the North side thereof is Colemanstreet Ward, and
begins also in the East, on the course of Walbrooke in Lothbury and runs
west on the South side to the end of Ironmongers lane, and on the North side to
the West corner of Bassings hall street. On the South side of Lothburie is the
street called the old Jury, the one half and better on both sides toward
Cheap is of this Ward. On the North side lies Colemanstreet, whereof the ward
takes name, wholly on both sides North to London wall, and from that North
end along by the wall, and Moregate East, to the course of Walbrooke. And
again from Colemanstreet west to the iron grates: and these be the bounds of
this ward.

Antiquities to be noted therein are these: First the street of Lothberie,
Lathberie, or Loadberie, Lothbery.
(for by all these names have I read it) took the name (as it seems) of
Berie, or Court of old time there kept, but by whom is grown out of memory.
This street is possessed for the most part by Founders, that cast
Candlestickes, Chafingdishes, Spice morters, and such like Copper or Laton
works, and do afterward turn them with the foot and not with the wheel, to
make them smooth and bright with turning and scrating (as some do term it)
making a loathsome noyce to the by passers, that have not been used to the
like, and therefore by them disdainfully called Lothberie. On the South side of
this street, amongst the Founders by some fair houses, and large for
merchants, namely one that of old time was the Jews Sinagogue, The Jews
Sinagogue.
which was defaced by the citizens of London after that they had slain 700.
Jews and spoiled the residue of their goods in the year 1262. the 47. of
Henry the third. And not long after in the year 1291. King Edward the first
banished the renmant of the Jews out of England, as is aforeshewed. The said
sinagogue being so suppressed certain Friars got possession thereof: For in
the year 1257. (says Matthew Parris) there were seen in London a new order of
Friars, called de penitentia Jesus, or Fra^res de sacca, Fratres de sacca or de
penitentia.
because they were apparelled in sackecloth, who had their house in London,
near unto Aldersgate without the gate, and had license of Henry the third, in
the 54. of his reign, to remove from thence to any other place: and in the 56.
he gave unto them this Jews Sinagogue: after which time Elianor the Queen,
wife to Edward the first took into her protection, and warranted unto the
Prior, and brethren de Penitentia Jesus Christi of London, the said land and
building in Colechurch street Colechurch street or Old Jury.
in the parish of S. Olaue in the Jury, and S. Margaret in Lothbery by her
granted, with consent of Stephen de Fulborne, under Warden of the Bridge house,
and other brethren of that house for lx. marks of silver, which they had
received of ye said Prior and brethren of Repentance, to the building of ye
said bridge. This order of friars gathered many good scholars, and multiplied
in number exceedingly, until the counsel at Lions, by the which it was
decreede, that from that time forth there should no more orders of begging
Friars be permitted, but only the four orders, to wit, the Dominick or
preachers, the Minorites or Gray Friars, the Carmelites or white Friars, and
the Augustines: and so from that time the begging Friars decreased, and fell to
nothing. Now it followed that in the year 1305. Robert Fitzwalter Robert
Fitzwalter his house.
requested and obtained of the said king Edward the first, that the same Friars
of the Sack might assign to the said Robert their chapel or church, of old
time called the Sinagogue of the Jews, near adjoining to the then mansion
place of the same Robert, where now stands the Grocers hall: and the said
Sinagogue was at the North corner of the old Jury. Robert Large Mercer, Mayor
in the year 1439. kept his Mayoraltie in this house, and dwelled there until
his dying day. This house stands and is of two parishes, as opening into
Lothberie, of S. Margarets parish, and opening into the old Jury, of S. Olaues
parish. The said Robert Large gave liberally to both these parishes, but was
buried at S. Olaues, Hugh Clopton Mercer Mayor, 1492. dwelled in this house,
and kept his Mayoraltie there: it is now a Tavern, and has to sign a
Windmill. The Windmill Tavern in the old Jury.
And thus much for this house sometime the Jews Sinagogue, since a house of
Friars, then a Noble man's house: after that a marchantes house, wherein
Mayoralties have been kept, and now a wine Tavern.

In the Old Jury is a proper parish Church of S. Olaue, Parish church of S.
Olaue in the Jury.
in which to the commendation of the parishioners, the monumentes of the dead
remain less defaced then in many other: First of William Dickman Ferono, or
Ironmonger one of the Sheriffs 1367. Robert Haueloke Ironmonger, 1390. John
Organ Mercer one of the Sheriffs 1385. John Forest Uicker of S. Olaues, and
the chapel annexed of S. Stephen 1399. Henry Eriole Tailor, 1400. Thomas
Morsted Esquire Surgeon to Henry the fourth, fifth and sixth, one of the
Sheriffs, 1436. he builded a fair new I Will, to the enlargement of this
church, on the North side thereof, wherein he lies buried 1450. Adam
Breakspeare Chaplen 1411. William Kerkbie Mercer 1465. Robert Large Mercer
Mayor 1440. He gave to that Church 200 pound. John Belwine Founder, 1467.
Gabriel Rave Fuller 1511. Wentworth Esquire 1510. Thomas Michell Ironmonger
1527. Giles Dewes servant to Henry the seventh, and to Henry the eight Clearke
of their libraries, and Schoolemaister for the French tongue to Prince Arthur,
and to the Lady Mary, 1535. Richard Chamberlain Ironmonger, one of the
Sheriffs 1562. Edmond Burlacy Mercer 1583. etc.

From this parish church of S. Olaue, to the North end of the Old Jury, and
from thence West to the North end of the Ironmongers lane, and from the said
corner into Ironmongers lane almost to the parrish Church of Saint Marten, was
of old time one large building of stone, very ancient, but of what
antiquity, or by whom the same was builded, or for what use I have not learned
more then that king Henry the 6. in the 16. of his reign, gave the office of
being Porter or keeper thereof, unto John Stent for term of his life, by the
name of his principal palace in the old Jury: Kings palace in the Old Jury.
this was in my youth called the old wardrope: but of later time the outward
stone wall has been by little and little taken down, and diverse fair houses
builded thereupon, even round about.

Now for the North side of this Lothburie, beginning again at the East end
thereof, upon the water course of Walbrooke have ye a proper parish church
called of S. Margaret, Parish church of S. Margaret in Lothburie.
which seems to be newly reedified and builded about the year 1440. for
Robert Large gave to the Quire of that church, 100. shillings and twenty
pound for ornaments, more to the vaulting over the watercourse of Walbrooke
by the said church, for the enlarging thereof two hundred marks.

There be monumentes in this church of Reginald Coleman son to Robert Coleman
buried there 1383. This said Robert Coleman may be supposed to be the first
builder and honor or Coleman street, and that Saint Stephens church then
builded in Coleman street was but a chapel, belonging to the parish Church
of Saint Olaue in the Jury: for we read (as before) that John Forest Uicker of
Saint Olaues, and of the chapel annexed of S. Stephen, deceased in the year
1399. This may be some argument, which I euerpasse. Sir Brian Tewke knight,
Treasurer of the chamber to King Henry the eight, and Dame Grisilde his wife
that deceased after him was there buried, 1536. John Fetiplace Draper Esquire
1464. and Joan his wife. Sir Hugh VVitch Mercer Knight, son to Richard VVitch
intombed there 1466. He gave to his third wife three thousand pound, and to
maids marriages five hundred marks: Sir John Leigh 1564 with this Epitaph.

No wealth, no praise, no bright renown no skill,
No force, no fame, no princes love, no toil,
Though foreign land by travail search ye will,
No faithful service of the country soil
Can life prolong one minute of an hour,
But death at length will execute his power,
For Sir John Leigh to sundry countries known,
A worthy knight well of his prince esteemde,
By seeing much to great experience grown
Though safe on seas, though sure on land he seemde,
Yet here he lies too soon by death oppressed,
His fame yet lives, his soul in heaven does rest.
By the West end of this parish church have ye a fair water Conduit, Conduit
in Lothbery.
builded at the charges of the city, in the year one thousand five hundred
forty six. Sir Martin Bows being Mayor: this water is conveyed in great
abundance from diverse springes without the North wall of the city, lying
betwixt Hoxton and Iseldon.

Next is the Founders Hall, The Founders Hall.
a proper house, and so long West to the Southwest corner of Bassinges Hall
street, have ye fair and large houses for marchantes: namely the corner
house. at the end of Bassinges hall street, an old piece of work builded of
stone etc. a part whereof has been lately employed as a market house for the
sale of Woollen, Bays, The Bay hall.
Wodmels, Flanels and such like. In this north side against the old Jury, is
Colemanstreete, so called of Coleman the first Builder and Owner thereof, as
also of Cole church or Coleman church, against the great conduite in Cheap.
This is a fair and large street replenished on both sides with diverse fair
houses, besides Allies and small Tenementes in great number.

On the east side of this street, almost at the north end thereof, is the
Armorers hal: Armorers hal.
also on the same side is kings Alley, Kings Alley.
and Love lane, Love lane.
both containing many Tenements. And on the west side toward the south end is
the parish Church of S. Stephen, Parish church of S. Stephen.
where the monumentes are defaced, there is one Tomb on the South side the
Quire but without inscription. I read that Thomas Bradbury Mercer Mayor, in the
year 1509. was buried there, his Tomb is on the north side the Quire, and also
one Edmond Harlocke Curriar to be a great benefactor, Sir John Garme,
Skirringham, 1468. Richard Hamney 1418. Richard Colsel, etc. By the east end of
this church is placed a Cock of sweet water, Cock of water by the Church.
taken out of the maine pipe that goes into Lothbery: also in London wall
Coduite at London wall.
directly against the north end of Coleman street, have ye a conduite of
water made at the charges of Thomas Exmen Goldsmith Mayor, 1517. And let here
be the end of this ward, which has an Alderman his deputy, common
Counselors four, Constables four, Scauengers four, of the Wardmote inquest
thirteen and a Beadle. It is taxed to the fifteen, in London, at 19. ^. and
in the Exchequer' at 19. ^.

Bassinges hall ward.
THe next adjoining to Colemanstreete ward on the west side thereof is
Bassinges hall ward, Bassinges hall ward.
a small thing and consists of one street called Bassinges hal street, of
Bassinges hall, the most principal house of that street whereof the ward
takes name. It begins in the south by the late spoken market house called
the Bay hall, which is the last house of Colemanstreete ward, this street
runs from thence north down to London wall, and some little distance both
east and west, against the said wall, and this is the bounds of Bassinges
hall ward. Monumentes of building on the east side thereof, amongst diverse
fair houses for merchants, have ye 3. halles of Companies, namely, the Masons
hall Masons hall.
for ye first, but of what antiquity that Company I have not read. The next is
the Weauers hal, Weuars hall.
which Company has been of great antiquity in this City, as appears by a
Charter of Henry the second, Patent of H. 2.
in these words, Rex omnibus ad quos etc. to be englished thus, Henry king of
England, Duke of Normandy, and of Gwian, Earl of A^diow, to the Bishop,
Justices, Sheriffs, Barons, Ministers, and al his true Leagues of London,
sends greeting, know ye that we have granted to the Weauers in London, their
Guilde to be had in London, with all the Freedoms, and Customs, that they had
in time of king Henry Henry the 1.
my Grandfather, so that none but they intermit within the city of their craft
but he be of their Guilde, neither in Southwarke or other places pertaining
to London, otherwise then it was done in the time of king Henry my Grandfather:
wherefore I will and straightly command that over all lawfully, they may treat,
and have all aforesaid, as well in peace, free, worshipful, and wholly, as
they had it, freer, better, worshipfullier, and wholier, then in the time of
king Henry my Grandfather, so that they yield yearly to me two marks of
gold, at the feast of S. Michaell, and I forbid that any man to them do any
unright, or disease, upon pain of ten pound witness Thomas of Canterbury,
Warwick fili Gar. Chamberlain at Winchester. Patent
Also I read that the same Henry the second in the 31: of his reign, made a
confirmation to the Weauers that had a Guilde or Fraternity in London, wherein
it appears that the said Weauers made wolen cloth, and that they had the
correction thereof, but amongst other Articles in that patent, it was decreede,
that if any man made cloth of Spanish wool, mixed with English Wool, the Port
grave, or principal magistrate of London ought to burn it, etc.

Moreover in the year 1197. king Richard the first at Matthew Paris.
the instance of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury and Iusticiar of England
ordained that the woollen clothes in every part of this realm should be in
breadth two yards within the listes and as good in the midst as in the sides
etc. King Henry the third granted to the citizens of London that they should
not be vexed, for the burels, or clothlisted, according to the constitution
made for breadth of cloth, the ninth of his reign, etc.

Lower down is the Girdlars hall, and this is all touching the east side of
this ward. Girdlars hall.


On the west side almost at the south end thereof is Bakewel hall, corruptly
called Blackewell hall, Bakewell hall.
concerning the original whereof I have heard diverse opinions, which I
ouerpasse as fables, without color of truth, for though the same seemed a
building of great antiquity, yet in mine opinion the foundation thereof was
first laid since the Conquest of William Duke of Normandy: for the same was
builded upon vaultes of stone, which stone was brought from Cane in Normandy,
the like of that of Paul's Church, builded by Mauritious and his successors
Bishops of London: but that this house has been a Temple or Jewish Sinagogue
(as some have fantasied) I allow not, seeing that it has no such form of
roundnes, or other likeness, neither had it the form of a Church, for the
assembly of Christians which are builded East and West, but contrariwise the
same was builded North and South, and in form of a noble man's house, and
therefore the best opinion in my indgement is that, it was of old time
belongiug to the family of the Bassinges, Bassinges hall.
which was in this Realm, a name of great antiquity and renown, and that it
bare also the name of that family, and was called therefore Bassinges Arms of
the Bassinges
Haugh, or Hall: whereunto I am the rather induced, for that the Arms of that
family were of old time so abundantly placed in sundry parts of that house,
even in the stone work, but more especially on the walls of the hall, which
carried a continual painting of them on every side so close together, as one
escutcheo^ could be placed by another, which I my self have often seen and
noted before the old building was taken down: these Arms were a Gerond of
twelve points, gold and azure. Of the Bassinges How Bassings hall ward took
that name:
therefore builders of this house, and owners of the ground, near adjoining,
that ward takes the name, as Coleman street ward of Coleman, and Faringden
ward of William and Nicholas Faringden, men that were principal owners of
those places.

And of old time the most noble persons that inhabited this City, were
appointed to be principal magistrates there, as was Godfrey de Magun (or
Magnauile) Portgraue or Sheriff, in the reign of William Conqueror, and of
William Rufus, Hugh de Buch, in the reign of Henry the first, Aubery de vere
Earl of Oxforde, after him Gilbert Becket, in the reign of king Stephen,
after that Godfrey de Magnauile the son of William the son of Godfrey de
Magnauile Earls of Essex, were Portgraues or Sheriffs of London, and
Middlesex. In the reign of Henry the second, Peter Fitzwalter: after him John
Fitznigel etc. so likewise in the reign of king John, the 16. of his reign, a
time of great trobles in the year 1214. Solomon Bassing, Sallomon Bassing and
other of that name.
and Hugh Bassing, Barons of this Realm, as may be supposed were Sheriffs:
and the said Solomon Bassing was Mayor in the year 1216. which was the first
of Henry the third, also Adam Bassing son to Solomon (as it seems) was one
of the Sheriffs in the year 1243. the 28. of Henry the third.

Unto this Adam de Bassing, king Henry the third in the 31 of his reign gave
and confirmed certain messuages in Alderman bury, and in Milk street (places
not far from Bassinges hall) with the aduowson of the Church at Bassinges hal,
with sundry liberties and privileges.

This man was afterward Mayor in the year 1251. the 36. of Henry the third,
moreover Thomas Bassing was one of the Sheriffs, 1269. Robert Bassing
Sheriff, 1279. and William Bassing was Sheriff 1308. etc. for more of the
Bassinges in this City I need not note, only I read of a branch of this
family of Bassinges, to have spread it self into Cambridge ^hire, near unto a
water or bourne, and was therefore for a difference from other of that name,
called Bassing Bassing borne
at the bourn, and more shortly Bassing borne. But this family is also worn
out, and has left the name to the place, where they dwelt. Thus much for this
Bassinges hall.

Now how Blakewell hall Bakewel hall given to the City.
took that name is an other question: for which I read that Thomas Bakewell
dwelled in this house, in the six and thirteth of Edward the third, and that
in the 20. of Richard the second, the said king for the sum of fifty
pounds which the Mayor and Comminaltie had paid into the Hanapar granted,
license so much as was in him to John Frosh, William Parker, and Stephen
Spilman (Citizens and Mercers) that they, the said message, called Bakewell
hal, and one garden with the appurtenances in the parish of S. Michaell of
Bassings haugh, and of S. Lawrence in the Jury of London, and one message, two
shops, and one Garden, in the said parish of S. Michaell, which they held of
the king in burgage, might give and assign to the Mayor and Comminaltie for
ever.

This Bakewell hall Bakewell hal a market place for woollen clothes.
thus established, has been long since employed as a weekelie market place,
for all sorts of Woollen clothes broad and narrow, brought from all parts of
this Realm, there to be sold. The which house of late years growing ruinous
and in danger of falling, Richard May Merchant Tailor at his decease gave
toward the new building Bakewell hall new builded.
of the outward part thereof 300. pound^s upon condition that the same should
be performed within three years after his decease, whereupon the old Bakewell
hal, was taken down, and in the month of February next following, the
foundation of a new strong and beutifull Store house being laid, the work
thereof was so diligently applied that within the space of ten months after,
to the charges of five and twenty hundred pounds, the same was finished in
the year 1588.

Next beyond this house be placed diverse fair houses for marchantes and
others, till ye come to the back gate of Guild hall, which gate and part of
the building within the same, is of this ward. Some small distance beyond this
gate, the Coopers have their common hall. Then is the parish church of S.
Michaell. Coopers hall, Parish church of S. Michael.
called S. Michaell at Bassinges hall, a proper church lately reedified, or new
builded, whereto John Barton Mercer and Agnes his wife were great benefactors,
as appears by his mark placed throughout the whole roof of the Quier, and
middle I Will of the church, he deceased in the year 1460. and was buried in the
Quire with this Epitaph.

John Barton lies under here,
Sometimes of London Citizen and Mercer,
And Ienet his wife, with their progeny,
Been turned to earth as ye may see,
Friends free what so ye be,
Pray for us we you pray,
As you see us in this degree,
So shall you be another day.
Frances Cook, John Martin, Edward Bromflit, Esquier of Warwickshire, 1460.
Richard Barnes, Sir Roger Roe, Roger Velden, 1479. Sir James Yarforde, Mercer
Mayor, deceased 1527. and buried under a fair Tomb with his Lady in a
special Chapel by him builded, on the North side the Quier, Sir John Gresham
Mercer Mayor, who deceased 1554. Sir John Ailife Surgeon, then a Grocer, one
of the Sheriffs, 1548. Nicholas Bakhurst one of the Sheriffs 1577. VVolsto^
Dixie S^^inner Mayor, 1585. etc. And thus I end this ward, which has an
Alderman his Deputy, for common Counsel 4. Constables two, Scauengers two,
for the Wardmote inquest seauenteene, and a Beadle, it is taxed to the fiteene
in London seven pound, and likewise in the Exchequer at

Criplesgate ward.
THe Next ward is called of Criplesgate, Criplegate Ward.
and consists of diverse streets and lanes, lying as well without the gate and
wall of the city, as with in: for first within the wall on the east part
thereof, toward the north it runs to the west side of Bassinges hal ward:
and toward the south it joins to the ward of Cheap, it begins at the
west end of S. Lawrence church, in the Jury, on the north side and runs
west to a Pump, where sometime was a well, with two Bucketes, at the south
corner of Aldermanbury street, which street runs down north to Gay spur
lane, and so to London wall, which street and lane are wholly on both sides of
this ward, and so be some few houses on both the sides from Gay spur lane,
by and against the wall of the city, east to the Grates made for the
Watercourse of the channels, and west to Criples gate. Now on the south side
from over against the west end of S. Lawrence church, to the Pumpe, and then up
Milk street, south unto Cheap, which Milkestreete, is wholly on both the
sides of Cripplegate ward, as also without the South end of Milkestreete, a
part of west Cheap, to wit from the standarde to the Cross, is all of
Cripplegate ward. Then down great Woodstreete, which is wholly of this ward
on both the sides thereof, so is little Woodstreete which runs down to
Cripplegate.

Out of this Woodstreete be diverse lanes, namely on the east side is Lad lane,
which runs east to Milkestreete corner, down lower in Woodstreete is Love
lane, which lies by the south side of S. Albons church in Woodstreete, and
runs down to the Conduite in Aldermanbury street. Lower down in
Woodestreete is Addlestreete, out of the which runs Phillippe lane, down to
London wall. These be the lanes on the east side.

On the west side of Woodestreete is Hugen lane by the south side of S.
Michaels church, and goes through ^o Guthuruns lane. Then lower is Maiden
lane, which runs west to the North end of Guthurouns lane, and up to the
said lane on the east side thereof, till against Kery lane, and back again:
then the said Maiden lane, on the north side goes up to Stayning lane, and up
a part thereof on the east side, to the farthest north part of Haberdashers
hall, and back again to Woodstreete, and there lower down is Silver street,
which is of this ward, till ye come to the east end of S. Olives church, on
the south side, and to Munkes well street on the north side, then down the
said Munkes well street on the East side thereof, and so to Criples gate, do
make the bounds of this ward, within the walls.

Without Cripplegate, Forestreete runs thwart before the gate, from against
the North side of S. Giles church, along to More lane end, and to a Posterne
lane end that runs betwixt the Town ditch on the south, and certain
gardens on the North almost to Moregate, at the east of which lane is a
pat-makers house, which house with all other the gardens, houses, and Allies on
that side the Morefieldes, t^^l ye come to a Bridge and Cowhouse near unto
Fensbery Court is all of Criplegate ward: then to turn back again through the
said Posterne lane to More lane, which More lane with all the Allies and
buildinges there, is of this ward, after that is Grubstreete, more then half
thereof to the straightning of the street, next is Whitecrosse street, up to
the end of Bech lane, and then Redcrosse street wholly, with a part of
Goldinglane, even to the Posts there placed, as a hounder.

Then is Bech lane before spoken of, on the east side of the Red cross, and
the Barbican street, more then half thereof, toward Aldersgate street, and
so have you all the bounds of Criplegate ward without the walls.

Now for Antiquities and Ornaments in this ward, meet to be noted: I find
first at the meeting of the corners of the old Jury, Milkestreete, Lad lane,
and Aldermanbury, there was of old time a fair well with two buckets, of late
years converted to a Pumpe, A pumpe at the corner of Aldermanbury street.
how Aldermanbury street took that name, many fables have been bruted, all
which I ouerpasse as not worthy the accounting, but to be short and plain, I
say that this street took the name of Aldermans bury (which is to say a
court) there kept in their Bery, or Court hall, now called the Guildehall,
which hall of old time stood on the East side of the same street not far
from the west end of Guild hall now used. Touching the antiquity of this old
Aldermans bery or court, I have not read other then that Richard Renery one of
the Sheriffs of London, in the first of Richard the first, which was in the
year of Christ 1189. gave to the church of S. Mary at Osney, Liber Osney.
Aldermanbery court or Guild hal by Aldermanbury church.
by Oxforde, certain ground and rents in Aldermanbury of London, as appears
by the Register of that Church, and is also entered in the Hoistinges of the
Guild hall in London: this old Bery court or hal continued and the courts of
the Mayor and Aldermen were continually holden there until the new Bery court
or Guild hal that now is was builded and finished, which hall was first begun
to be founded in ye year 1411. and was not fully finished in 20. years after,
I myself have seen the ruins of the old Court hall in Aldermanbury street
which of late has been employed as a Carpenters yard etc.

In this Aldermanbury street be diverse fair houses on both the sides, meet
for marchantes or men of Worship, and in the midst thereof is a fair
conduite made at the charges of William Eastfielde, sometime Mayor, who took
order as well for water to be conveyed, from Teyborne, and for the building of
this Conduite not far distant from his dwelling house, as also for a Standarde
of sweet water, to be erected in Fleetestreete, all which was don by his
executors, as in another place I have showed Then is the parish Church of S.
Mary Aldermanberie, Parish church of S. Mary Aldermanbury.
a fair Church with a churchyard, and cloister adjoining, in the which
cloister is hanged and fastened a shanke bone of a man Shanke bone of a man 28^
inches and a half long.
(as is said) very great, and larger by three inches and a half then that
which hangs in S. Laurence church in the Jury, for it is in length 28 inches
and a half of assise, but not so hard and steel like as the other, for the
same is light and somewhat porie and spongie. This bone is said to be found
amongst the bones of men removed from the charnell house of Paul's, or rather
from the Cloister of Paul's church, of both which reports I have some doubt, for
that the late Reyne Wolf Reyne Wolf a grave antiquarie, collected the great
Chronicles increased, and published by his executors.
Stationer (who paid for the carriage of those bones from the charnell to the
Morefields) told me of some thousands of Carry loades and more to be
conueighed, whereof he wondered, but never told me of any such bone in either
place to be found, neither would the same have been easily gotten from him if
he had heard thereof, except he had reserved the like for himself, being one
of the greatest serchers, and preseruers of antiquities in those parts for his
time. True it is that this bone, (from whence soever it came) being of a man,
as the form shows) must needs be monstrous, and more then after the
proportion of five shanke bones of any man now living amongst us. There lie
buried in this church Simon Winchcombe Esquire 1391. Robert Combarton 1422.
John Wheatly Mercer 1428. Sir William Estfild, Knight of the Bathe Mayor, 1438.
a great benefactor to that church under a fair monument, he also builded their
steeple, changed their old bells into 5. tunable bells, and gave one hundred
pounds to other works of that church. Moreover he caused the Conduit in
Aldermanbery Conduit in Aldermanburie.
which he had begun to be performed at his charges, and water to be conueighed
by pypes of lead from Tyborne to Fl^etestreete, as I have said. And also from
high Berie to the parish of S. Giles without Criplegate, where the inhabitants
of those parts incastellated the same in sufficient cesternes. John Midleton
Mercer Mayor 1472. John Tomes Draper 1486. William Bucke Tailor 1501. Sir
William Brown Mayor 1507 Dame Margaret Ienings wife to Stephen Ieninges Mayor
1515. A widow named Starkey, sometime wife to Modie, Raffe Woodcocke Grocer, one
of the Sheriffs 1586. Dame Mary Gresham wife to Sir John Gresham 1538. Thomas
Godfrey Remembrancer of the Office of the first fruits, 1577. Beneath this
church have ye Gay spur lane, Gay spur lane.
which runs down to London wall, as is before showed. In this, at the North
end thereof was of old time a house of Nuns, which house being in great
decay, William Elsing Priorie or Hospital called Elsing Spittle.
Mercer in the year of Christ 1329. the 3. of Edward the 3. began in place
thereof, the foundation of an Hospital, for sustentation of 100. blind men,
toward the erection whereof, he gave his two houses in the parishes of S.
Alphage and our blessed Lady in Aldermanberie near Criplegate, obtaining
first the Kings license of Mortmaine, under the great seal of England. This
house was after called a priorie or Hospital of S. Mary the Uirgin founded in
the year 1332. by V V. Elsing, for Canons Regular: the which W. Becam the
first Prior there, Robert Elsing son to the said W. gave to the said Hospital
12. ^. by the year for the finding of 3. priests, he also gave 100. ^. toward
the enclosing of the New churchyard without Aldegate Charterhouse churchyard
without Aldersgat, and one othet the like without Aldgate.
and 100. ^. to the enclosing of the New-churchyard without Aldersgate, to
Thomas Elsing his son 80. ^. the rest of his goods to be sold, and given to
the poor. This house valued 193. ^. 15. ^. 5. ^ was surrendered the xi.of May,
the xxij.of Henry the eight.

The monumentes that were in this church defaced. Thomas Cheney son to
William Cheney, Thomas, John and William Cheney, John Northampton Drayer Mayor
1381. Edmond Hungerford, Henry Frowike, Joan daughter to Sir Hilliam Cheney,
wife to William Stokes, Robert Eldarbroke Esquire 1460. Dame Joan Ratcliffe,
William Fowler, William Kingstone, Thomas Swineley and Helen his wife etc. The
principal I Will of this church was pulled down, and a frame of four houses set
up in the place: the other part of this church was converted into a parish
church of S. Alphage, Parish church of S. Alphage
and the parish church which stood near unto the wall of the City by
Criplesgate was pulled down and the plot thereof was made a Carpenters yard,
with saw pittes. The Hospital it self, the Prior, and chanons house with
other lodginges, were made a dwelling house, the church yard is a garden
plotte, and a fair gallerie on the cloister: the lodgings for the poor are
translated into stabling for horses. Elsing Spittle burned.


In the year 1541. Sir John Williams master of the kings Jewels, dwelling in
this house on Chrismas even at night, about seven of the clock, a great fire
began in the gallerie thereof, which burned so sore, that the flame fiering the
whole house and consuming it, was seen all the city over, and was hardely
quenched, whereby many of the kings Jewels were burned, and more imbeseled (as
was said). The Lord William of Them was buried in this church, and so was his
successor in that house, Sir Rowland Heyward Mayor etc. Now to return to
Milkestreete, so called of milk sold there (as is supposed) there be many
fair houses for wealthy merchants, and other: amongst the which I read that
Gregory Rokesley chief say master of the kings mints, and Mayor of London in
the year 1275. Gregory Rokesley Mayor of London his house rent xx.shillings
the year. Parish church of S Mary Magdalen.
the third of Edward the first (in which office he continued 7. years
together) dwelled in this milkstreet, in an house belonging to the priorie of
Jews in Sussex whereof he was tenant at will paying xx.^.by the year without
being bounden to rerparations or other charge: such were the rents of those
times. In this Milkestreet is a small parish church of S. Mary Magdaline, which
has of late years been repaired, William Brown Mayor, 1513. gave to this
church 40. pound, and was buried there, Thomas Exmew Mayor 1528. gave 40. ^.
and was buried there, so was John Mitford one of the Sheriffs, 1375. John
Olney Mayor 1475. Richard Rawson one of the Sherifs, 1476. Henry Kelsey, Sir
John Brown Mayor 1497 Thomas Muschampe one of the Sherifs, 1463. Sir William
Cantilo Knight, Mercer 1462. Henry Cantlow Mercer merchant of the Staple, who
builded a chapel and was buried therein 1495. John West Mercer Alderman 1517.
John Machel Alderman 1558. Thomas Skinner Clothworker Mayor 1596.

Then next to this is Woodstreet, Woodstreet.
by what reason so called I know not, true it is that of old time according to
a decree made in the reign of Richard the first, the houses in London were
builded of stone for defense of fire, which kind of building was used for 200.
years or more, but of later time for the winning of ground those houses have
been taken down, and houses of timber set up in place. It seems therefore
that this street has been of the later building, all of timber, (for not one
house of stone has been known there) and therefore called Woodstreet,
otherwise it might take the name of some builder or owner thereof.

Thomas Wood one of the Sheriffs in the year 1491. dwelled was father to my
loving friend William Lambarde Esquire, well known by sundry learned books
that he has published. John Medley Chamberlain of London, John Marsh Esquire
Mercer and common Sergeant of London etc. There is also (but without any
outward monument) the head of James the fifth king of Scots of that name, slain
at Flodden field, and buried here by this occasion. James the fifth king of
Scots his head buried in S. Michaels church in Woodstreet.
After the battle the body of the said King being found, was closed in
lead, and conveyed from thence to London, and so to the Monastery of Sheyne in
Surrey, where it remained for a time, in what order I am not certain: but
since the dissolution of that house, in the reign of Edward the sixth, Henry
Cray Duke of Suffolk, being lodged and keeping house there: I have been
showed the same body so lapped in lead, close of the head and body, thrown
into a waste room, amongst the old timber, lead, and other rubble. Since the
which time workmen there for their foolish pleasure hewed off his head: and
Lancelot Young at this present master Glasier to her Majesty, feeling a
sweet savor to come from thence, and seeing the same dried from all moisture,
and yet the form remaining, with the hair of the head, and beard red,
brought it to London to his house in Woodstreet, where for a time he kept it
for the sweetness, but in the end caused the Sexton of that church to bury it
amongst other bones, taken out of their charnell etc. I read in diverse
Records of a house in Woodstreet then called Black Hall, Black hall in
Woodstreet in S. Michaels parish.
but no man at this day can tell thereof.

On the North side of this S. Michaels church is Maiden lane, now so called,
but of old time Ingenelane, or Inglane. Ingene lane or Maiden lane.
In this lane the Waxchandlers have their common hall on the south side
thereof: and the Haberdashers have their like Hall on the North side at Staning
lane end. Waxchandlers hall.
This company of the Haberdashers, Haberdashers hall.
or Hurrers of old time so called, were incorporated a brotherhoode of S.
Katherine, the 26. of Henry the sixth, and so confirmed by Henry the seventh the
17. of his reign, the Cappers and Hat Merchants or Hurrers being one company
of Haberdashers.

Down lower in Woodstreet is Siluerstreete Siluerstreet.
(I think of silver smithes dwelling there) in which be diverse fair houses,
and on the North side thereof is Monks well street, Monks well street.
so called of a well at the North end thereof, where the Abbot of Garendon had
an house or Cell called S. James in the wall by Criplesgate, and certain
Monks of their house were the Chaplens there, wherefore the well (belonging to
that Cell or Hermitage) was called Monks well, and the street, of the well,
Monks well street.

The East side of this street down against London wall, and the South side
thereof to Criplesgate be of Criplesgate ward, as is before showed. In this
street by the corner of Monks well street is the Bowyers Hall. Boyers hall.
On the said East side of Monks well street be proper Alms houses Alms houses
in Monks well streets.
12. in number founded by Sir Ambrose Nicholas Salter Mayor 1575. wherein be
placed 12. poor and aged people rent free, having each of them vij.pence the
week, and once the year each of them five sacks of: Charcoales, and one
quarter of an hundredth of Faggots of hisgift for ever.

Then in little Woodstreet Alms chambers in little Woodstreet.
be 7. proper Chambers in an Alley on the west side, founded for seven poor
people therein to dwell rent free, by Henry Barton Skinner Mayor, 1416. Thus
much for the Monuments of this ward within the walls.

Now without the Posterne of Criplesgate, Parish church of S. Alphage without
Criplesgate.
first is the parish church of S. Giles, a very fair and large church lately
repaired after yt the same was burned, in the year 1545. the 37. of Henry the
8. by which mischance the monuments of the dead in this church are very few:
notwithstanding I have read of these following to be buried there, to wit,
Elianor wife to John Writh Esquire, daughter to Thomas Arnald Esquire, sister
and heir to Richard Arnald Esquire, John her son and heir, Margaret VVrith
her daughter, John Brigget, Thomas Ruston, Gentleman, John Talbot Esquire, and
Katherine his wife, Thomas Warfle, and Isabel his wife, Thomas ^ucie Gentleman
1447. Raph Rochford Knight 1439. Ed ^ond Water Esquire, Elizabeth wife to
Richard Barnes, sister and heir to Richard Malgraue Esquire of Essex,
Richard Gowre Esquire John Gowre Esquire, Frauncis Baromi of Mi^laine 1546. Sir
Henry Gray Knight, son and heir to Geroge Gray Earl of Kent, 1562. Reginald
Gray Earl of Kent, Richard Choppin Tallow Chandler one of the Sheriffs 1530.
John Hamber Esquire 1573. Thomas Hanley alias Clarenciaux, Herrald of Arms,
Thomas Busby Cooper who gave the Queens head Tavern to the relief of the
poor in ye parish 1575. John Whelar Goldsmith 1575. William Bolene Physician
1587. William Bolene 1575. Richard Bolene 1563. Robert Crowley^ Uicker and
Preacher there: all these four under one old stone in the Quire, the learned
John Fox writer of the Acts and Monuments of the English Church 1587. The
skillful Robert Glouer alias Sommerset Herralde, 1588.

There was in this church of old time a fraternity or brotherhood Brotherhood
in S. Giles Church.
of our blessed Lady, or Corpus Christi, and Saint Gyles founded by John
Belancer in the reign of Edward the third, the 35. year of his reign.

Some small distance from the East end of this church is a water Conduit, Water
Conduit without Criplesgate.
brought in pipes of Lead from Higberie by John Middleton one of the executors
to Sir William Eastfielde, and of his goods, the inhabitants adjoining
castilated it of their own costs and charges, about the year 1483.

There was also a Bosse of clear water, in the wall of the churchyard, Bosse
in the wall of S. Giles churchyard.
made at the charges of Richard Whittington sometimes Mayor, and was like to
that of Belingsgate: of late the same was turned into an evil pumpe, and so is
clean decayed.

There was also a fair Poole Poole of spring water.
of clear water near unto the Parsonage, on the west side thereof, which was
filled up, in the reign of Henry the sixth, the spring was coaped in, and
arched over with hard stone, and stairs of stone to go down to the spring, on
the bank of the town ditch: and this was also done of the goods, and by the
executors of Richard Whittington.

In Whitecrosse street White cross street.
King Henry the fifth builded one fair house, and founded there a brotherhoode
of Saint Giles, to be kept, which house had sometime been an Hospital of the
French order, Hospital of the French order.
and being suppressed, the lands were given to the brotherhood for relief of
the poor, One alley of diverse tenements over against the north wall of S. Giles
churchyard, was appointed to the alms houses for the poor, wherein they
dwelled rent free, and otherwise were relieved: but the said brotherhood was
suppressed by Henry the eight, since which time Sir John Gresham Mayor
purchased the lands thereof, and gave it to the maintenance of a free school,
which he had founded at Holt, a market town in Norfolk.

In Red Cross street Red Cross street. Libar S. Butolphe.
on the West side, from Saint Gyles Church yard, up to the said Cross, be many
fair houses builded outward, with diverse Alleyes turning into a large plot of
ground, of old time called the Jews Garden: The Jews Gardaine, or place to
bury their dead.
as being the only place appointed them in England, wherein to bury their dead:
till the year 1177. the 24. of Henry the second, that it was permitted to them
(after long suit to the King, and Parliament at Oxford) to have a special
place assigned them in every quarter where they dwelled.

This plot of ground remained to the said Jews, til the time of their final
banishment out of England, and is now turned into fair garden plots and summer
houses for pleasure.

On the East side of this Red Cross street, be also diverse fair houses, up
to the Cross. And there is Beech Lane, Beech Lane.
peradventure so called of Nicholas de la Beeche, Lieutenant of the Tower of
London, and put out of that Office in the 13. of Edward the third. This Lane
stretches from the Red Cross street, to white Cross street, and is
replenished, not with Beech Trees, but with beautiful houses, of stone, brick,
and timber. Amongst the which, was of old time, a great house pertaining to the
Abbot of Ramsey, The Abbot of Ramsey his Inn.
for his lodging when he repaired to the City: It is now called Drewry house,
of Sir Drew Drewry, a worshipful owner thereof.

On the North side of this Beech Lane, toward White Cross street, the Drapers
of London have lately builded 8. Alms houses Alms houses in Beech lane.
of brick and timber, for 8. poor Widows of their own Company, whom they
have placed there Rent free, according to the gift of the Lady Askewe, Widow
to Sir Christopher Askewe sometime Draper and Mayor. 1533.

Then in Golding Lane be also Alms houses, Golding Lane Alms houses there.
13. in number, and so many poor people placed in them Rent free, and every
one has two pence by the week for ever. Of the foundation of Thomas Hayes
Chamberlain of London, in the latter time of Henry the eight, he left fair
lands about Iseldonne, to maintain his foundation: Master Ironmonger has the
Order of them.

On the West side of the Red Cross, is a street called the Barbican, because
sometime there stood on the North side thereof, a Burgh-Kening Burgh Kening or
Barbican.
or Watch Tower of the city, called in some language a Barbican, as a bikening
is called a Becon: this Brugh-Kening was by the name of the Manner of Base
court, was given by Edward the 3. to Robert Vfford Earl of Suffolk, and is
now pertaining to Peregrine Bartie, Lord Willoughby of Ersby.

Next adjoining to this, is one other great house, called Garterhouse,
Garterhouse
sometime builded by Sir Thomas VVrithe, (or VVrithesley) knight, Alias Garter,
principal King of Arms, second son of Sir John VVrithe knight, Alias Garter,
and was uncle to the first Thomas Earl of Southampton Knight of the Gartar,
and Chancellor of England: he built this house, and in the top thereof, a
Chapel, which he dedicated by the name of S. Trinitatis in Alto. Thus much for
that part of Criplegate Ward without the wall, whereof more shall be, spoken in
the subburbe of that part. This Ward has an Alderman and his Deputy within
the gate. Common Counsel eight. Constables nine. Skauengers twelve. For
Wardmote Inqueast fffteene, and a Beadle.

Without the gate, it has also a Deputy. Common Counsel two. Constables
four. Skauengers four. Wardmote Inquest seventeen, and a Beadle. It is taxed
in London to the fifteen, at forty pound, and in the Exchequer, at thirty
nine pound ten shillings.

Aldersgate Ward.
THe next is Aldersgate Ward, Aldersgate Ward.
taking name of that North gate of the city: this Ward also consists of
diverse Streets and Lanes, lying as well within the gate, and Wall, as without:
and first to speak of that part within the gate, thus it is. The East part
thereof, joins unto the west part of Criplegate Ward in Engain Lane, or
Maiden Lane. It begins on the North side of that lane, at staining Lane end,
and runs up that Lane, from the Haberdashers Hall, to S. Mary Staining
church: and by the church East, winding almost to Woodstreete. And West through
Oatelane, Oateland.
and then by the South side of Bacon house, to Noble street, and back again
by Lilipot lane, (which is also of that Ward) to Maiden Lane, and so on that
North side, west to S. John Sacharies church, and to Faster Lane. Now on the
South side of Ingaine (or Maiden Lane) is the West side of Guthuruns Lane, to
Kery Lane, and Kery Lane it self (which is of this Ward) and back again into
Engainlane, by the North side of the Goldsmiths Hall, to Faster Lane: and this
is the East wing of this Ward. Then is Foster Lane almost wholly of this Ward,
and begins in the South toward Cheap, on the East side by the North side of
S. Fosters church, and runs dow^ North west by the West end of Engaine
Lane, by Lilipot Lane, and Oate Lane, to Noble street, and through that by
Shelly house (of old time so called, as belonging to the Shelleyes) for Sir
Thomas Shelley knight, was owner thereof in the 1. of Hen. the 4. It is now
called Bacon house, Shelleyes house, now Bacon house.
because the same was new builded by Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the
great Seal. Down on that side by the Lane, by Seriant Fleetwoods house,
(Recorder of London, who also new builded it) to S. Olaues Church in
Siluer-street, which is by the Northwest end of this Noble street. Then
again in Foster Lane, this Ward begins on the West side thereof, over
against the Southwest corner of Saint Fosters Church, and runs down by S.
Leonards church, by Pope Lane end, and by S. Anus Lane end, which Lane is also
of this Ward, North to the stone wall by the wall of the City, over against
Bacon house, which is also of this Ward. Then have ye the Maine street of this
Ward, which is called S. Martins Lane, S. Martins Lane.
which includes S. Martin on the East side thereof, and so down on both the
sides to Aldersgate. Aldersgate street.
And these be the bounds of this Ward within the wall and gate. Without the
gate, the Maine street called Aldersgate street, runs up North on the East
side, to the West end of Hownds Ditch, or Barbican street: A part of which
street is also of this Ward. And on on the West side to Longlane, a part
whereof is likewise of this Ward. Beyond the which Aldersgate street, is
Cosewell street up to the Bars.

And on this West side of Aldersgate street, by S. Buttolphes church, is Briton
street, which runs West to a Pumpe, and then North to the gate which
enters the church yard, sometime pertaining to the Priorie of S. Bartholomewe
on the East side: and on the West side toward S. Bartholomewes Spittle, to a
pain of posts there fixed. And these be the bounds of this Aldersgate Ward
without.

The antiquities be these, First in Staining Lane, Staining Lane Alms houses
there.
of old time so called (as may be supposed) of Painter stainers dwelling there.

On the East side thereof, adjoining to the Haberdashers Hall, be ten Alms
houses pertaining to the Haberdashers, wherein be placed ten Alms people of
that Company, every of them having eight pence the piece every Friday for ever,
by the gift of Thomas Huntlowe Haberdasher, one of the Sheriffs in the year
1539. And sir George Baron gave them ten pounds by the year for ever.

Then is the small parrish Church of Saint Mary, called Staining, Parish Church
of Saint Mary Staining.
because it stands at the North end of Staining Lane. In the which Church
being but newly builded, there remain no Monument worth the noting.

Then is Engaine Lane, (or Maiden Lane) and at the NorthWest corner thereof,
the parish Church of S. John Sachary. Parish Church of Saint John Sachary.
A fair Church, with the Monuments well preserved, of sir Nicholas Twiford
Goldsmith, Mayor, 1388. and Dame Margery his wife: of whose goods ye Church was
made and new builded, with a Tomb for them and others of their race, 1390.
Drugo Barentine Mayor, 1398. He gave fair lands to the Goldsmithes: he
dwelled right against the Goldsmithes Hall. Between the which Hall and his
dwelling house, he builded a Galorie thwarting the street, whereby he might go
from the one to the other: he was buried in this church, and Christian his
wife, 1427. John Adis Goldsmith 1400. And Margaret his wife. John Frauncis
Goldsmith Mayor, 1400. And Elizabeth his wife 1450. John Sutton Goldsmith one
of the Sheriffs, 1413. Bartholomew Seman Golde-heater, Master of the Kings
Mints, within the Tower of London, and the Town of Calice, 1430. Thomas
Leichfield, John Hewet Esquier, 1500. William Brekespere Goldsmith, 1461.
Christopher Eliot Goldsmith, 1505. Bartholmew Read Goldsmith Mayor, 1502. who
was burried in the Charterhouse, and gave to this his parish Church one hundred
pound. His wife was buried in this church, with a fair Monument, her Picture,
in habit of a widow. Thomas Keyton Lorimar, 1522. William Potken Esquier, 1537.
John Cornish with an Epitaph, 147. Robert Fenruther Goldsmith, one of the
Sheriffs in the year, 1512.

On the East side of this Faster Lane, at Engeyne Lane end, is the Goldsmithes
Hall, The Goldsmiths Hall.
a proper house, but not large. And therefore to say that Bartholmew Read
Goldsmith, Mayor, in the year 1502. kept such a feast in this Hall, as some
have fabuled is far incredible, R. Grasion.
and altogether impossible, considering the smalnesse of the Hall, and number
of the guests, which as they say, were more then an hundredth persons of great
estate. For the Messes and dishes of meats to them served, the paled park in
the same Hall, furnished with fruitful Trees, beasts of venery, and other
circumstances of that pretended feast well weighed, Westminster Hall would
hardly have suffised, and therefore I will ouerpasse it, and note somewhat of
principal Goldsmiths.

First I read, that Leefstane Goldsmith was Prouest of this City, in the
reign of Henry the 1. Also that Henry Fitz Alewin, Fits Leafstane Goldsmith was
Mayor of London, The first Mayor of London was a Goldsmith.
in the first of Richard the first, and continued Mayor 24. years. Also that
Gregory Principal men of the City Goldsmithes.
Rocksly, chief say-maister of all the Kings Mintes within England, (and
therefore by my conjecture) a Goldsmith was Mayor in the 3. of Edward the
first, and continued Mayor 7. years together. The William Farindon Goldsmith,
Alderman of Farindon ward, one of the Sheriffs 1281. the 9. of Edward the
first, who was a Goldsmith, as appears on record, as shall be showed in
Farindon Ward. Then Nicholas Farindon his son, Goldsmith, Alderman of
Farindon Ward, four times Mayor in the reign of Edward the second, etc. For
the rest of later time are more manifestly known, and therefore I leave them.

Then at the North end of Noble street, is the parish Church of S. Olaue in
Silver street, Parish Church of Saint Olaue in Silver street.
a small thing, and without any noteworthie monuments.

On the West side of Foster Lane, is the small parish Church of S. Leonards,
Parish church of S. Leonard in Foster lane.
for them of S. Martins be graunde. A number of Tenements being lately builded
in place of the great Colegiate-Church of Saint Martin: that parish is mightily
increased. In this Church remain these Monuments. First without the Church, is
graven in stone on the East end, John Broke it well, an especial reedifier,
or new builder thereof. In the Quire graven in brass, Robert Purfet Grocer,
1507. Robert Trappis Goldsmith, 1526. with this Epitaphe.

When the belles be merrily roong, And the Mass devoutly sung, And the meat
merrily eaten, Then shall Rober Trips his wives And children be forgotten. Then
in Pope lane) Pope Lane. Parish church of S. Anne in the Willowes.
so called of one Pope that was owner thereof) on the North side, is the parish
church of S. Anne, in the willowes, so called, I know not upon what occasion:
but some say, of willowes growing thereabouts: but now there is no such void
place for willowes to grow, more then the church yard, wherein do grow some
high Ash trees.

This church by casualtie of fire, in the year 1548. was burnt, so far as it
was Combustible, but since being newly repaired, there remain a few monuments
of antiquity of Thomas Beckhenton, Clarke of the pipe, who was buried there
1499. Ralphe Caldwell gentleman of Greyes Inn 1527. John Lord Sheffield: John
Herenden Mercer Esquire, 1572. these verses on an old stone.

Qu an Tris de c vul stra
os guis ti to um nere uit
h san Chris mi T mu la.
Then in S. Martins lane, was of old time a fair and large College of a Deane
and secular Cannons, or Priests, which house had great privileges both of
Sanctuary and otherwise, and was called S. College of S. Martin le graunde.
Martins le graunde: Founded by Ingelricus and Ewardus his brother, in the
year 1056. and confirmed by William the Conqueror, as appears by his
Charter, dated 1068. This College was surrendered to K. E. the 6. the 2. of his
reign, in the year 1548. and the same year the College church was pulled
down, and in place thereof many houses forthwith builded, highly prised, and
letten to strangers borne, and other such as claim the benefit of ye
privileges which were at the first granted only to ye church, and to the
Deane, Prebends and Canons, serving God according to ye foundation. Lower down
on the west side of S. Martins lane, in the parish of S. Anne, almost by
Aldersgate, is one great house, commonly called Northumberland house:
Northumberland house, or Queen Ianes Wardrobe.
it belonged to Hen. Percey. K. Hen. the 4. in the 7. of his reign, gave this
house, with ye tenements thereunto appertaining, to Queen lane his wife, and
then it was called her Wardrobe.

Now without Aldersgate, on the East side of Aldersgate street, is the Cooks
Hall: Cooks Hall.
which Cooks or Pastelars were admitted to be a Company, and to have a Master
and Wardens, in the 22. of Ed. the 4. From thence along unto Houndsditch or
Barbican street, be many fair houses. On the west side also be the like fair
buildings, till ye come to Longlane, and so to Coswell street. In Britten
street Britton street.
is one proper parish church of S. But^olphe, Parish Church of S. But^olphe
in which church, was sometime a brotherhood of S. Fabian, and Sebestian,
founded in the year 1377. the 51. of Ed the 3. and confirmed by H. the 4. in
the 6. of his reign. Then H. the 6. in the 24. of his reign, to the honor of
the Trinity, gave license to Dame Johan Astley, sometime his Nurse, to Robert
Cawod and Thomas Smith, to found the same a fraternity, perpetually to have a
Master and two Custose, with Brethren and Sisters, etc. This Brotherhood was
endowed with lands, more then 30. pound by the year, and was suppressed by Ed.
the 6. There lie buried, John de Bathe Weuar, 1390. Philip at Uine, Capper,
1396. Benet Gerarde Brewer, 1403. John Bradmor Chirurgian, Margaret and
Katheren his wives, 1411. John Michael Seriant at Arms, 1415. Allen Bret
Carpenter, 1425. Robert Malton, 1426. John Trigilion Brewer, 1417. John Mason
Brewer, 1431. Robert Cawod Clarke of the Pipe in ye Kings Exchequer, 1466. Ri.
Emm^sley, John Walpole, John Hartshorne Esquire, servant to the King, 1400. And
other of that family, great benefactors to ye church. William Marrow Grocer
Mayor, and Kathren his wife, were buried therabout, 1468. The Lady Anne
Packinton widow, late wife to Ioh. Packinton knight, Chirographer of ye court
of the Common pleas, she founded Alms houses near unto the white Friars
church in Fleetstreete. And thus an end of this Ward, which has an Alderman,
his Deputy, Common Counselors five. Constables eight. Skauingers nine. For
the Wardmote Inquest, fourteen, and a Bedle. It is taxed to the fifteen in
London, seven pound, and likewise in the Exchequer.

Faringdon Ward, Infra, or within.
ON the South side of Aldersgate Ward, lies Faringdon Ward, Faringdon Ward
within.
called Infra, or within, for a difference from an other Ward of that name,
which lies without the walls of the City, and is therefore called Farindon
Extra. Farindon extra, and Faringdon infra, all one Ward, and then divided
into twain by Parliament How Faringdon Ward, took that name of William
Farindon.
These two Wards of old time were but one, and had also but one Alderman, til
y^ 17. of Richard the second. At which time the said Ward for the greatness
thereof, was divided into twain, and by Parliament ordered to have two Aldermen,
and so it continues till this day. The whole great Ward of Farindon, both
Infra and Extra, took name of William Farendon Goldsmith, Alderman of that
Ward, and one of the Sheriffs of London, in the year 1281. the 9. of Edward
the first, he purchased the Aldermanry of this Ward, as by this abstract of
deeds which I have read thereof may appear.

Thomas de Arderne, son and heir of Sir Ralphe Arderne knight, Sir Ralphe
Arderne Knight, Alderman of that Ward, now called Faringdon, in the reign of
Hen. the third. Anketinus de Auerne, Alderman. Ralphe le Feure Alderman.
granted to Ralphe le Feure, Citizen of London (one of the Sheriffs in the
year 1277.) all the Aldermanry with the appurtenances within the City of
London, and the suburbs of the same, between Ludgate and Newgate, and also
without the same gates: which Aldermanry, Anketinus de Ardone held, during his
life, by the grant of the said Thomas de Auerne: to have and to hold to the
said Ralphe and to his heirs, freely, without all challenge: yielding therefore
yearly to the said. Thomas and his heirs, one Cloue, (or slip) of
Gilli^flowers, at the feast of Easter, for all secular service and customs,
with warrantie unto the said Ralphe le Feure, and his heirs, against all
people, Christians, and Jews, in consideratiof twenty marks, which the said
Ralphe le Feure did give before hand, in name of a Gersum or fine, to the
said Thomas, etc. dated the fifth of Edward the first, and witness G. de
Rockesley Mayor: R. Arrar one of the Sheriffs, H. Wales, P. le Tailor, T. de
Basing, I. Horn, N. Blackthorne, Alderman of London. After this, John le
Feure, John le Feure, Alderman.
son and heir to the said Ralphe le Feure, granted to William Farendon,
William Farendon Alderman.
Citizen and Goldsmith of London, and to his heirs, the said Aldermanry, with
the appurtenances, for the service thereunto belonging, in the seventh of Edward
the first, in the year of Christ 1279. This Aldermanry descended to Nicholas
Farendon, Nicholas Farendon Alderman.
son to the said William and to his heirs: which Nicholas Farendon (also a
Goldsmith) was four times Mayor, and lived many years after: for I have read
diverse deeds whereunto he was a witness, dated the year 1360. He made his
Testament, 1361. which was 53. years after his first being Mayor, Nicholas
Farendon lived 53. years after he had been once Mayor.
and was buried in S. Peter's in Cheap. So this Ward continued under the
government of William Faringdon the Father, and Nicholas his son, by the space
of 82. years, and retains their name until this present day.

This Ward of Faringdon within the walls, is bounded thus: Beginning in the
East, at the great Cross in West Cheap, from whence it runs West. On the
North side from the parish church of S. Peter, (which is at the Southwest
corner of Woodstreete) unto Guthurums Lane, and down that Lane, to Hugon Lane
on the East side, and to Kery Lane on the West.

Then again into Cheap, and to Foster Lane, and down that Lane, on the East
side, to the North side of Saint Fausters Church, and on the West, till over
against the Southwest corner of the said Church, from whence down Fauster
Lane, and Noble Street, is all of Aldersgate street Ward, till ye come to
the stone wall, in the West side of Noble street.

Then by the said wall down to Winsor house, (or Neuils Inn) and down
Monkes-well street, on that West side, and then by London wall to Criple Gate.
And the West side of that same Gate is of Faringdon Ward.

Then back again into Cheap, and from Fauster Lane end, to Saint Martins
Lane end, and from thence through Saint Nicholas Shambles, by Penticost Lane,
and Butchers Alley, and by stinking Lane through Newgate Market, to Newgate.
All which is the North side of Faringdon Ward.

Then on the South from against the said great Cross in Cheap, West from
Fridayes street, and down that street on the East side, till over against the
North East corner^ of S. Mathewes Church: and on the West side, till the South
corner of the said Church.

Then again along Cheap to the old Exchange, and down that Lane (on the
East side) to the parish church of Saint Augustine, (which church and one house
next adjoining in Watheling street, be of this Ward) and on the West side of
this Lane, to the gate which enters the South church yard of Saint Paul's,
and within that gate on the North side, to the Gate that enters the North
church yard: all which North church yard is of this Faringdon Ward.

Then again into Cheap, and from the North end of the old Exchange, West by
the North Gate of Powles church yard, up Pater Noster Row, by the two Lanes
out of Powles church, and to a sign of the Golden Lion, which is some twelve
houses short of Aue Mary Lane: the West side of which Lane, is of this Ward.

Then at the South end of Aue Mary Lane, is Creed Lane: the West side whereof,
is also of this Ward.

Now betwixt the South end of Aue Mary Lane, and the North end of Creed
Lane, is the coming out of Powles Church yard. On the East, and the high
street called Bowier Row, to Ludgate on the West side: which way to Ludgate
is of this Ward. On the North side whereof, is Saint Martins church. And on
the South side, the turning into the black Friars.

Now to turn up again to the North end of Aue Mary Lane, there is a short
Lane which runs West some small distance, and is there closed up with a gate
into a great house: and this is called Amen Lane. Amen Lane.


Then on the North side of Pater Noster Row, beginning at the conduit over
against the Old Exchange Lane end, and going west by Saint Michaels church.
At the west end of which church, is a small passage through the Church,
toward the North. And beyond this church some small distance, is an other
passage, which is called Paniar-Alley: Paniar Alley.
and comes out against Saint Martins Lane end.

Then further West, in Pater Noster Row, is Iuie Lane, Iue Lane.
which runs North to the west end of Saint Nicholas Shambles. And then west
Pater Noster Row, till over against the golden Lion, where the Ward ends
for that street.

And then about some dozen houses (which is of Baynards Castle Ward) to
UUarwike Lane end: which UUarwicke Lane, stretches North to the high street
of Newgate Market. And the west side of UUarwicke Lane is of this Faringdon
UUarde. For the East side of UUarwick Lane, of Aue Mary Lane, and of Creed
Lane, with the UUest end of Pater Noster Row, are all of Baynards Castle
UUarde.

Yet (to begin again at the said Conduit by the old Exchange) on the North
side thereof, is a large street that runs up to Newgate, as is aforesaid.
The first part or Southside whereof, from the conduit to the Shambles, is
called Bladder street. Bladder stree^
Then on the back side of the shambles, be diverse slaughter houses, and such
like, pertaining to the shambles, and this is called Mount-Godard street.
Mountgodard street.
Then is the Shambles it self. And then Newgate Market. And so the whole
street on both sides up to Newgate, is of this UUarde, and thus it is wholly
bounded.

Monuments in this UUarde, there be these. First the great Cross in UUest
cheap. Cross in Cheap builded.
But in the ward of Faringdon, the which cross was first erected in that
place, in the year 1291. in the 19. of Edward the first, upon this occasion.

Queen Elianor his wife, dyed at Herdeby (a Town near unto the city of
Lincoln) her body was brought from thence to Westminster. And this King (in
memory of her) caused at every place (where the body was stayed in the way) a
stately cross of stone to be made and erected, with the Queens Image and
Arms upon it: as at Grantham, Woborne, Northampton, Stony Stratfoord,
Dunstable, S. Albons, Waltham, West Cheap, and at Charing, from whence she was
conveyed to Westminster, and there buried.

This Cross in west cheap, being like to those other, which remain till this
day, and being by length of time decayed, John Hatherley being Mayor, procured
in the year 1441. license of King Henry the 6. in the 21. of his reign, to
reedifie the same in more bewtifull manner, Cross in Cheap new builded.
for the honor of the city: and had also license to take up 200. fodar of
lead, for the building thereof, and of certain^ conduits, and a common Gramarie,
and it was very curiously wrought, at the charges of diverse Citizens, John
Fisher Mercer gave 600. marks toward it, and it was not finished before the
year 1486. the second of Henry the seventh. It was new gilt all over in the
year 1522. against the coming in of Charles, the fifth Emperor, and was new
burnished against the Coronation of Edward the sixth. And gilt again in the
year 1554. against the coming in of king Philip. Since the which time, the
said Cross Corsse in Cheap indighted, the Images broken.
having been presented by diverse Iuries (or Wardmote Inquests) to stand in the
highway, to the let of carriages, etc. In the year 1581. the 21. of June in
the night, the lowest Images about the said Cross, were broken and defaced.

Whereupon proclamation was made, that who so would bewray the doers thereof,
should have forty crowns: but nothing came to light. The Image of the blessed
virgin at the time robbed of her son, and her arms broken by which she stayed
him on her knees, her whole body also was strained with ropes so as it was
ready to fall: But was in the year 1595. again fastened and repaired. In the
year 1596. about Bartholomewtide, a new Son misshapen (as borne out of time)
was laid in her arms. The other Images remaining broken as before.

On the East side of the same Cross, the steps being taken thence, under the
Image of Christ's resurrection, was set up a curious wrought frame of gray
Marble, and in the same an Image in Alablaster of a woman, (for the most part
naked) and Thames water Thames water conveyed to the Cross in Cheap.
prilling from her breasts: but the same is often times dried up.

At the Southwest corner of Woodstreete, is the parish Church of S. Peter
Parish Church of Saint Peter in Cheap.
the Apostle, by the said Cross, a proper Church lately new builded. John
Shawe Goldsmith Mayor, deceased 1503. appointed by his Testament, the said
Church and steeple to be newly builded of his goods, with a flat roof.
Notwithstanding Tho. Wood Goldsmith; one of the Sheriffs, 1491. is accounted
principal benefactor: because the roof of the middle I Will is supported by
Images of Woodmen. I find to have been buried in this Church, Nicholas
Farendon Mayor, Richard Hadley Grocer, 1492. John Palmer Fishmonger, 1500.
William Rouse Goldsmith Sheriff, 1429. T. Atkins Esquire, 1400. Ioh. Butlar
Sherif, 1420. Ioh. Palmer, Henry Warley Alderman, 1524. Sir John Monday
Goldsmith Mayor, deceased, 1537. Augustine Hind Cloath-worker, one of the
Sheriffs in the year 1550. whose Monument does yet remain, the others be
gone.

The long shop, or narrow shed, incroching on the high way before this Church,
was licensed to be made in the year 1401. for thirty shillings four pence
the years rent, but now increased much.

Then is Guthuruns lane, Long shop or shead by the Cross in Cheap.
so called of Guthurun, sometime owner thereof. The inhabitants of this lane,
of old time were goldbeaters, as does appear by records in the Exchequer. For
the easterling money was appointed to be made of fine silver, such as men made
into foil, and was commonly called silver of Guthuruns lane, Guthuruns Lane.
etc. The Embrotherers Hall Imbrotherers Hall.
is in this lane. John Throwstone Embrotherer, then Goldsmith, Sheriff,
deceased 1519. gave forty pound toward the purchase of this Hall. Hugon Lane
Hugonlane.
on the East side, and Kery lane Kery lane.
(called of one Kery) on the West.

Then in the high street on the same North side, is the Sadlers Hall. Sadlers
hall.
And then Fauster lane (so called) of Saint Fausters, Fauster lane.
a fair church, lately new builded. Parish Church of S. Fauster.
Henry Coote Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs deceased 1509. builded S. Dunstons
chapel there. John Throwstone, one of the Sheriffs, gave to the building
thereof, one hundred pound, by his testament. John Brown Seriant Painter,
Alderman, deceased 1532. was a great benefactor, and was there buried. William
Tryst Selerar to the King 1425. John Standelfe, and John Standelfe Goldsmithes,
lie buried there. Richard Galder 1544. Agnes wife to William Milborne
Chamberlain of London, 1500. etc.

Then down Fausterlane and Noble street, at the North end whereof, is one
great house builded of stone, commonly called the Lord Windsors house, but I
have read it by the name of Neuels Inn Neuels Inn or the Lord Winsors house.
in silver street, and at the end of Monks well street. Monks well street.


In this street on the west side thereof, is the Barbers Chirurgians Hall,
Barber Chyrurgians hall.
whom obtained their incorporation in the year one thousand four hundred
sixty and four, the second of Edward the fourth, since the which time, they
builded their Hall.

At the North corner of this street, on the same side, was sometime an
Hermitage, Hermitage of S. James in the Wall.
(or Chapel of Saint James) called in the Wall, near Cripplegate: it
belonged to the Abbey and Covent of Garadon, as appears by a record of Edward
the first in the twenty seven year. And by a record of Edward the third, the
sixteenth year. William de Lions was Hermit there, and the Abbot and Covent of
Geredon, founded two Chapleins, cistercian Monks of their house: in this
Hermitage, one of them was founded there, for Aymor de Valence, Earl of
Pembrooke, and Mary de Saint Paul, his Countess.

Of these Monks, and of a well pertaining to them, the street took that
name, and is called Monkes-well street. This Hermitage with the purtena^ces,
was in the reign of Edward the sixth purchased from the said King, by William
Lamb one of the gentlemen of the kings Chapel, Citizen and cloathworker of
London: he deceased in the year 1577. and then gave it to the Cloath-workers
in London: with other Tenements, to the value of fifty pound the year, to the
intent they shall hire a Minister to say divine service there, etc.

Again to the high street of Cheap, from Fauster lane end to S. Martins,
and by that Lane to the Shambels or flesh market, on the North side whereof, is
Penticost Lane, Penticost lane the Butchers Hall.
containing diverse slaughterhouses for the Butchers: and there is the Butchers
Hall. Butchers hall


Then was there of old time, a proper Parish Church of Saint Nicholas, Parish
Church of S. Nicholas.
whereof the said flesh market took the name, and was called S. Nicholas
Shambles. This church with the tenements, and Ornaments, was by Henry the
eight, given to the Mayor and communaltie of the city, toward the maintenance
of the new Parish church, then to be erected in the late dissolved church of
the Gray Friars: so was this church dissolved and pulled down. In place
whereof, and of the church yard, many fair houses are now builded in a court
with a well, etc.

Then is Stinking lane, Stinking lane, or Chick lane
so called, or Chicke-lane at the East end of the Gray Friars church. And then
the late dissolved church of the Gray Friars: Graye Friars Church.
The Original whereof, was this.

The first of this order of Friars in England nine in number, arrived at Dover:
five of them remained at Canterbury, the other 4. came to London, were lodged
at the preaching Friars in Oldboorn, for the space of fifteen days: and then
they hired an house in Cornhill, of John Treuers, one of the Sheriffs of
London. They builded there little cells, wherein they inhabited, but shortly
after, the devotion of the citizens toward them, and the number of the Friars
so increased, that they were by the citizens removed to a place in S. Nicholas
Shambles: which John Ewin Mearcer, appropriated unto the comunaltie, to the use
of these said Friars, and himself became a lay-brother amongst them. About the
year 1225. William Ioyner builded their Quire, Henry Walls the body of the
church: Walter Poter Alderman the Chapter house: Gregory Rokesly, their Dorter:
Bartholomewe of the castle made the refectorie: Peter de Heliland made the
infirmitorie: Beuis Bond king of Heraults, made the Study, etc. Margaret
Queen, second wife to Edward the 1. began the Quire of their new church, New
Church of the gray Friars.
in the year 1306. to the building whereof, in her life time, she gave 2000.
Marks, and one hundred mark by her Testament.

John Britain Earl of Richmond, builded the body of the church, to the
charges of three hundred pound, and gave many rich Jewels and Ornaments to be
used in the same. Mary Countess of Pembroke, seventy pound. Gilbert de Clare,
Earl of Gloucester, bestowed 20. great beams out of his Forest of Tu^bridge, and
20. pound Starlings: Lady Helianor le Spencer, Lady Elizabeth de Brugh, sister
to Gilbert de Clare, gave sums of money: and so did diverse citizens: as Arnald
de Tolinea, one hundred pound. Robert Barron Lisle, who became a Friar there,
three hundred pound. Bartholomew de Almaine fifty pound. Also Philippe Queen,
wife to Edward the third, gave 70. pound. And so the work was done within the
space of 21. years 1327. This church thus rich furnished with windows made at
the charges of diverse persons, the Lady Margaret Segraue, Countess of
Norffolk, bare the charges of making the stalls in the quire, to the value of
350. marks, about the year 1380. Richard Whittington founded the Library,
Liberarie of the gray ^ryers.
in the year 1429. which was in length, one hundred twenty and nine foot:
and in breadth, one and twenty foot: all seeled with wainscot, having twenty
eight deskes, and eight double settles of wainscot.

Which in the year next following, was altogether finished in building, and
within three years after, furnished with books, to the charges of five
hundred fifty six pound, ten shillings, whereof Richard Whittington bare
four hundred pound, the rest was boorne by Doctor Thomas Winchelsey, a Friar
there: and for the writing out of D. Nicholas de lira his works in two
volumes, to be chained there, 100. Marks, etc. The seeling of the Quire at
diverse men's charges, two hundred marks, and the paynting at fifty marks.

This whole Church contains in length Length and breadth of Gray Friars Church.
three hundred foot, of the feet of S. Paul: in breadth, eighty nine foot,
and in height from the ground to the Roof, 64. foot, and two inches, etc. It
was consecrated 1325. and at the general suppression, was valued at thirty
two pound, nineteen shillings, surrendered the twelfth of November, 1538. the
30. of Henry the eight, the ornaments and goods being taken to the Kings use:
the Church was shut up for a time, and used as a Store house of goods, taken as
pryses from the French: But in the year 1546. on the third of January, was
again set open. On the which day, preached at Paul's Cross the Bishop of
Rochester, where he declared the Kings gift thereof, to the City, for the
releeuing of the poor.

Which gift was by pattent of Saint Bartholomewes Spittle in Smithfield, lately
valued at three hundred five pound six shillings seven pence, and surrendered
to the King: of the said Church of the Gray Friars, and of two parrish
Churches, Gray Freyers Church made a Parish Church.
the one of Saint Nicholas in the Shambels, and the other of S. Ewines in
Newgate market, which were to be made one Parish Church in the said Friars
Church, and in lands he gave for maintenance of the said Church, with divine
service, reparations, etc. 500. marks by year^ for ever.

The thirteenth of January, the 38. of Henry the eight, an agreement was made
betwixt the King and the Mayor, and communaltie of London: dated the 27. of
December: by which the said gift of the Gray Friars Church, with all the
Edifices, and ground, the Fratrie, the Library, the Dortar, and Chapter House,
the great Cloystrie and the lesser: tenements, gardens, and vacant grounds,
Lead, Stone, Iron, etc. The Hospital of S. Bartholomewe in west Smithfield,
the church of the same, the lead, belles, and ornaments of the same Hospital,
with all the Messuages, Tenements, and appurtenances. The Parishes of Saint
Nicholas, and of S. Ewin, and so much of Saint Pulchers as is within the gate,
called Newgate, were made one Parish church in the Gray Friars church, and
called Christ's church: founded by Henry the 8.

The Uickar of Christ's church was to have 26. pound, 13. s. 4. d. the year.
The Uicar of S. Bartholomew 13. li. 6. s. 8. d. The Uisitar of Newgate (being a
Priest) ten pound. And other 5. Priests in Christ's church, all to be helping
in the divine service, ministering the Sacraments, and Sacramentals, the five
Priests to have 8. li. the piece. 2. Clarks, 6. pound each. A Sexton 4. li.
Moreover, he gave them the Hospital of Bethelem: with the lauer of Brass, by
estimation, 18. foot in length, and 2. foot and a half in depth, and the
water course of lead to the said Friar house belonging, containing by
estimation in length, 18. Acres. In the year 1552. began the preparing of the
Gray Friars house, for the poor fatherless children. And in the month of
November, the children were taken into the same, to the number of almost four
hundredth. On Christmas day in the afternoon, while the Lord Mayor and Alderman
rode to Powles, the children of Christ's Hospital Christr Hospital.
stood, from S. Lawrence Lane end in Cheap, toward Powles, all in one livery
of Russet cotton, 340. in number. And at Easter next, they were in blewe, and
so have continued ever since.

The defaced Monuments in this church Monuments in Christ's Church.
were these. First in the Quire of the Lady Margaret, daughter to Phillip king
of France, and wife to Edward the first, foundresse of this new church, 1317.
Of Isabel daughter to Edward the 3. wedded to the Lord Couse of France,
Alianor, wife to John Duke of Britain, Beatrix Duchess of Britain, daughter
to Henry the 3. And Elianor Duchess of Buckingham, 1530. Sir Robert Lyle
Baron. The Lady Lysle and Margaret de Riuars, Countess of Deuon, all under one
stone. John Hastings Earl of Pembrooke, 1389, Margaret daughter to Tho.
Brotherton Earl Marshall, she was Duchess of Norffolke, and Countess
Marshall, and Lady Segraue, 1389, Peter Bishop of Carbon in Hungary, 1331.
Gregory Rocksley Mayor. Sir John Deuerux Knight, 1385. John Denham Baron,
sometime Treasuror of England, knight of the Garter, 1501. William Fitz Warren
Baron, and Isabell his wife, sometime Queen of Man. Robert Chalons knight,
1439. John Chalons, Isabell Queen wife to Edward the second, daughter to
Philippe King of France, 1358. Isabell daughter to Edward the third, Countess
of Bedford, and Lady Cousie, Johan of the Tower Qeene of Scots, daughter to E.
the 2. John duke of Burbon, and Augue, Earl of Claremond, Mounpauncer, and
Baron Beaugen, who was taken prisoner at Agen-court, kept prisoner 18. years,
and deceased 1433. Elizabeth Neuell wife to John, son and heir to Raphe
Earl of Westmerland, and mother to Raphe Earl of Westmerland, and daughter to
Richard Earl of Kent, 1423. Edward Burnell son to the Lord Burnell. In
Alhallowes chapel. James Fines Lord Say. 1450. and Helenor his wife 1452. John
Smith Bishop of Landafe, 1478. John, Baron Hilton: John Baron Clinton. Richard
Hastings Knight, Lord of Willowbie, and Wells, Tho. Burdet Esquire beheaded,
1477. Robert Lile son and heir to the L. Lisle. In our Lady chapel, Io.
Gisors of Lo. knight. Humphrey Stafford Esquire of Woorstershire 1486. Rob.
Bartram Baron of Bothell. Raphe Barons knight. Wi. Apleton knight. Reynold de
Cambrey knight. T. Bewmond, son and heir to H. lord Bewmond^ John Butler
Knight. Adam de Howton knight, 1417. Bartholomew Caster knight of Lon.
Rein^ride Arundle kntght, 1468. T. Couil Esquire 1422. In the Postles chapel,
Walter Blunt knight of the Garter, and L. Mountioy, Treasurer of England 1474.
Edward Blunt L. Mountioye 1475. Alice Blunt Mountioye, sometime wife to William
Brown Mayor of London, and daughter to Henry Kebell, Mayor 1521. Anne Blunt
daughter to John Blunt knight, Lord Mountioy, 1480. Sir Allen Cheinie knight,
and sir Tho. Green knight. William Blunt Esquire, son and heir to Walter
Blunt, and father to Ed. Lord Mountioy. James Blunt Knight, son to Walter
Blunt Captain of Gwynes 1492. Flizabeth Blunt wife to Robert Curson knight,
1494. Bartholomew Burwashe, and John Burwashe his son, John Blunt Lord
Mountioy captain of Gwins and Hams 1485. Alan Buxhall of London, John Blunt
knight 1531. John Philpot knight Mayor, and the Lady Jane Sampford his wife
1384. Margaret daughter to sir John Philpot, first married to T. Sentler
Esquire, and after to John Neyland Esquire. Nicholas Biember knight Mayor,
Roll. Blunt Esquire, 1509. To. Bradbury 1489. Nicholas Clifton knight. Frances
Chape, 2. sons of Allayne Lord Cheinery, and John son and heir to the same
Lord Allayne Cheinie knight. John Robpart knight of the Garter 1450. Alleine
Cheiney knight, Thomas Malorye Knight, 1470. Thomas Young a Justice of ye Bench,
1476. John Baldwin fellow of Grays Inn, and common Seriant of London, 1469.
Walter Wrotsley knight of Warwickshire, 1473. Stephen Ienins Marchantaylor,
Mayor 1523. Thomas a Par, and John Wiltwater, slain at Barnet, 1471. Robert
Elkenton knight 1460. Richard Hauering knight 1388. Robert Trisilian knight,
Justice, 1308. Geoffrye Lucy, son to Geoffrey Lucy, John Water Alias York
Herault 1520. John More (Alias Nory) Herault 1491. George Hopton Knight, 1489.
Between the quire and the Altar, Rape Spiganell knight, John Moyle gentleman
of Greyes Inn, 1495. William Huddie knight 1501. Io. Cobham a baron of Ke^t,
John Mortayn knight John Deyncort knight, John Norbery Esquire, high Treasurer
of England, Henry Norbere his son Esquire, John Southlee knight, Thomas
Sakuile, Thomas Lucy knight 1525. Robert de la Riuar, son to Mauricius de la
Riuar, Lord of Tormerton, 1457 John Malmaynas Esquire, and Thomas Malmayns
knights, Nicholas Malmains Hugh Parsal knight, 1490. Alexandria Kirketon
knight, etc. In the body of the Church, William Paulet Esquire of
Summersetshire 1482. John Moyle gentleman 1530. Peter Champion Esquire 1511.
John Heart Gentleman 1449. Alice La. Hungarford, hanged at Tiborne, for
murdering her husband, 1523. Edward Hall Gentleman of Grayes Inn, 1470. Ri.
Churchyard Gentleman fellow of Grayes Inn, 1498. John Mortimar knight beheaded
1423. Henry Frowike Alderman, Renauld Frowike, Philip Pats, 1518. William
Porter Seriant at arms 1515. Thomas Grantham Gentleman 1511. Edmond Rotheley
Gentleman 1470. Henry Reston Gentleman of Grayes Inn, 1485. I. Aubrye son to
I. Aubrye, Mayor of Norwich, 1368. Nicholas Mongomery Gentleman, son to Io.
Mongomery of Northamptonshire 1485. Sir Bartho. Emfield knight: Sir Barnard, S.
Peter knight, Sir Raphe Sandwiche knight, Custos of London. Sir Andrew Sakauile
knight.

All these and five times so many more have bin buried there, whose Monuments
are wholly defaced: for there were 9. Tombs of Alablaster and Marble,
environed with strikes of Iron in the Quire, and one Tomb in the body of the
church also coped with iron, all pulled down, besides 7. score grave stones of
Marble, all sold for 50. pound or thereabouts, by Sir Martin Bows. Of late
time buried there, Walter Hadden Doctor, etc.

From this church West to Newgate, is of this Ward. Now for the Southside of
this Ward, beginning again at the cross in Cheap, from thence to Friday
street, Parish church of S. Matthew in Friday street.
and down that street on the West side, till over against the Northwest
corner of S. Matthewes church. And on the West side, to the South corner of the
said church, which is wholly in the Ward of Faringdon, a proper church, and
has these few Monuments of Sir Nicholas Twiford Goldsmith, Mayor: who gave to
that church an house, with the appurtenances, called the Griffon on the Hope,
in ye same street. Thomas Pole Goldsmith, 1395. Robert Johnson Goldsmith,
Alderman. Robert Harding Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs, 1478. John Twiselton
Goldsmith, Alderman, 1525. Raphe Allen Grocer, one of the Sheriffs deceased,
1546. Anthony Gamage Ironmonger, one of the Sheriffs, deceased, 1579. Cage,
John Mabbe Chamberlain of London, etc.

From this Friday street, West to the Old Exchange, Old Excha^ge.
a street so called of the Kings Exchange there kept, which was for the receipt
of Bullion, to be quoyned. For Henry the 3. in the 6. year of his reign,
wrote to the Scabines and men of Ipre, that he and his council had given
prohibition, that none, ^nglishmen or other, should make change of plate or
other Mass of silver, but only in this Exchange at London, or at Canterbury.
Andrew Bukerell then had to Farm the Exchange of England, and was Mayor of
London in the reign of Henry the third. John Somercote had the keeping of the
Kings Exchange over all England. In the eigth of Edward the first, Gregory
Rockesly was keeper of the said Exchange for the King. In the fifth of Edward
the second, William Hausted was keeper thereof. And in the 18. Roger de
Frowicke, etc.

These received the old stamp, or coining yrons, from time to time, as the
same were worn, and delivered new to all the Mints in England, as more at large
in another place I have noted.

This street begins by West Cheap in the North, and runs down South so
Knight-Riders street: that part thereof which is called Olde-Fish street, but
the very housing and Office of the Exchange and Coynage, was about the midst
thereof, South from the East Gate that enters P^wles Church yard, and on the
West side in Baynards Castle Ward.

On the East side of this Lane, betwixt West cheap, and the church of S.
Augustine, Henry Walls Mayor (by license of Ed. the first) builded one Row of
houses, the profits rising of them to be employed on London Bridge.

The parish church of S. Augustine, Parish church of S. Augustine.
and one house next adjoining in Watheling street, is of this Ward called
Faringdon. This is a fair church, and lately well repaired, wherein be
Monuments remaining of Henry Read Armourer, one of the Sheriffs 1450. Robert
Bellesdon Haberdasher, Mayor, 1491. Sir Townley, William Dear one of the
Sheriffs, 1450. Robert Ra^en Haberdasher, 1500. Thomas Apleyard Gentleman,
1515. William Moncaster Merchant Tailor, 1524. Willi. Holte Merchant Tailor,
1544. etc.

Then is the North church yard of Powles, in the which stands the Cathedral
church of S. Paul. Cathedral Curch of S. Paul.
This church was first founded by Ethelbart King of Kent, about the year of
Christ, 610. he gave thereto lands, as appears.

Aedelbertus Rex deo inspirante, pro animae sua remedio dedit episcopo melito
terram qua appellatur Tillingeham ad monaster: sui solatiu^ soilioz, S. Pauli:
Et ego Rex Aethelbertus ita firmiter concedo tibi presulimelito potestatem eius
habendi and possidendi vt in perpetuum in monastary vtilitate permanet, etc.
Athelstan, Edgare, Edward the Confessor, and others also gave lands thereunto.
William Conqueror gave to the Church of S. Paul, and to Mauricius then Bishop,
and his successors, the Castle of Sto^tford, with the appurtenances, etc. He
also confirmed the gifts of his predecessors, in these words: Omne I Rex Angl.
Clamo quietas in perpetuum, 24. Hidas quas Rex Aetholbert dedit S. Paulo iuxta
murum London, etc.

The Charter of King William the Conqueror, given to the church of S. Paul in
London, exemplified in the Tower: the latin thereof Englished thus.

William by the grace of God, King of Englishmen, To all his well-beloved French
and English people, greeting. Know ye that I do give unto God and the Church of
S. Paul of London, and to the Rectors and Seruitors of the same, in all their
lands which the Church has, or shall have, within borough and without, sack
and socke, Thole and The, Infangthefe, and Grithbriche, and all f^eeshippes by
sea and by land, on tide, and off tide, and all the rights that into them.
Christendom by rad^ and more speak and on buright hamed, and on buright
work, before all the Bishoppricks in mine land: and on each other man's land.
For I will that the Church in all things be as free as I would my soul to be
in the day of judgment, witnesses Ofmound our Chancellor, Lamfranke the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas Archbishop of York, Roger Earl of
Salesbury, and Alane the County, and Geffrey de Magna villa, and Raphe
Peuerell.

In the year 1087. this church of S. Paul Saint Paul's church brent.
was brent with fire, and therewith the more part of the citie^ which fire began
at the entry of the West gate, and consumed to the East gate. Mauricius then
Bishop, began therefore the foundation of a new church of S. Paul, Foundation
of the new Church of S. Paul builded, stone brought from Cane in Normandy.
a work that men of that time judged would never have bin finished, it was to
them so wonderful for length and breadth, and also ye same was builded upon
Arches (or Ua^ltes) of stone, for defense of fire, which was a manner of work
before that time unknown to the people of this Nation, and then brought in by
the French: and the stone was fetched from Cane in Normandy.

This Mauricius deceased in the year 1107. Richard Beamor succeeded him in the
Bishoppricke, who did wonderfully increase the said church, purchasing of his
own cost, the large streets and Lanes about it, wherein were wont to dwell many
lay people, which ground he began to compass about, with a strong wall of
stone and gates. King Henry the first gave to the said Richard, so much of the
Mote (or Wall) of the castle, on the Thames side to the South, as should be
needful to make the said wall of the church, and so much as should suffice to
make a wall without the way on the North side, etc.

It should seem that this Richard enclosed but two sides of the said church
or Semitorie of Saint Paul, to wit, the South and North sides: for King Edward
the second, in the tenth of his reign, granted that the said church yard
should be enclosed with a wall where it wanted, for the murders and robberies
that were there committed. But the citizens then claimed the East part of the
church yard to be the place of assembly to their folkemotes, and that the
great steeple there situate was to that use, their common bell, The comm^^
bell in Paul: church yard rung, for the calling together of the Citizens to
their folkemotes.
which being there rung, all the inhabitants of the city might hear and come
together. They also claimed the West side, that they might there assemble
themselves together, with the Lord of Baynardes castle, for view of their
Armor in defense of the city. This matter was in the Tower of London referred
to Haruius de Stanton, and his fellow Justices Itenerantes: but I find not the
decision or judgment of that controversy.

True it is, that Edward the third, in the seventeen of his reign, gave
commandment for the finishing of that wall, which was then performed, and to
this day it continues. Although now on both the sides (to wit, within and
without) it be hidden with dwelling houses. Richard Beamer deceased in the
year 1127. and his successors in process of time, performed the work begun.

The steeple of this church was builded and finished in the year 1222. The
cross on the said steeple fell down, and a new was set up in the year 1314.
The new work of Powles Powles steeple.
(so called) at the East end above the Quire, was begun in the year 1251.

Henry Lacie Earl of Lincoln, Constable of Chester, and Custos of England, in
his time was a great benefactor to this work, and was there buried, in the
year 1310. Also Raphe Baldocke Bishop of London, in his life time gave two
hundredth marks to the building of the said new work: The new work of
Powles.
and left much by his Testament, toward the finishing thereof, he deceased in
the year 1313 and was buried in the Lady chapel.

The first of February, in the year 1444. about two of the clock in the
afternoon, this steeple was fiered by lightning, Powles steeple fiered by
lightning.
in the midst of the shaft or speere, both on the West side, and on the South,
but by labor of many well disposed people, the same was to appearance quenched
with Uinegre, so that all men withdrew themselves to their^ houses praising
God: but between eight and nine of the clock in the same night, the fire brast
out again, more fervently then before, and did much hurt to the Lead and
Timber, till by the great labor of the Mayor and people that came thither, it
was thoroughly quenched.

This steeple was repaired Paul's steeple repaired.
in the year 1462. and the Weather Cock again erected: but one Robert Godwin
winding it up, the rope brake, and he was destroyed on the Pinacles, and the
cock Another cock of Paul's steeple.
was sore bruised. But Burchwood (the Kings Plomer) set it up again: since the
which time, needing reparation, it was both taken down and set up, in ye year
1553. it the^ wayed 40. pound. At which time it was found to be of copper gilt
over, and the length from the bill to the tail, being 4. foot, and the
breadth over the wings, 3. foot and a half: the cross from the bole, to the
Eagle (or Cock) was fift^ene foot, and six inches of a sise: the length
thereof overthwart, was five foot and ten inches: and the compass of the bole
was nine foot and one inch. The inner body of this Cross, was Oak, the next
cover was Lead, and the uttermost was of Copper, red varnished. The boale and
Eagle, or Cock, were of Copper and gilt also. The height of the steeple was
520. foot, Height of the steeple.
whereof the stone work, is 260. foot, and y^ spire was likewise 260. foot:
the length of y^ whole church, Length of Paul's Church.
is two hundred and forty tailors yardes, which make 720. foot: the breadth
thereof, is 130. foot: and the height of the body of that church, is 150.
foot. Gouernor^ of this Church.
This church has a Bishop, a Deane, a Precentor, Chauncelor, Treasurer, and
five Archdeacons: to wit, of London, Middlesex, Essex, Colchester and S.
Albons: it has Prebendaries thirty, Cannons twelve, Uickars Chorall six, etc.

The College of Petty Cannons there, Petie Cannons of Paul's.
was founded by king Richard the second, in honor of Queen Anne his wife, and
of her progenitors, in the 17. of his reign. Their Hall and lands was then
given unto them, as appears by the Pattent, Master Robert Dokesworth then
being master thereof.

There was also one great Cloister on the North side of this church, Great
Cloystry of Paul's.
inuironing a plot of ground, of old time called Pardon church yard, whereof
Thomas More (Deane of Paul's) was either the first builder, or a most especial
benefactor, and was buried there. Dance of Paul's.
About this Cloister, was artificially and richly painted, the dance of
Machabray, or dance of death, commonly called the dance of Paul's: the like
whereof, was painted about S. Innocents cloister, at Paris in France: the metres
or poesy of this dance, were translated out of French into English, by John
Lidgate, the Monk of Bery, and with y^ picture of Death, leading all estates
painted about the Cloister: at the special request and dispense of Iankin
Carpenter, in the Reign of Henry the 6. In this Cloister were buried many
persons, some of worship, and others of honor: the monuments of whom, in
number and curious workmanship, passed all other that were in that church.

Over the East Quadrant of this Cloister, was a fair Library, Library of
Paul's.
builded at the costs and charges of Walter Sherington, Chancellor of the Duchy
of Lancaster, in the reign of Henry the 6. which has been well furnished
with fair written books in Uellum: but few of them now do remain there. In
the midst of this pardon church yard, was also a fair Chapel, Chapel in
Pardon churchyard.
first founded by Gilbert Becker, Portgraue and principal magistrate of this
city, in the reign of king Stephen, who was there buried.

Thomas Moore Deane of Paul's before named, reedified this Chapel, and founded
three Chaplains there, in the reign of Henry the 5.

In the year 1549. on the tenth of April, the said Chapel by commandment
of the Duke of Summerset, was begun to be pulled down, with the whole
Cloystrie, the dance of Death, the Tombs, and monuments: so that nothing
thereof was left, but the bare plot of ground, which is since converted into a
garden, for the Pety Canons. There was also a Chapel at the North door of
Paul's, Chapel at the North door of Paul's.
founded by the same Walter Sherington, by license of Henry the sixth, for two,
three, or four Chaplains, endowed with forty pound by the year. This Chapel
also was pulled down in the reign of Edward the sixth, and in place thereof, a
fair house builded.

There was furthermore, a fair Chapel of the holy Ghost in Paul's church, on
the North side: founded in the year, 1400. by Roger Holmes, Chauncelor and
Prebendary of Paul's, for Adam Bery Alderman, John Wingham and others, for seven
Chaplains, and called Holmes College. Holmes College.
Their common Hall was in Paul's church yard on the South side. This College
also was with others suppressed in the reign of Edward the sixth. Then under
the Quire of Paul's is alarge chapel, first dedicated to the name of Jesus,
founded the 37. of Henry the sixth, as appears by his patent thereof, dated at
Crodowne to this effect. Many liege men, and Christian people having begun a
fraternity, and guild, to the honor of the most glorious name of Jesus Christ
our Savior, in a place called y^ crowdes of the Cathedral church of Paul's in
London, which has continued long time peaceably, till now of late: whereupon
they have made request, and we have taken upon us the name and charge of the
foundation, to the land of Almighty God, the Father, the Son and the holy
Ghost, and especially to the honor of Jesus, in whose honor, the fraternity
was begun, etc.

The King ordained William Say then Deane of Paul's to be the Rector, and
Richard Ford, (a remembrancer in the Exchequer) and Henry Bennis (clarke of his
privy Seal) the Gardians of these brothers and sisters: they and their
successors to have a common seal: license to purchase lands or tenements to
the value of 40 pound by the year, etc.

This foundation was confirmed by Henry the seventh, the two and twenty of his
reign, to Doctor Collet, then Deane of Powles, Rector there, etc. And by Henry
the eight, the seven and twentieth of his reign, to Richard Pace, then Deane
of Paul's, etc.

At the West end of this Jesus chapel, under the Quire of Paul's, also was a
Parish church of Saint Faith, Parish Chrch of Saint Faith.
commonly called Saint Faith under Paul's, which served for the Stacioners and
others, dwelling in Paul's church yard, Pater Noster Row, and the places near
adjoining. The said chapel of Jesus being suppressed in the reign of Edward
the sixth: the Parishioners of Saint Fayths church were removed into the same
Jesus chapel, as to a place more sufficient for largeness and lightsomenesse,
then their former church was, and so it still remains to that use.

Then was there on the North side of this church yard, a Charnell house
Charnel house with a Chapel.
for the boanes of the dead, and over it a chapel of an old foundation, such
as follows. In the year one thousand two hundred eighty two, the tenth of
Edward the first, it was agreed, that Henry Walls Mayor, and the citizens, for
cause of shops by them builded, without the wall of the churh yard, should
assign to God, and to the church of Saint Paul, ten marks of rent by the
year for ever, toward the new building of a chapel of the blessed Uirgin
Mary, and also to assign five marks of yearly rent to a Chaplain to
celebrate there.

Moreover in the year 1430. the eight of Henry the sixth, license was granted
to Iankin Carpenter, (executor to Richard Whittington) to establish upon the
said Charnell, a Chaplain, to have eight marks by the year: Then was also in
this chapel, two brotherhoods. In this chapel were buried Robert Barton, and
Henry Barton Mayor, and Thomas Mirfin Mayor, all Skinners, and were entombed
with their Images of Alablaster over them, grated about with Iron: all which,
was pulled down in the year one thousand five hundred forty nine, the bones
of the dead, couched up in a Charnill (by report of him who paid for the
carriage) were conveyed from thence into Finsbery field, amounting to more then
one thousand cart loades, and there laid on a moorish ground, Reign-Wolfe.
in short space after raised (by soylage of the city) to hear three
winde-milles.

The chapel and Charnill were converted into dwelling houses, ware houses, and
sheads for Stacioners, builded before it, in place of the Tombs. In the East
part of this church yard, stands Powles school, Powles school.
lately builded and endowed in the year 1512. by John Collet Doctor of
Divinity, and Deane of Powles, for 153. poor men's children, to be taught free
in the same scoole, for which he appointed a Master, a Surmaister, or Usher,
and a Chaplain, with large stipends for ever, committing the case and
oversight thereof, to the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Mearcers in
London, because he was borne in London, and was son to Henry Collet, Mearcer,
sometime Mayor. He left to these Mearcers, lands, to the yearly value of one
hundred and twenty pound or better. Near unto this school on the North side
thereof, was of old time a great and high Clochier Clochiard in Powles church
yard.
(or Bel-house) four square, builded of Stone, and in the same a most strong
frame of Timber, with four Belles, the greatest that I have heard off: these
were called Jesus Belles, and belonged to Jesus Chapel, but I know not by
whose gift: the same had a great spear of timber, covered with Lead, with the
image of Saint Paul on the top, but was pulled down by sir Miles Partredge
knight, in the reign of Henry the eight.

The common speech then was, that he did set an hundred pound upon a cast at
dice against it, and so won the said Clocheard and belles of the King: and
then causing the belles to be broken as they hoong, the rest was pulled down
and broken also. This man was afterward executed on the Tower hill, for matters
concerning the Duke of Summerset, in the year 1551. the fifth of Edward the
sixth.

In place of this Clochearde, of old times, the common Bell of the city
Common bell of the City.
was used to be roong for the assembly of the citizens, to their Folk motes as
I have before showed. About the midst of this church yard, is a Pulpit Cross
Pulpit Cross in Paul's Church yard.
of timber, mounted upon steps of stone, and covered with Lead. In which,
are sermons preached by learned Divines every Sunday in the forenoone. The very
antiquity whereof, is to me unknown: but I read, that in the year 1259.
King Henry the third, commanded a general assembly to be made at this Cross,
where he in proper person commanded the Mayor, that on the next day following,
he should cause to be sworn before the Aldermen, every stripling of twelve
years of age, or upward, to be true to the King and his heirs, Kings of
England.

Also in the year 1262. the same King caused to be read at Paul's Cross, a
Bull obtained from Pope Urban the fourth, as an absolution for him, and for all
that were sworn to maintain the Articles made in Parliament at Oxford. Also
in the year 1299. the Deane of Paul's, accursed at Paul's Cross, all those
which had searched in the church of Saint Martin in the field, for an h^^rd of
Gold, etc.

Thomas Kemp Bishop of London, new builded this Pulpit and Cross, in form as
it now stands. In the year 1561. the fourth of June, betwixt the hour of
three and four of the Clock in afternoon, the great spear of the steeple of
Saint Paul's church, Paul's steeple and Church brent.
was fiered by lightening, which brake fourth (as it seemed) two or three
yardes beneathe the foot of the Cross, and from thence it brent downward the
spear to the battlements, stone work and bells, so furiously, that within the
space of four hours, the same steeple with all the Roofes of the church, were
consumed, to the great sorrow and perpetual remembrance of all the beholders.
After this mischance, the Queens Majesty directed her letters to the Mayor,
willing him to take order for speedy repairing of the same. Speedy repairing
of Paul's Church.
And she of her Gracious disposition, for the furtherance thereof, did
presently, give and deliver in gold 1000. marks, with a warrant for 1000.
l^ades of timber, to be taken out of her woods, or elsewhere.

The citizens also gave first a great benenolence, Benevolence.
and after that three fifteenes to be speedily paid. The Queens gift.
The Clergy of England, likewise within the Province of Canterbury, granted
the fourth part of the value of their benefices, charged with first fruits,
the thirtieth part of such as were not so charged, but the Clergy of London
Dioces, granted the thirtieth part of all that paid first fruits, and the
twentieth part of such as had paid their fruits.

Six citizens of London, and two Petty Canons of Powles church, had charge
to further and ouersee the work, wherein such expedition was used, that
within one month next following the burning thereof, the church was covered
with boordes and lead, in manner of a false Roof against the weather, and
before the end of the said year, all the said Isles of the church were framed
out of new timber, covered with lead, and fully finished. The same year also,
the great Roofes of the West and East ends were framed out of great timber in
Yorkeshiere, brought thence to London by sea, and set up, and covered with
lead. But concerning the steeple, little was done, through whose default God
knows: it was said, that the money appointed for new building of the
steeple, was collected, and brought to the hands of Edmond Grindall then Bishop
of London. The monuments in this church Monuments in Powles church.
be these. First as I read, of Erkenwalde Bishop of London, buried in the old
church, about the year of Christ, seven hundred, whose body was translated
into the new work, in the year one thousand one hundred and forty, being
richly shrined, above the Quire behind the high Alter.

Sebba or Seba King of the East Saxons, first buried in the old Church, and
after that, removed into the new, and laid in a coffin of stone, on the North
side, without the Quire. Etheldred King of the West Saxons, was likewise buried
and removed. William Norman Bishop of London, in the reigns of Edward the
Confessor, and of William the Conqueror, deceased, one thousand and seventy,
and is now buried in the West I Will, with an Epitaph, as in another place I have
showed. Eustauchius de Fanconbridge Bishop of London 1228. buried in the South
I Will, above the Quire. Roger Nigar Bishop of London 1241. buried on the North
side the Quire. Fulco Basset Bishop of London 1259. Henry Wingham B. 1262.
Henry Lacye, Earl of Lincoln, in the new work of Powles, betwixt our Lady
chapel, and S. Dunstons chapel, where a fair monument was raised for him,
with his picture in armor, cross legged, as one professed for defense of the
holy land, against the infidels. His monument is foulely defaced. The cause of
monuments of the dead cross-legged.
Raphe Baldoke B. of London 1313. in our Lady chapel, whereof he was founder.

Some have noted, that in digging the foundation of this new work of Powles,
there were found more then an hundred scalpes of Oxen, Scalpes of oxen found
in diging of a foundation.
or Kine, which thing (say they) confirms greatly the opinion of those which
have reported, that of old time there had been a Temple of Jupiter, and that
there was daily sacrifice of beasts.

Othersome, both wise and learned, have thought the Bucks head, boorne before
the procession of Paul's, on Saint Paul's day, to signify the like. But true
it is, that I have read an ancient deed to this effect.

Sir William Baud knight, the third of Edward the first, A Bucks head borne
before the procession at Powls.
in the year 1274. on Candlemas day, grautned to Haruy de Borham, Deane of
Powles, and to the chapter there, that in consideration of twenty two Akers of
ground or land, by them granted within their manor of Westley in Essex, to be
enclosed into his park of Curingham, he would for ever upon the feast day of
the conversion of Saint Paul in winter, give unto them a good Do, seasonable
and sweet, and upon the feast of the commemoration of Saint Paul in summer, a
good Bucke, and offer the same at the high Alter, the same to be spent amongst
the Canons residents: the Do to be brought by one man at the hour of
Procession, and through the Procession to the high Alter: and the bringer to
have nothing: the Bucke to be brought by all his meyney in like manner, and
they to have paid unto them by the Chamberlain of the church, 12. pence only,
and no more to be required. This grant he made, and for performance, bound the
lands of him and his heirs to be distrained on: and if the lands should be
euicted, that yet he and his heirs should accomplish the gift. Witnesses
Richard Tilbery, William de Vockendon, Richard de Harlowe, Knights, Peter of
Stanforde, Thomas of Waldon, and some others.

Sir Walter Baude Knight, son to William, confirmed this gift, in the
thirtieth of the said King, and the witnesses thereunto, were Nicholas de
Wokendon, Richard de Rokeley, Thomas de Mandeuile, John de Rocheford, Knights,
Richard de Broniforde; William de Marks, William de Fulham, and other. Thus
much for the grant.

Now what I have heard by report, and have partly seen, it follows. On the
feast day of the Co^memoration of Saint Paul, the bucke being brought up to
the steps of the high Alter in Powles church, at the hour of Procession, the
Deane and chapter being apparelled in Coapes and Uestments, with garlands of
Roses on their heads, they sent the body of the Bucke to baking, and had the
head fixed on a powle, boorne before the Cross in in their procession, until
they issued out of the West door, where the keeper that brought it, blowed the
death of the Bucke, and then the Horners that were about the City, presently
answered him in like manner: for the which pains, they had each one, of the
Deane and Chapter, four pence in money, and their dinner: and the keeper that
brought it, was allowed during his aboade there, for that service, meat,
drink and lodging, at the Deane and Chapters charges, and five shillings in
money at his going away, together with a loaf of bread, having the picture of
Saint Paul upon it, etc.

There was belonging to the church of Saint Paul for both the days, two
special suits of Uestments, the one imbrodered with Buckes, the other with
Does, both given by the said Bands (as I have heard.) Thus much for ye matter.
Now to the residue of the monuments, Henry Gylford, L. Marshall, was buried in
the Postles chapel 1313. Richard Newport Bishop 1318. Sir John Bewcamp,
Constable of Dover, Wardon of the Ports, Knight of the Garter: son to Gwye
Bewcampe, Earl of Warwick, and brother to Thomas, Earl of Warwick, in the
body of the church on the South side 1358. where a fair monument remains of
him: he is by ignorant people ^isnamed, to be Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, who
lies honorably buried at Saint Albons, twenty miles from London: and
therefore such as merrily profess themselves to serve Duke Humphrey in Powles,
are to be punished here, and sent to Saint Albons, there to be punished
again, for their absence from their Master, as they call him.

Sir Raphe de Hingham, chief Justice of both Benches, successively buried in
the side of the North walk, against the Quire, 1308. Sir John Putteney Draper
Mayor, 1348. in a fair chapel by him builded, on the North side of Powles,
wherein he founded 3. chaplains.

Richard de Plesseys in the North walk before Saint Georges chapel, 1361. Sir
Simon Burley, Constable of Dover, and Chamberlain to Richard the second,
knight of the Garter beheaded, lies buried in the North walk against the
Quire. Adam de Bery Mayor, in the year 1364. buried in a Chapel of Saint Mary
Magdalen: or of the holy Ghost, called Holmes College.

Roger Holmes Chauncelor and Prebend of Powles, was buried there 1400. John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster 1399. buried on the North side the Quire, by Blanch his
first wife, who deceased in the year 1368. The Duchess of Bedforde, sister
to Philip Duke of Burgonie, one thousand four hundred thirty three. Robert
Fitz Hew, Bishop of London, in the quire, one thousand four hundred thirty
five. Thomas Kempe Bishop of London, in a proper chapel of the Trinity, by
him founded in the body of the Church on the North side, 1489. John Collet
Deane of Powles on the South side without the quire, 1519. Richard Fitz James,
Bishop of London lies hard beneath the North-west Pillar of Paul's steeple,
under a fair tomb, and a chapel of timber with stairs, mounting thereunto
over his tomb,1521. his chapel was burned by fire, falling from the steeple.
John Stokesly Bishop of London in our Lady chapel 1539. John Neuel, Lord
Latimere, in a chapel by the North door of Powles, about the year, 1542. Sir
John Mason knight, in the North walk against the quire, 1566. William Herbert
Earl of Pembrooke, knight of the Garter, on the North side the quire, 1569.
Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord keeper of the great Seal, on the South side of the
Quire, 1578. Sir Philip Sidney above the Quire, on the North side the Quire,
1586. Sir Francis Walsingham knight, principal Secretary, and chauncelor of
the Duchy of Lancaster 1590. Sir Christopher Hatton Lord Chancellor of England,
knight of the Garter, above the Quire, 1591 under a most sumptuous monument,
whereof a merry Poet writ thus.

Philip and Francis have no Tomb,
For great Christopher takes all the room.
John Elmare Bishop of London, before S. Georges chapel, 1594. The Lady
Heneage, and her husband sir Thomas Heneage Chauncelor of the Duchy, 1595.
Richard Fletcher Bishop of London, 1596. These as the chief have I noted, and
so an end for Paul's church.

Without the North gate of Powles church, from the end of the old Exchange,
West up Pater Noster Row, Pater Noster Row.
by the two lanes out of Paul's church, the first out of the cross I Will of
Paul's, the other out of the body of the church, about the midst thereof, and
so West to the golden Lion, be all of this Ward, as is aforesaid: The houses
in this street, from the first North gate of Paul's churchyard, unto the next
gate, was first builded without the wall of the churchyard, by Henry Walls
Mayor, in the year 1282. The rents of those houses go to the maintenance of
London bridge. This ^^reete is now called Pater Noster Row, because of
Stacioners or Text writers that dwelled there, who wrote and sold all sorts of
books then in use, namely, A. B. C. Or Abstes with the Pater Noster, Aue,
Creed, Graces, etc.

There dwelled also turners of Beads, and they were called Pater Noster
makers: Pater Noster makers.
as I read in a Record of one Robert Nikke Pater Noster maker, and Citizen, in
the reign of Henry the fourth, and so of other. At the end of this Pater Noster
Row, is Aue Mary Lane, Aue Mary Lane.
so called upon the like occasion of text writers, and Beade makers, then
dwelling there: and at the end of that Lane is likewise Creed Lane, Creed
Lane.
late so called (but sometime Spurrier Row, of Spurriers dwelling there) and
Amen Lane, Amen Lane.
is added thereunto, betwixt the South end of Warwick Lane, and the North end
of Aue Mary Lane: at the North end of Aue Mary lane, is one great house builded
of stone and timber, of old time pertaining to John Duke of Britain, Duke of
Britains house, since Pembrookes Inn, now Burgaueny house.
Earl of Richmond, as appears by the Records of Edw. the second: since that
it is called Pembrookes Inn, near unto Ludgate, as belonging to the Earls of
Pembrooke in the times of Ric. the 2. the 18. year: and of Henry the sixth, in
the 14. year. It is now called Burgaueny house, and belonged to Henry, late
Lord of Burgaueny. Betwixt the South end of Aue Mary Lane, and the North end
of Creed Lane, is the coming out of Powles church yard, on the East, and the
high street on the West, toward Ludgate, and this is called Bowier Row,
Bowier Row.
of bowiers dwelling there in old time, now worn out by Mearcers and others.
In this street on the North side, is the Parish church of S. Martin, a proper
church, and lately new builded: for in the year 1437. John Michael Mayor and
the communaltie, granted to William Down parson of S. Martins at Ludgate,
Parish church of S. Martin by Ludgate.
a parcel of ground, containing in length 28. foot, and in breadth 24. foot,
to set and build their steeple upon, etc. The Monuments here, be of Henry
Belwase, and John Gest, 1458. William Tauerner Gentleman 1466, John Barton
Esquire, 1439. Stephen Pecocke Mayor 1533. Sir Roger Cholemly, some say William
Seuen-Oake Mayor, etc.

On the South side of this street, is the turning into the Blackfriars, The
Blacke-Fryers.
which order sometime had their house in Olde-Boorne, where they remained for
the space of fifty five years, and then in the year 1276. Gregory Roksley
Mayor, and the Barons of this city, Mayor and Barons of this City.
granted and gave to Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury, two (Lanes or
ways) next the street of Baynards Castle, and also the Tower of Mountfichit,
to be destroyed: in place of which, the said Robert builded the late new
church of the Blacke-Fryers, and placed them therein. King Edward the first and
Elyanor his wife, were great benefactors thereunto. This was a large church,
and richly furnished with Ornaments: wherein diverse Parliaments and other great
meetings has been holden: namely in the year one thousand four hundred and
fifty, the twenty eight of Henry the sixth, a Parliament was begun at
Westminster, and adiourned to the Blacke-Fryers in London. In the year, 1527.
the Emperor Charles the fifth, was lodged there. In the year 1524. the
fifteenth of April, a Parliament was begun at the Blackfriars, wherein was
demanded a subsidy of 800000. pound to be raised of goods and lands, 4.
shillings of every pound, and in the end^ was granted 2. shillings of the
pound, of goods or lands, that were worth 20. pound, or might dispend 20.
pound by the year, and so upward, to be paid in 2. years. This Parliament
was adiourned to Westminster, amongst the black Monks, and ended in the Kings
Palace there, the 14. of August, at 9. of the clock in the night, and was
therefore called the black Parliament. Parliament at the Blacke-Fryers called
the black Parliament.
In the year 1529. Cardinal Campenis the Legate with Cardinal Woolsey, sat at
ye said Black Friars, where before them as Legates and Judges, was brought in
question the Kings marriage with Queen Kathren as to be unlawful, before whom
the King and Queen were cited and summoned to appear, etc. Whereof more at
large in other places has been touched. The same year in the month of
October, began a Parliament in the Blacke-Fryers, in the which Cardinal
Woolsey was condemned in the priminerie: this house valued at 104. li. 15.
shillings 5. d. was surrendered the twelfth of November, the thirtieth of Henry
the eight. There are interred, or buried in this Church, Margaret Queen of
Scots: Hubert de Brugh Earl of Kent, translated from their old church, by
Olde-Boorne: Robert de Attabeto Earl of Bellimon: Dame Izabel wife to Sir
Roger Bygot, Earl Marshall: William and Jane Huse, children to Dame Elils,
Countess of Arundell, and by them lies Dame Ellis, daughter to the Earl
Warren, and after Countess of Arundell. Dame I Would wife to sir Walter daughter
to Ferrers of Chartley, Richard de Brewes: Dame Iahu, daughter to Thomas, wife
to Sir Gnight. Richard Strange, son to Roger Strange, Elizabeth daughter to sir
Bartholomewe Badlesmere, wife to sir William Bohanne Earl of Northampton.
Marsh, the Earls of March, and Hereforde, and Elizabeth Countess of
Arondell. Dame Johan daughter to sir John C^rne, first wife to sir Gwide Bryan.
Hugh Clare Knight. The heart of Queen Helianor the foundresse: the heart of
Alfence her son, the hearts of John and Margaret, children to Will. Valence, sir
William Thorpe Justice, the Lord Lyoth of Yreland: Maude wife to Geffrey Say,
daughter to the Earl of Warwick, Dame Sible, daughter to William Pattehulle,
wife to Roger Bewchampe, and by her Sir Richard or Roger Bewchampe, Lord S.
Amand, and Dame Elizabeth his wife, daughter to the Duke of Lancaster: Sir
Stephen Collington knight, Sir Wi. Peter knight. Sir Io. Tiptoste, Earl of
Woorster beheaded 1470. William Paston, and Anne daughter to Edmond of
Lancaster, the Lord Beamount, Sir Edmond Cromwell, Baron of Burford, the Lady
Neuel wedded to the lord Douglasse, da^ghter to the Duke of Excester, Ri.
Scroope Esquire, Dame Katheren Vaux, alias Cobham, Sir Th. Brown, and dame
Elizabeth his wife, Jane Powell, Thomas Swinforth, John Mawsley Esquire, 1432.
John de la Bear, Nicholas Carre Esquire, Geffrey Spring Esquire: William
Clifford Esquire, Sir Thomas Brandon knight of the Garter, 1509. William
Stalworth Merchantaylor, 1518. William Courtney Earl of Devonshire, nominated,
but not created, the third of Henry the eight, etc.

There is a Parish of Saint Anne within the Precinct of the Blacke-Fryers,
Parish church of S. Anne new builded in the Black Friars.
which was pulled down with the Friars church, by Sir Thomas Cardin, alias
Carden: but in the reign of Queen Mary, he being forced to find a church to
the inhabitants, allowed them a lodging chamber above a staire, which since
that time, to wit, the year 1597. fell down, and was again by collections
therefore made, new builded in the same year, and was dedicated on the
eleventh of December. Now to turn again out of ye Black Friars through Bowier
Row, Aue-mary lane and Pater Noster Row, Corn market by Pater Noster Row.
to the church of Saint Michaell ad Bladum, or at the corn, corruptly at the
Querne, so called, because in place thereof, was sometime a corn market,
stretching up West to the Shambles: It seems that this church was first
builded, about the reign of Edward the third, Thomas Newton first parson
there, was buried in the Quire, the year 1361. which was the 35. of Edward the
third. Parish church of S. Michaell Ad Bladu^^.
At the East end of this church stood a cross, called the old cross, in West
cheap, Old Cross in west cheap.
which was taken down in the year, 1390. the 13. of Richard the second: since
the which time, the said parish church was also taken down, but new builded
and enlarged, in the year 1430 the eight of Henry the sixth. William Estefield
Mayor, and the communaltie, granted of the common soil of the city, three
feet and a half in breadth on the North part, and four foot in breadth
toward the East, for the enlarging thereof. This is now a proper church, and
has the monuments of Thomas Newton first parson, Roger Woodcocke Hatter, 1475.
Thomas Ressell Brewer, 1473. John Hulton Stacioner 1475. John Oxney, Roger
North Roger North.
Merchant, Haberdasher, 1509. Henry Pranel Uintener, one of the Sheriffs 1585.
William Elkin one of the Sheriffs, 1586. Thomas Banckes, 1598. etc.

At the East end of this church, in place of the old cross, is now a water
conduit placed. Water conduit by Paul's gate.
W. Estfielde Mayor, the 9. of Henry the 6. at the request of diverse common
councels, granted it so to be: whereupon in the 19. of the same Henry, one
thousand marks was granted by a common council toward the works of this
conduit, and the reparations of other, this is called the little conduit in West
cheap by Powles gate. At the West end of this parish church, is a small
passage for people on foot, through the same church, and west from the said
church, some distance, is an other passage out of Pater Noster Row, and is
called of such a sign, Panyar Ally, Passagethrog^ S. Michels Church. Panier
Ally.
which comes out into the North, over against S. Martins Lane. Next is Iuie
Lane, Iuie Lane.
so called of Iuie growing on the walls of the Prebend alms houses, but now
the Lane is replenished on both the sides with fair houses, and diverse offices
be there kept, by registers, namely for the prerogative court of the Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Probate of wills, and for the Lord Treasurers remembrance
of the Exchequer, etc.

This Lane runs North to the West end of S. Nicholas Shambles. Of old time
was one great house, sometimes belonging to the Earls of Britain, since that
to the Louels, and was called Louels Inn: Louels Inn.
for Mathild, wife to John Louell, held it in the first of Henry the 6. Then is
Eldenese Lane, Eldeneselane, or Warwick Lane.
which stretches North to the high street of Newgate Market, the same is now
called Warwick Lane, of an ancient house there builded by an Earl of
Warwick, and was since called Warwick Inn. Warwickes Inn.
It is on record called a Message in Eldenese Lane, in the parish of S.
Sepulcher, the 28. of Henry the 6. Cicille the Duches to Warwick, possessed
it. Now again from the Conduit by Powles gate on the North side, is a large
street, running West to Newgate: the first part whereof, from the Conduit to
the Shambles, is (of selling bladders there) called Bladder street. Bladder
street
Then behind the Butchers shoppes be now diverse slaughter houses inward, and
Tippling houses outward. This is called Mountgodard Street, Mountgodard street.
by all likelihood of the Tippling houses there, and the Goddards or Pots,
mounting from the tap to the table, from the table to the mouth, and sometimes
over the head. Also this street goes up to the North end of Iuie Lane. Before
this Mountgodard street, stall boords were set up by the Butchers, to show
and to sell their flesh meat upon, over the which stalboords, they first
builded sheads to keep off the weather: but since that, incroching by little
and little, they have made these stall boords and sheads, fair houses, meet
for the principal Shambles. Next is Newgate Market, Newgate market.
first of corn and meal, and then of other victuals, which stretches almost
to Eldenese Lane. A fair, new, and strong fram^ of Timber covered with lead
was therefore set up at the charges to the City, near to the West corner of
S. Nicholas shambles, for the meal to be weyed, in the 1. of Ed. the 6. Sir
John Gresham being then Mayor. On this side the North corner of Eldenese Lane,
was sometime a propper parish Church of S. Ewine, Parish Church of S. Ewin.
(as is before said) was given by Henry the 8. toward the erecting of Christ's
Church: it was taken down, and in place thereof, a fair strong frame of
timber was erected, wherein dwell men of diverse Trades. And from this frame to
Newgate, is all of this Ward, and so an end thereof. It has an Alderman, his
Deputy, Common Council 12. Constables 17. Scauingers 18. Wardmote Inquest,
18. and a Bedle. And is taxed to the fifteen in London, at 54. pound, and in
the Exchequer at 53. pound, 6. shillings 8. pence.

Bredstreete Ward.
BRedstreete Ward Bredstreete Ward.
begins in the high street of West Cheap, to wit, on the South side, from
the Standard, to the great Cross. Then is also a part of Watheling street of
this ward, to wit, from over against the Red Lion on the North side up almost
to Powles gate, for it lacks but one house of S. Augustins Church. And on the
South side, from ye Red Lion gate to the Old Exchange, and down the same
Exchange on the East side, by the West end of Maiden Lane, or Distar Lane, to
Knightrydars street, or as they call that part thereof, Old Fishstreete. And
all the North side of the said Old Fishstreete, to the South end of
Bredstreete, and by that still in Knightridars street, till over against the
Trinity Church, and Trinity Lane. Then is Bredstreet Bredstreete.
it self so called of bread in old time there sold: for it appears by
records, that in the year 1302. which was the 30. of Ed. the 1. The Bakers of
London were bounden to sell no bread in their shops or houses, but in the
Market, and that they should have 4. Hall motes in the year, at four several
terms, to determine of enormities belonging to the said Company.

This street giving the name to the whole Ward, begins in West Cheap,
almost by the Standard, and runs down South, through or thwart Watheling
street, to Knightridars street aforesaid, where it ends. This Bredstreete is
wholly on both sides of this Ward. Out of the which street on the East side,
is Basing Lane, a piece whereof, to wit, too and and over against the back
gate of the Red Lion in Watheling street, is of this Bredstreete Ward.

Then is there one other street, which is called Friday street, Friday
street.
and begins also in West Cheap, and runs down South through Watheling
street, to Knightrider street (or Old Fishstreet) This Friday street is of
Bredstreete Ward, on the East side from over against the Northeast corner of
saint Mathewes Church, and on the West side from the South corner of the said
Church, down^ as aforesaid.

In this Friday street on the West side thereof, is a Lane, commonly called
Maiden Lane, or Distaffe Lane, corruptly for Distar Lane, which runs West
into the old Exchange: and in this lane is also one other Lane, on the South
side thereof, likewise called Distar Lane, which runs down to Knightriders
Street, or old Fishstreete: and so be the bounds of this whole Ward. The
Monuments to be noted here, are first, the most bewtifull frame and front of
fair houses and shops, that be within all the walls of London, or elsewhere
in England, commonly called Godsmithes row, The Goldsmithes row in Cheap.
betwixt Breadstreet end, and the Cross in Cheap, but is within this
Breadstreete Ward: the same was builded by Thomas Wood Goldsmith, one of the
Sheriffs, in the year 1491. It continues in number, ten fair dwelling
houses, and fourteen shops, all in one frame uniformly builded, four
stories high, bewtified toward the street, with the Goldsmithes Arms, and
the likeness of woodmen (in memory of his name) riding on monstrous beasts,
all which is cast in Lead, richly painted over, and guilt: these he gave to
the Goldsmithes, with stocks of money to be lent to young men, having those
shops etc.

This said Front was again new painted and guilt over, in the year 1594. Sir
Richard Martin being then Mayor, and keeping his Maioraltie in one of them, and
serving out the time of Cutber^ Buckle in that office, from the second of
Iulie, til the 28. of October. Then for Watheling Street, Watheling street.
which Leyland calls Atheling or Noble street: but since he shows no reason
why it was so called, I rather take it so named of the great high way of the
same calling. True it is, that at this present as of old time also, the
inhabitants thereof were and are, wealthy Drapers, retailors of woollen
clothes both broad and narrow, of all sorts, more then in any one street of
this City. Of the old Exchange, here I have noted in Faringdon Ward:
wherefore I pass down to Knightriders street, Knightriders Street.
whereof I have also spoken in Cordwainer street Ward, but in this part of the
said Knightriders street, is a fishmarket kept, and therefore called old
Fishstreete, for a difference from new Fishstreete.

In this old Fishstreete, Fishmarket called old Fishstreete.
is one row of small houses, placed along in the midst of Knightriders
street, which row is also of Bredstreete Ward, these houses now possessed of
Fishmoongers, were at the first but mooueable boordes (or stables) set out on
market days, to show their fish there to be sold: but procuring license to
set up sheads, they grew to shops, and by little and little, to tall houses, of
three or 4. stories in height, and now are called Fishstreete. Bredestreet,
Bredstreete.
so called of bread sold there (as I said) is now wholely inhabited by rich
Merchants, and diverse fair Innes be there for good receipt of carriers, and
other travelers to the city. On the East side of this street, at the corner
of Watheling Street, is the proper church of Alhallowes in Bred street, Parish
church of Alhallowes in Bredstreet.
wherein are the monuments of James Them Goldsmith, John Walpole Goldsmith
1349. Thomas Beamount Alderman, one of ye Sheriffs, 1442. Sir Richard Chaury
Salter Mayor, 1509. Sir Thomas Pargitar Salter Mayor, 1530. Henry Sucley
Marchantailor, one of the Sheriffs 1541. Richard Read Alderman, that served
and was taken prisoner in Scotland, 1545 Robert House one of the Sheriffs,
1586. William Albany: Richard May, and Roger Abde Marchantaylors. The steeple
of this church had sometime a fair speere of stone, but taken down upon this
occasion. In the year 1559. the fifth of September, about noone or midday,
fell a great tempest at London, in the end whereof, happened a great
lightening, with a terrible clap of thunder, which struck the said speere
about nine or ten foot beneath the top thereof: Spear of Alhallowes steeple
taken down.
out of the which place fell a stone, that slew a dog, and overthrew a man
that was playing with the dog: the same speere being but little ^amnified
hereby, was shortly after taken down, for sparing the charges of reparation.
On the same side is Salters Hall, Salters Hall.
with six alms houses in number, builded for poor decayed brethren of that
company: This Hall was burned in the year 1539. and again reedified.

Lower down on the same side, is the parish church of Saint Mildred Parish
church of S. Mildred in Bredstreet.
the Uirgine. The monuments in this Church be of the Lord Trenchaunt, of Saint
Albons knight, who was supposed to be either the new builder of this Church, or
best benefactor to the works thereof, about the year 1300. and odd. Cornish
gentleman 1312. William Palmer Blader a great benefactor also 1356. John
Shadworth Mayor, 1401. who gave the parsonate house, a reuestry, and
Churchyard, in the year 1428. and his monument is pulled down. Stephen Bugge
Gentleman, his Arms be 3. water bugges, 1419 Roger Forde Uintoner, 1440.
Thomas Barnwell Fishmonger, one of the Sheriffs, 1434. Sir John Hawlen Clarke,
Parson of that Church, who built the Parsonage house newly, after the same had
been burned to the ground, together with the Parson and his man also, burned in
that fire, Parson of S. Mildred and his man burned.
1485. John Pranell 1510. William Hurstwaight Pewterer to the King, 1526.
Christopher Turner Chirurgian to King Henry the 8. 1530. Raphe Simonds
Fishmonger, one of the Sheriffs, in the year 1527. Thomas Laugham gave to the
poor of that Parish four Tenements, 1575. Thomas Hall Salter, 1582. Thomas
Collins Salter, Alderman. Sir Ambrose Nicholas Salter, Mayor, 1575. was buried
in Sir John Chadworths Uault.

Out of this Bredstreet, on the same East side, is a Basing lane, a part
whereof (as is before showed) is of this Ward, but how it took the name I
have not read: other then that in the 20. year of Richard the second, the same
was called the Bakehouse: Basing Lane called the Bakehouse.
whetherment for the Kings Bakehouse, or of Bakers dwelling there, and baking
bread to serve the Market in Bredstreete, where the bread was sold, I know
not: but sure I am, I have not read yet of any Basing, or of Gerrarde the
Giant, to have any thing there to do.

On the South side of this Lane, is one great house, of old time builded upon
Arched Uaultes, of stone, and with Arched Gates, now a common Ostrey for receipt
of Travelers, commonly and corruptly called Gerardes Hall, of a Gyaunt said
to have dwelled there. A Pole of 40. foot long, and ^5. inches about, fabuled
to be the iusting staff of Gerarde a Giant.
In the high Rooffed Hall of this house, sometime stood a large Fur Pole,
which reached to the roof thereof, and was said to be one of the staves that
Gerarde the Giant used in the wars, to run withal. There stood also a
Ladder of the same length, which (as they say) served to ascend to the top
of the Staff. Of later years this Hall is altered in building, and diverse
rooms are made in it. Notwithstanding the Pole is removed to one corner of the
Hall, and the Ladder hanged broken up on a Wall in the yard. The Hostelar of
that house said to me, the Pole lacked half a foot of forty in length: I
measured the compass, and found it to be fifteen inches. Reason of the
Pole, could the master of the Hostrey give me none, but badde me read the
great Chronicles, for there he had heard of it. Which answer seemed to me
insufficient, for he meant the description of Britain, before Reinwoolfes
Chronicle, wherein the Author writing a Chapter of Gyaunts, and having been
deceived by some Authors, too much crediting their smoothe speech, has set
down more matter then troth, as partly (and also against my will) I am
enforced to touch. R. G. R.G. A stone said to be a toothe, and so by
conjecture, a man to be 28. foot of height.
in this brief collection of Histories has these words. I the writer hereof,
did see the tenth day of March, in the year of our Lord 1564. and had the same
in my hand, the Toothe of a man, which waighed ten Ounces of Troy weight.
And the skull of the same man is extant and to be seen, which will hold five
Peckes of wheat. And the shinne bone of the same man is six foot in length,
and of a marvelous greatness. Thus far of R. G. Whereunto is added in the
said description, that by coniecturall simetrie of those parts, the body to
be twenty eight foot long or more. From this he goes to an other matter,
and so to Gerard the Giant and his staff. But to leave these fictions and to
return where I left, I will note what my self have observed concerning that
house.

I read, that John Gisors Gisors Hall restored to his old name.
Mayor of London, in the year 1245. was owner thereof, and that Sir John
Gisors Knight Mayor of London, and Constable of the Tower, one thousand three
hundredth and eleven. And diverse others of that name and family since that time
owed it. For I read that William Gisors was one of the Sheriffs, one thousand
three hundredth twenty nine. More, that John Gisors had issue, Henry and John.
Which John had issue, Thomas. Which Thomas deceasing in the year one thousand
three hundredth and fifty, left unto his son Thomas, his Message called
Gysors Hall, in the Parish of Saint Mildred in Bredstreete: John Gisors made a
Feofment thereof, one thousand three hundredth eighty six, etc. Gerards Hall
overthrown with Gerard the Giant, and his great spea^.
So that it appears that this Gisors Hall of late time by corruption has bin
called Gerards Hall, for Gisors Hall, as Bosoms Inn for Blossoms In. Beuis
Marks, for Buries Mark. Mark Lane, for Mart Lane: Belliter Lane, for
Belsetters Lane: Gutter Lane, for Guthuruns Lane: Cry church, for Christ's
church: S. Mihell in the Querne, for Saint Mihell at Corn, and sundry such
others. Out of this Gisors Hall, at the first building thereof, were made
diverse Arched doors, yet to be seen, which seem not sufficient for any great
monsture, or other then men of common stature to pass through, the Pole in the
Hall might be used of old time (as then the custom was in every parish) to be
set up in the street, in the Summer as a Maypole, before the principal Hall,
or house in the parish, or street, and to stand in the Hall before the scrine,
decked with Holme and Iuie, all the feast of Christmas. Every man's house of
old time was decked with holly and Iuie in the winter, especially at Christmas.
The lader served for decking of the Maypole, and Roof of the Hall. Thus much
for Gisors Hal and for ye side of Bredstreet, may suffice. Now on ye West side
of Bredstreet, amongst diverse fair and large houses for merchants, and fair
Innes for passengers, had ye one prison house pertaining to the Sheriffs of
London, called the compter in Bredstreete: but in the year 1555 the prisones
were removed from thence, to one other new Compter Coumpter in Bredstreete.
in Woodstreete, provided by the cities purchase, and builded for that purpose:
the cause of which remove was this. Richard Husband Pastelar, keeper of this
Coumpter in Bredstreet, being a wilful and headstrong man, dealt for his own
advantage, hardly with the prisoners Prisoners removed from the Coumpter in
Bredstreete to a new coumter in Woodstreete. Keeper of the counter sent to
Newgate.
under his charge, having also sernants such as himself liked best for their
bad usage, and would not for any complaint be reformed: whereupon in the
year 1550. Sir Rowland Hill being Mayor, by the assent of a court of
Aldermen, he was sent to the gayle of Newgate, for the cruel handling of his
prisoners: and it was commanded to the keeper of set those irons on his
legs, which are called the widows alms: These he ware from Thursday, till
Sunday in the afternoon, and being by a court of Aldermen released, on the
Tuesday, was bound in an hundred marks, to observe from thenceforth an act
made by the common council, for the ordering of prisoners in the Compters: all
which notwithstanding, he continued as before: whereof my self am partly a
witness: for being of a Jury to enquire against a Sessions of Gayle
delivery, in the year one thousand five hundred fifty two, we found the
prisoners hardly dealt withal, for their achates and otherwise, Quest of
inquiry indight the keepers of the gayles for dealing hardly with their
prisoners.
and that thieves and strumpets were there lodged for four pence the night,
whereby they might be safe from searches that were made abroad: They indighted
the bowling Allies, etc.
for the which enormities, and other not needful to be recited, he was
indighted at that Session, but did rub it out, and could not be reformed, til
this remove of ye prisoners for the house in Bredstreete was his own by Lease,
or otherwise, so that he could not be put from it. Such Gaylors buying their
offices, will deal hardly with pitiful prisoners. Now in Friday street,
Friday street.
so called of Fishmoongers dwelling there, and serving frydayes market, on the
East side, is a small parish church, commonly called S. John Evangelist, Parish
church of S. John Evangelist.
the monuments therein, be of John Dogget Marchantaylor, one of the Sheriffs,
in the year 1509. Sir Christoper Askew Draper, Mayor, 1533. Then lower down,
is one other parish church of S. Margaret Moses, Parish church of S. Margaret
Moses.
so called (as seems) of one Moses, that was founder, or new builder
thereof. The monuments there, be of sir Richard Dobbet Skinner, Mayor, 1551.
William Dane Ironmoonger, one of the Sheriffs, 1569. Sir John Allet
Fishmoonger, Mayor 1591.

On the West side of this Friday street, is Maiden Lane, Maiden Lane or
Distarlane.
so named of such a sign, or Distaffe Lane, for Distar Lane, as I read in
record of a Brew House, called the Lamb in Distar Lane, the sixteenth of Henry
the sixth. In this Distar Lane, on the North side thereof, is the Cord-wayners,
Cordwayners Hall.
or Shoomakers Hall, which company were made a brotherhood or fraternity, in
the eleventh of Henry the fourth. On the South side of this Distar Lane, is
also one other Lane, called Distar Lane: which runs down to Knightriders
street, or old Fishstreete, and this is the end of Bredstreete Ward: which
has an Alderman, his Deputy, Common Council ten. Constables ten.
Skauengers eight. Wardmote Inquest thirteen, and a Beadle. In stands taxed
to the fifteen in London, at thirty seven pound, and in the Exchequer at
thirty six pound ten shillings.

Queen Hithe Ward.
NExt unto Bredstreet Ward, on the South side thereof, is Queen Hithe Ward,
Queen Hithe Ward.
so called of a water gate, or harborow for Boats, Lighters and Barges, and
was of old time for ships, at what time, the timber bridge of London was
drawn up, for the passage of them to the said Hithe, as to a principal
strand for landing and vnlading against the midst and heart of the City. This
Ward begins in the East, in Knightriders street, Knightriders street.
on the South side thereof, at the East end of the Parish church called the
holy Trinity, and runs West on the South side to a lane called Lambert
hill, which is the length of the Ward in Knightriders street, out of the
which street are diverse Lanes, running South to Thames street, and are of this
Ward: the first is Trinity Lane, Trinity Lane.
which runs down by the West end of Trinity Church. Then is Spuren Lane,
Spuren Lanes, or Hugge^lane.
or Sporners Lane, now called Huggen Lane. Then Bredstreet hill. Then S. Mary
Mounthaunt: out of the which Lane, on the East side thereof, is one other Lane,
turning East, through S. Nicholas Olaues Church yard, to Bredstreete hill. This
Lane is called Finimore Lane or five foot Lane, because it is but five foot
in breadth at the West end: Finimore or five foot lane.
In the midst of this lane, runs down one other lane broader, South to
Thames street, I think the same to be called Desboorne Lane, Desborne lane
for I read, of such a Lane to have bin in the parish of Mary Summerset, in
the two and twentieth year of Edward the 3. where there is said to lie
between the Tenement of Edward de Mountaoute Knight, on the East part, and the
tenement sometime pertaining to William Gladwine on the West, one plot of
ground, containing in length toward Thames street 25. foot etc.

Last of all, have you Lambart hill Lambert hill.
Lane, so called of one Lambart an owner thereof: and this is the furthest West
part of this Ward. On the North side coming down from Knightriders street,
the East side of Lambards hill, is wholely of this Ward: and the west side,
from the North end of the Black-smithes Hall (which is about the midst of
this Lane) unto Thames Street. Then part of Thames street, is also of this
Ward, to wit, from a Cooks house called the sign of King David, three houses
West, from the old Swan Brewhouse in the East, unto Huntington house, over
against Saint Peter's Church in the West, near unto Powles Wharffe. And on the
land side from a Cooks house called the blew Boore, to the West end of Saint
Peter's Church, and up Saint Peter's Hill, two houses North above the said
Church. And these be the bounds of this Ward: in which, are Parish Churches
seven, Halles of Companies two, and other Ornaments, as shall he showed.

First, in Knightriders street, is the small Parish Church of the holy
Trinity, Parish church of the Trinity.
very old and in danger of down falling: collections have been made for the
repairing thereof, but they will not stretch to far, and therefore it leans
upon proppes or stilts. Monuments are therein none. Toward the West end of
Knightriders street, is the Parish Church of S. Nicholas Cold Abbey, a comely
Church, Parish church of S. Nicholas Cold Abey.
somewhat ancient, as appears by the ways raised thereabout: it has been
called of many, Golden Abbey, of some Cold Abbey, and so has the most
auncientest writing: but I could never learn the cause why it should be so
called, and therefore I will let it pass. There be monuments in this Church,
of Andrew Awbery Grocer, Mayor, and Thomas Friar Fishmoonger, in the year
1351. who gave to this Church and parish one plot of ground, containing fifty
six foot in length, and forty three foot in breadth, at both ends to be a
burial place for the dead of the said Parish, the twenty sixth of Edward the
third. Also Thomas Madefrey Clarke, and John Pylot, gave to the Wardens of that
Parish, one shop, and a house in Distar lane, for the continual repairing of
the body of that church, the belles and Ornaments the twentieth of Richard the
2. buried there John Calfe, and William Cogeshall, Walter Turk Fishmoonger
Mayor, 1349. Richard Esgastone Fishmoonger, 1400. Richard Walberge Fishmoonger,
1407. Thomas Padington Fishmoonger, 1485. Robert Hary Fishmoonger, and others.

On the North side of this church in the Wall thereof, was of late builded a
convenient Eistern of stone and lead, for receipt of Thames water, Water condit.
conveyed in pipes of lead to that place, for the ease and commodity of the
Fishmoongers, and other inhabitants, in and about old Fishstreete. Barnard
Randolphe common Seriant of the city of London, did in his life time deliver
to the company of Fishmoongers, the sum of nine hundred, pound, to be employed
toward the conducting of the said Thames water, and sisterning the same, etc.
In the parishes of S. Mary Magdalen, and S. Nicholas Cold Abbay near unto
Fishstreete, seven hundred pound, and other two hundred pound to charitable
deeds: he deceased, 1583. and shortly after, this conduit with the other, was
made and finished.

In Trinity Lane, on the west side thereof, is the Painter stayners Hall,
Painter stainers Hall.
for so of old time were they called, but now that workmanship of stayning is
departed out of use in England Lower down in Trinity Lane on the East side
thereof, was sometime a great Message pertaining unto John Earl of Cornwell,
Earl of Cornwell his house.
in the foureteenth of Edward the third. On Bredstreet hill down to the Thames
on both sides, be diverse fair houses, inhabited by Fishmoongers,
Cheesemoongers, and Merchants of diverse trades. On the West side whereof, is
the parish church of S. Nicholas Olive, a convenient church, having the
momuments of William Newport Fishmoonger, one of the Sheriffs 1375. Richard
Willowes Parson 1391. Richard Sturges Fishmoonger 1470. Thomas Lewen
Ironmoonger, one of the Sheriffs 1537. who gave his message with yt
purtenances, wherein he dwelt, with fourteen Tenements in the said Parish of
S. Nicholas, Parish church of S. Nicholas Olive.
to be had after the decease of Agnes his wife, to the Ironmoongers, and they
to give stipends appointed to Alms men, in five houses by them builded in the
church yard of that parish: more to poor scholars in Oxford and Camebridge,
etc. Blitheman, an excellent Orgainest of the Queens Chapel, lies buried
there with an Epitaphe, 1591, etc. The next is old Fishstreet hill, Old
Fishsteet hill.
a Lane so called, which also runs down to Thames street. In this lane on
the East side thereof, is ye one end of Finimore on Five foot lane. On the
West side of this old Fishstreete hill, is the Bishop of Herefordes Inn or
lodging: Bishop of Herefords house.
an ancient house, and large rooms builded of stone and timber, which
sometime belonged to the Mounthaunts in Norfolk. Radulphus de Maydenstone,
Bishop of Hereford, about 1234. bought it of the Mounthaunts, and gave it to
the Bishops of Hereforde, his successors. Charles both Chancellor of the
Marches, Bishop of Hereforde, about the year 1517. repaired it, since the
which time, the same is greatly ruinated, and is now divided into many small
tenements: the Hall and principal roomethes, are an house to make Sugar loves,
etc. Next adjoining, is the parish Church of S. Mary de Mount Alto, or
Mounthaunte, this is a very small church, Parish Church of Saint Mary Monte
Alto.
and at the first builded to be a chapple for the said house of the
Mounthaunts, and for Tenements thereunto belonging. The Bishop of Hereford is
Patron thereof. Monuments in this church of John Gloucester Alderman, 1345. who
gave Salt Wharfe for two Chanteries there. There was sometime a fair house in
the said parish of Saint Mary Mounthaunte, belonging to Robert Belkenape,
Robert Belkenape his house given to Will. Wickam.
one of the Kings Justices, but the said Belknape being banished this realm,
King Richard the second, in the 12. of his reign, gave it to William Wickham
bishop of Winchester.

On the East side of this Old Fishstreete Hill, is one great house now letten
out for rent, which house sometime was one of the Halles pertaining to the
Company of Fishmongers, One old Hall of the fishmongers. Fishmongers Hallmotes,
six in number.
at such time as they had six Hallmotes or meeting places: namely, twain in
Bridge street, or new Fish street, twain in old Fish street, whereof this was
one: and twain in Stockfishmonger Row, Pattents.
or Thames street, as appears by a Record the 22. of Richard the 2.

Next Westward, is one other Lane called Lambard Hill, Lambard Hill.
the East side whereof, is wholly of this Ward, and but half the west side:
to wit, from the North end of the black Smithes Blacksmithes.
Hall. Then in Thames street of this Ward, on the North side over against the
Queens Hithe, is the Parrish church of S. Michaell, Parish Church of S.
Michael at Queen Hithe.
a convenient church, but all the Monuments therein are defaced.

I find that Stphen Spilman, Gentleman of that Family in Norfolk, sometime
Mearcer, Chamberlain of London, then one of the Sheriffs and Alderman, in the
year 1404. deceasing without issue, gave his lands to his Family the
Spilmans^ and his goods to the making or repairing of Bridges and other like
godly uses: And amongst others to this church, and was buried in the Quire.

Also Richard Marlowe Ironmoonger Mayor, 1409. gave 20 pound to the poor of
that Ward, and ten Marks to the church. Richard Gray Ironmoonger Alderman,
one of the Sheriffs 1515 gave forty pound to that church, and was buried
there. At the west end of that church goes up a lane, called Pyellane.
Piellane.
On the same North side, at the South end of Saint Mary Mounthaunt Lane, is
the parish church of Saint Mary Summerset, Parish church of Saint Mary
Summerset.
over against the broken Wharffe: it is a proper church, but the Monuments are
all defaced. I think the same to be of old time called Summers Hithe,
Su^mers Hithe.
of some man's name that was owner of the ground near adjoining, as Edreds
Hithe was, so called of Edred owner thereof, and Sythence called Queen Hithe,
as pertaining to the Queen, etc.

Then is a small Parish church of S. Peter, Parish church of S. Peter Parua by
Powles Wharffe.
called Parua or Little, upon the Thames, near unto Powles wharffe: In this
church no Monuments do remain. At the UUest end thereof, is a Lane called
Saint Peter's hill, but two houses up that lane, on the East side, is of this
UUarde, and the rest is of Castle Baynarde UUarde.

On the South side of Thames street, beginning again in the East, among the
Cooks: The first in this Ward, is the sign of David the King: then is Towns
end lane, Towns end lane.
turning down to the Thames. Then is Queen Hithe, a large receptackle for
ships, lighters, barges, and such other vessels.

Touching the Antiquity and use of this gate and Hithe, first I find, that of
old time the same belonged to one named Edred, and was then called Edreds
Hithe, Edreds Hithe or Queen Hithe. ^iber trinitate
which since falling to the hands of King Stephen, it was by his Charter
confirmed to William Deypre: the firm whereof in Fee and in heritage, William
Deypre gave it unto the Prior and Covent of the holy Trinity within Aldgate,
as appears by this Charter. To Theobald by the grace of God Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of England, and Legata Apostolic, to the Bishop of
London, and to all faithful people, Clerks, and lay men, William Deypre
sends greeting.

Know ye me to have given and granted to God, and to the Church of the Holy
Trinity of London, to the Pryor and Cannons there serving God, in perpetual
alms, Edreds Hithe with the appurtenances, with such devotion, that they shall
send every year twenty pound unto the maintenance of the Hospital of S.
Kathrens, which Hospital they have in their hands, and 100. shillings to the
Monks of Berdmondsey, and 60. shillings, to the brethren of the Hospital of
Sain Gyles, and that which remains, the said Prior and Cannons shall enjoy to
themselves: witnesses, Richard de Lucia, Raphe Picot, etc.

This Edreds Hithe after the aforesaid grants, came again to the Kings hands,
by what means I have not read, but it pertained unto the Queen, and therefore
was called Ripa Reginae, the Queens Banque, or Queens Hithe, and great profit
thereof was made to her use, as may appear by this which follows. Record.


King Henry the third, in the ninth of his Reign, commanded the Constables of
the Tower of London, to arrest the ships of the Cinque Ports on the river of
Thames, and to compel them to bring their corn to no other place but to the
Queens Hithe only. Ships of the ports arested and forced to bring their corn
to Queen Hithe.


In the eleventh of his reign, he charged the said Constable to destraine
any fish offered to be sold in any place of this city, but at the Queen
Hithe. Moreover, in twenty eight of the said Kings reign, an inquisition was
made before William of York, Provost of Beuerley, Henry of Bathe, and Hierome
of Caxton, Justices Itenerants, sitting in the Tower of London, touching the
customs of Queen Hithe, observed in the year last, before the wars,
between the King his father, and the Barons of England, and of old customs
of other times, and what customs had been changed, at what time to Tax and
payment of all things coming thither, and between woorepathe, and Anede
Hithe, were found and ceased according to the old order, as well corn and
fish as of other things: all which customs were as well to be observed in
the part of Dounegate as in Queen Hithe, for the Kings use. When also it was
found, that the corn arriving between the gate of Guild Hall of the Merchants
of Colleyne, and the Soke of the Archbishop of Canterburye (for he had a house
near unto the Black Friars) was not to be measured by any other quarter, then
be that of the Queens soke. Liberty of the Queens Hithe from the Stilyard to
the Blackfriars. Soke is court.


After this, the Bayliffes of the said Hithe complained, that since the said
Recognision, fourteen foreign ships laden with Fish, arrived at Bilnings
Gate, which ships should have arrived at the said Hithe: And therefore it
was ordered, that if any foreign ship laden with Fish, should in form
aforesaid, arrive elsewhere then at this Hithe, it should be at the Kings
pleasure to amerce them at 40. shillings. Notwithstanding, the ships of the
citizens of London were at liberty to arrive where the owners would appoint
them.

After this, the said Henry the third, confirmed the grant of Richard Earl
of Cornwell, for the Farm of the Queen Hithe, Queen Hithe let to farm to the
Mayor and Communaltie of London.
unto John Gisors then Mayor, and to the Communaltie of London, and their
successors for ever, as by this his Charter appears: Henry by the grace of
God, King of England, lord of Ireland, Duke of Gwine, and Earl of Aniowe, to
all Archbishops, etc. Be it known, that we have seen the covenant between
our brother Richard Earl of Cornwell, of the one party, and the Mayor and
Communaltie of London on the other party, which was in this sort. Liber
trinit^te, Lon.
In the 30. year of H. the son of King John, upon the feast of the
translation of Saint Edward at Westminster, this covenant was made between the
honorable lord Richard Earl of Cornwell, and John Gisors then Mayor of
London, and the Commons thereof, concerning certain exactions and demands
pertaining to the Queen Hithe of London. The said Earl granted for himself
and his heirs, that the said Mayor, and all Mayors ensuing, and all the
Commons of the city, should have and hold the Queen Hithe, with all the
liberties, customs, and other appurtenances, repaying yearly to the said
Earl, his heirs and assigns, 50.li. at Clarken well, at two several terms:
to wit, the Sunday after Easter 25. pound. And at Michaelmas 25. pound. And for
more sureti^ hereof, the said Earl has set thereunto his seal, and left it
with the Mayor. And the Mayor and Communaltie have set to their seal and left
it with the Earl. Wherefore we confirm and establish the said covenant, for
us, and for our heirs. Witnesses, Raphe Fitx Nicholl, Richard Gray, John and
William Brithem, Pawlin Payner, Raphe Wancia, Ioh. Gumband and other: at Winsor
the 26. of Febr. the 31. of our reign. The charge of this Queen Hithe was
then committed to the Sheriffs, and so has continued ever since, the profits
whereof are sore diminished, so that (as writes Robert Fabian) Robert Fabian.
it was worth in his time little above 20. Marks, or 15. pound, one year
with an other. Now for customs of this Queen Hithe, Liber constitution.
in the year 1302. Custom of Queen Hithe.
the 30. of Ed. the 1. it was found by the oath of diverse men, that Bakers,
Brewers, and others buying their corn at Queen Hithe, should pay for
measuring, portage, and carriage for every quarter of corn whatsoever, from
thence to West Cheap, to S. Anthonins Church, to Horshewe Bridge, and to
Woolsey street in the Parish of Alhallowes the less, and such like distances,
one ob. q. to Fleet Bridge, to Newgate, Criplegate, to Bercheouars Lane, to
East-Cheape and Billings Gate, one penny. Also that the measurer (or the
meater) ought to have 8. A corn Meater, 8. M. Porters, and 24. Porters under
them, at queen Hithe.
chief Master Porters, every Master to have 3. Porters under him, and every
one of them to find one horse, and seven sackes, and he that so did not, to
loose his Office. This Hithe was then so frequented with Uessels, bringing
thither corn (besides fish, salt, fuel, and other marchandizes) that all
these men, to wit, the Meater, and Porters, 37. in number, for all their charge
of horses and sackes, and small stipend, lived well of their labors: but now
that case is altered: the Bakers of London and others Citizens, travel into
the Countries, and buy their Corn of the Farmars, after the Farmars price.

King Edward the second in the first of his reign, gave to Margaret, wife to
Peter de Gauestone, forty three pound, twelve shillings nine pence ob. q.
Liber Guild.
out of the rent in London, to be received of the Queens Hithe. Certain
Inpositions were set upon ships and other vessels, coming thither, as upon
Corn, Salt, and other things, toward the charge of clensing Roomeland
Romeland at Queen Hithe.
there, the 41. of Edward the 3.

The third of Edward the fourth, the Market at Queen Hithe being hindered by
the slacknesse of drawing up London Bridge, it was ordained, that all manner of
Uesselles, Ships, or Boats, great or small, resorting to the City with
victual, should be sold by retaile, and that if there came but one Uessell at
a time, were it salt, wheat, Kye, or other Corn from beyond the Seas, or
other grains, Garlic, Onyons, Hearings, Sprattes, Eles, Whyting, Place,
Cods, Mackarell, etc. then that one Uessell should come to Queen Hithe, Queen
Hithe to be more frequented of Ships and botes then Billings gate.
and there to make sale: but if two Uessailes came, the one should come to
Queen Hithe, the other to Billings gate: if three, two of them should come to
Queen Hithe, the third to Billings gate, etc. always the more to Queen
Hithe: if the Uessell being great, coming with sault from the Baye, and could
not come to these keys, then the same to be conveyed by Lighters, as before is
meant.

One large house for stowage of Corn (framed out of Lighters and Barges) is
there lately builed. Sir John Lion Grocer Mayor, 1554. by his Testament, gave
one hundred pound toward it, but since increased and made larger at charges of
the City, in the year, 1565. A garner for corn at Queen Hithe. A garnar for
corn, and a store house for meal at Queen Hithe Stewe lane. Timber Hithe.


Next adjoining to this Queen Hithe, on the West side thereof, is Sault
Wharffe, named of Sault taken up, measured and sold there. The next is Stewe
lane, of a Stewe, or hot house there kept. After that, is Timber Hithe, or
Timber street, so called of Timber and Boordes there taken up and Wharffed, it
is in the Parish of Saint Mary Somershithe, as I read in the fifty sixth of
Henry the third, and in the ninth of Edward the second. Then is Brooks
wharffe, Brooks Wharffe. Broken wharffe.
and broken wharfe, a water gate (or Keye) so called, of being broken and
fallen down into the Thames. By this Broken Wharffe, By Gods house by broken
wharffe.
remains one large old building of stone, with Arched gates, which Message
as I find in the reign of Henry the third, the forty three year, pertaining
unto Hugh de Bygot, and in the eleventh of Edward the second, to Thomas Earl
of Norffolke, Marshall of Ireland: In the eleventh of Henry the sixth, to John
Newbery Duke of Norffolke, etc.

Within the gate of this house, (now belonging to the city of London) is
lately, to wit, in the year, 1594. and 1595. builded one large house, of great
height, called an engine, made by Beuis Bulmar gentleman, for the conueying and
forcing of Thames water An engine for enforcing of thames water.
to serve in the middle and West parts of the City. The ancient great Hall of
this Message, is yet standing, and pertaining to a great Brew House for Beer.
West from this, is Trigge lane, Trigge lane.
going down to the Thames, Next is called Bosse lane, Bosse lane.
of a Bosse of water, like unto that of Billings gate, there placed by the
executors of Richard Wittington. Then is one great message sometime belonging
to the Abbots of Chartsey in Surrey, and was their Inn, wherein they were
lodged, when they repaired to the City: it is now called Sandy house, by what
reason I have not heard: I think the Lord Sands have been lodged there. And
this is an end of this Queen Hithe Ward: which has an Alderman and his
Deputy. Common Council six. Constables nine. Skauengers eight. Wardmete
Inquest thirteen, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the Fifteen in London twenty
pound, and in the Exchequer at twenty pound.

Castle Baynard Ward.
THe next is Castle Baynard Ward, Castle Baynard ward.
so named of an old Castle there, this Ward begins in the East, on the
Thames side, at an house called Huntington house, and runs West by Powles
Wharffe, by Baynards Castle, Puddle Wharffe, and by the South side of Black
Frers. Then turning by the East Wall of the said Friars, to the Southwest end
of Creed Lane. Then on the North side of Thames street, over against
Huntington house, by Saint Peter's Church and lane, called Peter hill, along
till over against Puddle Wharffe: and then North up by the great Wardrobe, to
the west end of Carter lane. Then up Creed lane, Auemary lane, and a piece of
Pater Noster Row, to the sign of the Golden lion, and back again, up
Warwick lane, all the East side thereof, to the sign of the Crown by Newgate
Market: and this is the farthest North part of this Ward.

Then out of Thames street be lanes assending North to Knightriders street:
the first, is Peter hill lane, all of that Ward, (two houses excepted,
adjoining to Saint Peter's church.) The next is Powles Wharffe hill, which
thwarting Knightriders street, and Carter lane, goes up to the South Chain of
Powles church yard.

Then is Adlestreete, Adlestreete.
over against the West part of Baynards Castle, going up by the West end of
Knightrydars street, and to Carter Lane. Thus much for Lanes out of Thames
street. The one half of the West side of Lambard Hill Lane being of this
Ward, at the Northwest end thereof, on the South side, and at the West end
of Saint Mary Maudlins Church on the Northside, begins Knightridars street
to be of this Ward, and runs West on both sides to the Parish Church of
Saint Andrew by the Wardrobe.

Then at the said East end of S. Magdalens Church, goes up the Old Exchange,
all the west side whereof, up to the southeast gate of Powles church yard, and
by S. Austins church, is of this Ward. About the midst of this Old Exchange,
on the West side thereof, is Carter Lane, which runs West to the East entry
of the Black Friars, and the south end of Creed Lane, out of the which Carter
Lane, descends a Lane called Do little Lane, Do little lane.
and comes into Knightrider street, by the Boores head Tavern: and more
West, is Sermon Lane, by an Inn called the Powle head. Then out of Carter
Lane, on the North side thereof, the South Chain of Powles church yard, and
the church yard it self on that south side of Powles church, the church of
Saint Gregory, the BiPoppes Palace, and the Deanes lodging, be all of this
Ward: and such be the bounds thereof. The Ornaments in this Ward, be Parish
churches 4. Of old time a castle: Diverse Noblemens houses. Halles of Companies
twain. And such others, as shall be showed.

In Thames street, at the Southeast end, is an ancient message, of old time
called Bewmounts Inn, Bewmounts Inn.
as belonging to that family of Noblemen of this realm, in the 4. of Edward
the 3. Edward the 4. in the 5. of his reign, gave it to William Hastings, Lord
Chamberlain, Master of his Mints. It is now called Huntington House, as
belonging to the Earls of Huntington. Next is Powles Wharfe, Paul's wharfe
a large landing place, with a common staire upon the River of Thames, at the
end of a street called Powles Wharfe Hill, which runs down from Powles
chain. Next is a great Message called Scrupes Inn, Scrupes Inn.
sometime belonging to the Scrupes, in the 31. of Henry the 6.

Then is one other great Message sometime belonging to the Abbey of Fiscampe,
beyond the Sea, and by reason of the wars, it coming to the hands of King
Edward the 3. the same was given to Sir Simon Burley, Knight of the Garter, and
therefore called Burley House Burley House
in Thames street, between Baynards Castle and Powles Wharfe.

Then have you Baynards Castle, Baynardes Castle.
whereof this whole Ward takes the name. This Castle Banquethe on the River
Thames, and was called Bainards castle, of Baynard, a noble man that came in
with William the Conqueror, of the which Castle, and of Baynard himself, I
have spoken in an other place. There was also a Message by Baynardes Castle,
called Legates Inn, Legates Inn.
in the 7. of Edward the fourth, where be now diverse Wood Wharfes. Then is
there a great Brewhouse, and Puddle Wharfe, Puddle wharfe
a water gate into the Thames, where horses use to be watered, and therefore
being filed with their trampeling, and made puddle like, it is (as I suppose)
called Puddle Wharfe. Then is there a Lane, between the Black Friars and the
Thames, called in the 26. of Ed. the 3. Castle Lane. In this Lane also, is one
great Message, of old time belonging to the Priorie of Okeborne in Wilshire,
and was the Priors lodging when he repaired to London. Pryor of Okebornes house.
This Priory being of the French order, was suppressed by H. the 5. and with
other lands and Tenements pertaining to the said Priory, was by H. the 6. given
to his College in Cambridge, called now the kings College. About this Castle
Lane, was sometime a Mill, or Mils, belonging to the Templars of the New
Temple, as appears of Record: for King John in the first year of his reign,
granted a place on the Fleet, near unto Baynards Castle, to make a Mill, and
the whole course of water of the Fleet, to serve the said Mill. A Mill or Mi^s
by Baynards Castle.


I read also that in the year 1274. the 2. of E. the I. Ri. Rayson and
Atheline his wife, did give to Nicholas de Musely Clark, ten shillings of
yearly free and quiet rent, out of all his Tenements, with the houses thereupon
built, and their appurtenances, which they had of the demise of the M. and
brethren of Knights Templars in England, next to their Mill of Fleet, over
against the houses to Laurence de Brook, in the parish of S. Andrew, next to
Baynard Castle: Soke Court or Ward pertaining to Richard Fitzwater.
which Tenements lies between the way, leading toward ye said Mill on the
West part. Also in the rights belonging to Robert Fitz Water and to his heirs,
in the City of London, in the time of peace, it was declared in the year
1303. that the said Robert Castillon of London, and Banner bearer, had a soke
(or Ward) in the City, that was by the wall of Saint Paul, as men go down
the street before the Brewhouse of Saint Paul unto the Thames, and so to the
side of the Mill, which is in the water that comes down from Fleet Bridge,
and goes so by London walls, betwixt the Friars Preachers Church, and
Ludgate, and so runs back by the house of the said Friars, unto the said
Common wall of the Chanory of Saint Paul: that is all of the Parish of Saint
Andrew, which is in the gift of his Ancestors by senioritie, as more I have
showed in the Castles.

Now here is to be noted, that the walls of London at that time went straight
South from Ludgate, down to the River of Thames, but for building of the
Blacke-Fryars church, the said wall in that place, was by commandment taken
down, and a new wall was then made, straight West from Ludgate to Fleet
bridge, and then by the water of Fleet, to the River of Thames, etc.

In the year 1307. the 35. of Edward the first, in a Parliament at Carlisle,
Henry Lacie Earl of Lincoln, complained of Noyances done to the water of the
Fleet: Whereupon it was granted, that the said Mill should be removed and
destroyed. Mill by Baynards Castle, destroyed.
This Ward ascends up by the East wall of the blacke-Fryars, to the South
West end of Creed Lane, where it ends on that side. Then to begin again on
ye North side of Thames street over against Huntington house by Saint Peter's
Church and Lane, called Peter Hill, and so to S. Benet, Hude (or Hithe) over
against Paul's Wharfe, a proper parish Church, Parish Church of Saint Benet
hard by Paul's Wharfe.
which has the Monuments of Sir W. Cheiny knight, and Margaret his wife, 1442.
buried there. West from this church, by the southend of Adlestreet, almost
against Pudle wharfe, there is one ancient building of stone and timber,
builded by the lords of Barkley, and therefore called Barklies Inn. Barklies
Inn.
This house is now all in ruin, and letten out in several Tenements, yet the
arms of the Lord Barkley remain in the stone work of an arched gate, and is
between a Cheuron crosses, 10. three, three, and four.

Richard Beauchampe Earl of Warwick, was lodged in this house, then called
Barklies Inn, in the Parish of Saint Andrew, in the reign of Henry the 6.
Then turning up toward the North, is the parish church of S. Andrew in ye
Wardrobe, a proper church, Parish Church of Andrew in the Wardrobe The Kings
great Wardroabe.
but few Monuments has it. Then is the kings great Wardrobe, I have not read
by whom the same was builded, neither when, or for what cause, but only that
Sir John Beauchampe, knight of ye Garter, Constable of Dover, Warden of the
Sink Ports (son to Gwido de Beauchampe, Earl of Warwick) was lodged there:
this house then bearing the name of the Kings Wardrobe, in the 5. of E. the 3.
The said John Beauchampe deceased in the year 1359. and was buried on the
South side of the middle I Will of Powles church.

In this house of late years, is lodged Sir John Fortescue, knight, Master of
the Wardrobe, Chancellor and under Treasurer of the Exchequer, and one of her
Majesty's Privy Council. The secret letters and writings touching the estate of
the realm, were wont to be introlled in the kings Wardrobe, and not in the
Chauncery, as appears by the Records. Claus. 18. E. 4 I. Mendo, 13. Claus.
33. E. I. Memb. 3. Et liberat. I. E. 2. Memb. 4. etc. From this Wardroabe by
the West end of Carter Lane, then up Creed Lane, Aue Mary Lane, a piece of
Pater Noster Row, up Warwick Lane, all the East side, to a Brewhouse called
ye Crown, as I said is of this ward. Touching Lanes ascending out of Thames
street, to Knightrydars street, the first is, Peter's Hill, Peter Hill Lane.
wherein I find no matter of note, more then certain Alms houses, Alms
houses for 6. poor Widows.
lately founded on the West side thereof, by David Smith Imbroderer, for 6.
poor widows, whereof each to have 20. s. by the year.

At the upper end of this Lane toward the North, the corner houses there, be
called Peter's Key, Peter's Key.
but the reason thereof I have not heard. Then is Powles Wharfe Hill, Paul's
wharfe Hill.
on the East side whereof is Woodmongers Hall. Woodmongers Hall.
And next adjoining, Garter House, so called of the Office there kept by Garter
King of Heraults, and other Heraults. This house was sometime belonging to the
Stanleys, for Thomas Stanley first Earl of Darby of that name, who married the
Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond, mother to Henry the seventh, in his time
builded it.

Queen Mary gave to Gilbert Dethike, then Garter principal King of arms of
English men, Thomas Hawley Clarentioules King of arms of the South parts,
William Haruy Alias Norey, King of arms of the North parts, and the other
Heraults and Purseuants of arms, and to their successors, all the same
Capital message, or house called Darby house, with the appurtenances,
situate in the Parish of Saint Benet and Saint Peter, then being in the tenure
of Sir Richard Sackuile Knight, and lately parcel of the lands of Edward Earl
of Darbie, etc. To the end that the said Kings of Arms, Heraults and
Purseuants of Arms, and their successors, might at their liking dwell
together, and at meet times, to congregate, speak, confer, and agree among
themselves, for the good government of their faculty, and their records might
be more safely kept, etc. Dated the eighteenth of July, 1555. Philip and Mary
the first and third year. Then higher up, near the South chain of Powles
church yard, is the Powle head Tavern, which house with the appurtenances,
was of old time called Powles Brewhouse, Powles Brewhouse.
for that the same was so employed, but being since left off, and letten out.

On the West side of this street, is one other great house builded of stone,
which belongs to Powles church, and was sometime letten to the Blunts Lords
Mountioy, but of later time to a College in Cambridge, and from them to the
Doctors of the Civil Law and Arches, who kept a commons there, and many of
them being there lodged, it is called the Doctors Commons. Doctors Commons.
Above this on the same side, was one other great building, over against Powles
Brewhouse, and this was called Powles Bakehouse, Powles Bakehouse.
and was employed in baking of bread, for the church of Powles. In Adlestreete
Adlestreete.
or Lane, I find no monuments.

In Lambart hill Lambart hill
Lane on the West side thereof, adjoining to the North side of the Black
Smithes Hall, Black Smithes Hall,
have ye one plot of ground enclosed with a brick wall, for a Church yard
Church yard of S. Mary Magdalen.
or burying plot for the dead, of Saint Mary Magdalens by old Fishstreete.

Which was given to that use, by John Iwarbie an Officer in the receipt of the
Exchequer, in the twenty six year of Henry the sixth, as appears by patent.
John Iwarby etc. gave a piece of land lying boyde in the Parish of Saint Mary
Magdalen nigh to old Fishstreete, between the Tenement of John Phipot on the
South, and the Tenement of Bartholomewe Burwashe on the West, and the Tenement
pertaining to the Covent of Holly-well, on the North, and the way upon
Lambards hill, on the East, for a Church-yarde to the Parson, Church Wardens,
etc.

Over against the North West end of this Lambard hill Lane in Knightriders
street, is the Parish Church of Saint Mary Magdalen, Parish church of S. Mary
Magdalen.
a small Church, having but few Monuments.

On the West side of this Church, by the Porche thereof, is placed a Conduit,
Coduit of Thames water.
or Cisterne of Lead, Castelated with stone for receipt of Thames water,
conveyed at the charges of the before named Barnard Randolph Esquire. By the
East end of Sant Mary Magdalens Church, runs up the old Exchange Lane, by
the West end of Carter Lane, to the South-east gate or chain, or of Powles
Church yard as is before showed. And in this part was the Exchange kept, and
Bullion was received for Coynage, as is noted in Faringdon Ward within.

In this Parish of Saint Mary Magdalen, out of Knightriders street up to Carter
Lane, be two small Lanes, the one of them called Do little Lane. Do little
Lane.
The other Sermon Lane, or Sheremoniers Lane, Sermon Lane. or Sheremoniers Lane.
the reason of their names so given, I have not learned, but I find Sermon
Lane or Sheremoniers Lane, so called in the foureteenth of Edward the first,
and a place there, to be called the black loft, with four shops adjoining. I
find also that in the thirteenth of Richard the second, William de la Pole had
an house there, it may be supposed that Lane to take name of such as cut and
rounded the plats to be coined into Esterling pence, for the place of Coining
was in the old Exchange near unto this.

In Knightriders street, is the College of Physicians, College of Physicians.
wherein was founded in the year one thousand five hundred eighty two, a
public Lecture in Surgerye, Lecture in Surgery to be read.
to be read twice every week, etc. as is showed elsewhere.

In the South Church yard of Powles, is the South side, and West end of the
said church: West Gates of Powles Church.
In the which West end, be three stately Gates, or Entries, curiously wrought
of stone, namely the middle gate, in the midst whereof, is placed a massy
Pillar of brass, whereunto the leaves of the said great Gate are closed and
fastened, with locks, bolts, and bars of iron: All which notwithstanding, on
the 24. of December, in the year 1565. by a tempest of wind then rising from
the West, these Gates were blown open, Gates of Paul's church, blown open.
the bars, boltes, and locks, broken in sunder, or greatly bended. Also on
the 5. of January, in the year 1589. by a like Tempest of wind then in the
South West, the lesser West Gate of the said church next to the Bishops
Palace was broken, both boltes, bars, and locks, so that the same was
blown over.

At either corner of this West end, is also of ancient building, a strong
Tower of stone, made for bell Towers, the one of them, to wit, next to the
Palace, is at this present to the use of the same Palace, the other toward
the South, is called the Lowlardes Tower, For Lowlards Tower, Read M. Fox.
and has been used as the Bishops Prison, for such as were detected for
opinions in Religion, contrary to the faith of the church.

The last prisoner which I have known committed thereto, was in the year
1573. one Peter Burchet, Peter Burchet
Gentleman of the middle Temple, for having desperately wounded, and minding to
have murdered a serviceable Gentleman named John Hawkens Esquire, in the high
street near unto the Strande, who being taken and examined, was found to
hold certain opinions erroneous, and therefore committed thither, and
convicted, but in the end by persuasion, he promised to obiure his heresies:
and was by commandment of the Council, removed from thence to the Tower of
London, etc. where he committed, as in an other place I have at large reported.

Adjoining to this Lowlardes Tower, is the Parish church of Saint Gregory,
Parish Church of S. Gregory.
appointed to the Petty Cannons of Powles. Monuments of note I know none
there.

The rest of that South side of Saint Paul's Church, with the Chapter House (a
bewtifull piece of work, builded about the reign of Edward the third) is now
defaced, by means of Lysences granted to Cutlers, Budget makers, and other,
first to build low sheddes, but now higher Houses, which do hide that
beautiful side of the Church, save only the top and South Gate.

On the North West side of this Church yard, is the Bishops Palace, The
Bishops Palace.
a large thing for receipte, wherein diverse Kings have been lodged, and
great household has been kept, as appears by the great Hall, which of
late years since the rebatement of Bishops liuinges, has not been
furnished with household meynie and Guestes, as was meant by the builders
thereof, and was of old time used.

The Deanes lodging on the other side, directly against the Palace, is a fair
old House, and also diverse large houses, are on the same side builded, which
yet remain, and of old time were the Lodgings of Prebendaries and
Residenciars, which kept great housholdes, and liberal hospitality, but now
either decayed, or otherwise converted.

Then is the Stacioners Hall The Sta^ionars Hall.
on the same side, lately builded for them. And let this be an end of
Baynardes Castle Ward, which has an Alderman, his Deputy. Common Council
9. Constables 10. Scauingers 7. Wardmote Inquest, 14. and a Beadle. And to the
Fifteencis taxed at 12. pound.

The Ward of Faringdon Extra, or without.
THe farthest West Ward The Ward ^ Faringdon w^
of this City, being the 25. Ward of London, but without the Walls is called
Faringdon without, and was of old time part of the other Faringdon within,
until the 17. of Richard the second: in which it was divided and made twain,
by the names of Faringdon infra, and Faringdon extra, as is before showed.

The bounds of which ward, without Newgate, and Ludgate, are these. First on
the East part thereof, is the whole precinct of the late priorie of Saint
Bartholomewe, and a part of Long Lane, on the North, toward Aldersgate
street, and Ducke Lane, with the Hospital of Saint Bartholomewe on the West,
and all Smithfield to the Bars in S. John street. Then out of Smithfielde,
Chicken Lane toward Turmile brook, and over that brook by a bridge of timber,
into the field: then back again by the Pens (or foldes) in Smithfield, by
Smithfield pond, to Cowe-Lane, which turns toward Oldboorne: and then Hosiar
Lane, out of Smithfield, also toward Oldboorne, till it meet with a part of
Cow Lane. Then Cock Lane out of Smithfield, over against Pie corner: then
also is Giltspur street, out of Smithfield to Newgate, then from Newgate West
by Saint Sepulchers church to Turnagaine Lane: then to Oldboorne conduit, on
Snor hill, to Oldboorne bridge: up Oldboorne hill to the Bars on both sides,
on the right hand or North side, at the bottom of Oldboorne hill, is Gold
Lane, Gold lane.
sometime a filthy passage into the fields, now both sides builded with small
tenements. Then higher is Lither Lane, Lither lane.
turning also to the field, and so to the Bar. Now on the left hand or South
side from Newgate, lies a street called the Old Baily, Old Baylie.
or court of the Chamberlain of this city: this stretches down by the wall
of the city unto Ludgate: on the West side of which street, breaks out one
other Lane, called Saint Georges Lane, till ye come to the Southende of
Seacole Lane: and then turning toward Fleetestreete, it is called Fleet Lane.
The next out of the high street from Newgate turning down South, is called the
little Baylie, and runs down to the East of Saint Georges Lane. Then is
Seacole lane, which turns down into Fleetelane: near unto this Seacole
lane, Limeburners lane, or Seacole lane.
in the turning toward Oldboorne conduit, is an other lane, called in Record,
windeagaine lane, Windeagaine lane.
for that it turns down to Turmill Brook, and from thence back again, for
there is no way over. Then beyond Oldboorne bridge to Shoe lane, Shooelane.
which runs out of Oldboorne unto the conduit in Fleetestreete. Then also is
Fewtars lane, Fewtars lane.
which likewise stretches South into Fleetestreete, by the East end of Saint
Dunstons church, and from this lane to the Bars, be the bounds without
Newgate.

Now without Ludgate, this ward runs up from the said gate to Temple bar,
and has on the right hand or northside, the south end of the Old Bailey, then
down Ludgate hill, to the Fleet lane, over Fleet bridge, and by Shoe lane,
and Fewters lane, and so to New street (or Chancery lane) and up that lane to
the house of the Rolls, which house is also of this ward, and on the other
side to a lane over against the Roules, which enters Ficquetes field.

Then hard by the Bar is one other lane called Shyre lane, Shire lane.
because it deuideth the City from the Shire, and this turns into Ficquetes
field.

From Ludgate again on the left hand, or south side to Fleet bridge, to bride
lane, which runs south by Bridewell, then to Water lane, which runs down
to the Thames.

Then also by the White Friars, and by the Temple, even to the Bar
aforesaid, be the bounds of this Faringdon ward without.

Touching Ornaments and Antiquities in this ward, first betwixt the said
Newgate and the parish Church of S. Sepulchers is a way toward Smithfielde,
called Guilt spur, or Knightridars street, Giltspurre or Knightridars
street.
of the knights and other riding that way into Smithfielde, replenished with
buildinges on both sides up to Pie corner, a place so called of such a sign,
sometimes a fair Inn for receipte of Travelers, but now divided into
Tenements, and over against the said Pie corner lies Cock lane, Cock lane
which runs down to Oldbourne Conduite.

Beyond this Pie corner lies west Smithfielde, West Smithfielde.
compassed about with buildinges, as first on the south side following, the
right hand stands the fair parish church, and large Hospital of Saint
Bartilmew, founded by Rahere the first Prior of Saint Bartilmewes Hospital of
S. Bartilmew.
thereto near adjoining, in the year 1102.

Alfune (that had not long before builded the parish church of S. Giles without
Cripplegate, became the first Hospitelar, or Proctor for the poor of this
house, and went himself daily to the Shambles and other marketes, where he
begged the charity of devout people for their relief, promising to the
liberal giuers, (and that by alleging Testimonies of the holy scripture)
reward at the hands of God, this Hospital, was since repaired about the year
1423. of the goods and by the Executors of Richard VVhitington, sometime
Mayor of London, and was governed by a Master, and eight Brethren, being
Priests for the church, and four Sisters to see the poor served.

Sir John VVakering Priest, Master of this house in the year 1463. amongst
other books gave to their common Library the fairest Bible, that I have seen
written in large velame, by a Brother of that house, named John Coke at the age
of 68. years, when he had been Priest 43. years, since the spoil of that
Library. I have seen this book in the custody of my worshipful friend
master, Walter Cope.

Monumentes in this Church of the dead, Benefactors thereunto be these,
Elizabeth wife to Adam Hone Gentleman, Bartilmew Bildington, Jane wife to John
Cook, Dame Alis wife to Sir Richard Isham, Alice wife to Nicholas Bailey, John
Woodhouse Esquier, Robert Palmar Gentleman, Idona wife to John Walden lying by
her husband on the North side late newly builded, 1424. Sir Thomas Malifant
Baron of Winnow, Lord Sir George in Glamorgan, and Lord Ockeneton and Pile in
the county of Pembroke, 1438. Dame Margaret his wife, Daughter to Thomas Astley
Esquier, with Edmond and Henry his children, William Markeby Gentleman 1438.
Richard Shepley, and Alice his wife, Thomas Sauill Sarieant at Arms, Edward
Beastby Gentleman, and Margaret his wife, Walter Ingham and Alienar his wife,
Robert Warnar and Alice Lady Carne, Robert Galdfet, Johan and Agnes his wives,
Sir Robert Danuars, and Dame Agnes his wife, daughter to Sir Richard Delaber,
William Brooks Esquier, John Sirley Esquier, and Margaret his wife, having
their pictures of Brass, in the habit of Pilgrims on a fair flat stone with
an Epitaph. 1456. Jane Lady Clinton, who gave ten pound to the poor there,
1458. Agnes Daughter to Sir William, S. George, John Rogebrooke Esquier,
Richard Surgeon, Thomas Burgan Gentleman, Elizabeth wife to Henry Skinard
daughter to Chincroft Esquier, William Mackeley Gentlman and Alice his wife,
William Fitzwater Gentleman, 1466.

This Hospital was valued at the suppression in the year, 1539. the 31. of
Henry the eight to 35. pound, six shillinges, 7. pence, yearly. The church
remains a parish church to the Tenantes dwelling in the precinct of the
Hospital, Hospital of Bartilmew suppressed.
but in the year 1546. on the 13. of January, the Bishop of Rochester,
preaching at Paul's Cross, declared the gift of the said king, to the Citizens
for releeuing of the poor, which contained the Church of the Gray Friars, the
church of S. Bartilmew with the Hospital, with all the Messuages and
appurtenances in Giltspurre, alias Knightridars street, Breton street, Petar
Kay, in the parish of S. Mary Magdalen, in old Fishstreete, and in the parish
of S. Benet Huda, Lymehurst, or Lymehost, in the Parish of Stebunheth, etc.
Then also were orders devised for relief of the poor, the inhabitants were al
called to their parish churches whereby Sir Richard Dobbes then Mayor their
several Aldermen, or other grave Citizens, they were by eloquent orations
persuaded how great and how many commodities would ensew unto them and their
City, if the poor of diverse sorts which they named were taken from out their
streets, lanes, and allies, and were bestowed and provided for in Hospitalles
abroad etc. therefore was every man moved liberally to grant, what they would
impart, toward the preparing, and furnishing of such Hospitals and also what
they would contribute weekly toward their maintenance for a time (which they
said should not be past one year or twain) until that they were better
furnished of endowment: to make short every man granted liberally, according to
his hability, and books were drawn of the relief in every ward of the City,
toward the new Hospitalles, and were delivered by the Mayor, to the kings
Commissioners, on the 17. of February, and order was taken therein, so as the
26. of July, in the year 1552. the repayring of the Gray Friars house, for
poor fatherless children, was taken in hand, and also in the latter end of
the same month, began the repayring of this Hospital of S. Bartilmew, and was
of new endowed, and furnished at the charges of the Citizens.

On the east side of this Hospital, lies Duke lane, which runs out of
Smithfielde south, to the northend of little Bretaine street. On the east side
of this Ducke lane, and also of Smithfield lies the late dissolved Priorie at
S. Bartilmew Priorie of S. Bartilmew.
founded also by Rahere, a pleasant witted Gentleman, and therefore in his time
called the kings Minstrell, about the year of Christ 1102. he founded it in
a part of ye often before named morish ground, which was therefore a common Lay
stall of all filth, that was to be voyded out of the City, he placed Canons
there, and himself became their first Prior, and so continued till his dying
day, and was there buried in a fair monument, of late renewed by Bolton.

Amongst other memorable matters touching this Priorie, one is of an
Archbishops visitation, which Matthew Paris has thus. Boniface (says he)
Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop of Canterbury visits Saint
Bartilmewes Priorie with stripes.
in his Uisitation, came to this Priorie, where being received with Procession,
in the most solemn wise, he said that he passed not upon the honor, but came
to visit them, to whom the Canons anwered that they having a learned Bishop,
ought not in contempt of him, to be visited by any other: which answer so much
offended the Archbishop, Words of the Archbishop to the Prior and Canons.
that he forthwith fell on the Supprior and smote him on the face, saying,
indeed, indeed does it become you English Traitors so to answer me, thus
raging with oaths not to be recited, he rent in pieces the rich Cope of the
Supprior, Suppriors cope ^ent and trode^ under foot and himself almost slain.
and trod it under his feet, and thrust him against a Pillar of the Chancell,
with such spiritual violence, that he had almost killed him: But the Chanons
seeing their Supprior thus almost slain, came and plucked off the Archbishop
The Archbishop armed and overthrown.
with such force that they overthrew him backwards, whereby they might see that
he was armed and prepared to fight, the Archbishops men seeing their master
down (being all strangers and their masters countrymen, borne in Prouence)
fell upon the Chanons, beat them, tare them and trod them under feet, The
Canons beaten and trod under foot.
at length the Canons The Canons complained but could not be heard.
getting away as well as they could, ran bloody and myry, rent and torn, to
the Bishop of London, to complain, who bad them go to the king at
Westminster, and tell him thereof, whereupon four of them went thither, the
rest were not able, they were so sore hurt, but when they came to Westminster,
the king would neither hear nor see them, so they returned without redress,
in the mean season the whole City was in an uproar and ready to have rung the
common bell, and to have hewed the Archbishop into small pieces, who was
secretly crept to Lambhith, where they sought him and not knowing him by sight,
The whole city in an uproar against the Archbishop.
said to themselves, where is this Ruffian, that cruel s^iter, he is no
winner of souls, but an exactor of money, whom neither God, nor any lawful
or free election, did bring to this Promotion, but the king did unlawfully
intrude him, being utterly unlearned, a stranger borne and having a wife etc.
but he conveyed himself over, and went to the king with a great complaint,
against the Chanons, whereas himself was guilty.

Bolton Bolton last Pr^or of S. Bartlmew a great builder there.
was the last Prior of this house, a great builder there: for he repaired the
Priorse church with the parish church adjoining, the offices and lodginges to
the said Priorie belonging, and near adjoining, he builded of new the Manor
of Chanonbery Canonberie.
at Islington which belonged to the Canons of this house, and is situate in a
low ground, somewhat north from the parish Church there, but he builded no
house at Harrow on the hill, as ^dwarde Hall Edward Hall.
has written, following a fable then on foot. The people (says he) being
feared by Prognostications, which declared that in the year of Christ 1524.
there should be such Eclipses in watery signs and such conjunctions, that by
waters and floudes many people should perish, people victuled themselves and
went to high grounds for fear of drowning and especially one Bolton, which
was Prior of S. Bartilmewes in Smithfielde builded him a house upon Harrow on
the hill, only for fear of this floude, thither he went and made provision
of all things necessary within him for the space of two months etc. but this
was not so indeed as I have been credibly informed: true it is that this
Bolton, was also Parson of H^^row, and therefore bestowed some small
reparations on the Personage house, and builded nothing there more then a
Douehouse, to serve him when he had forgon his Priorie.

To this Priorie king Henry the second granted the Privilege of a fair to be
kept yearly at Bartilmewtide Bartilmewfai^
for three days, to wit, y^ Eve, the day, and next morrow, to the which the
Clothiars of all England, and Drapers of London repaired, and had their Boothes
and standinges within the Churchyard of this Priorie closed in with walls and
gates locked every night, and watched for safety of men's goods, and wares, a
court of Piepowdars Court of Piepowdars.
was daily during the Fair holde^ for debts and contracts. But now in place of
Bothes within this Church yard (only letten out in the fair time) be many
large houses builded, and the North wall toward Long lane being taken down, a
number of Tenementes are there erected.

The monuments of the dead in this Priorie, are these of Rahere the first
founder, Roger Walden Bishop of London, 1406. John Warton Gentleman, and
Elizabeth his wife, daughter to William Scot Esquier, John Louth Gentleman,
Robert Shikeld Gentleman, Sir Bacon knight, John Ludlow, and Alice his wife,
VV. Thirlewall Esquier, Richard Lancaster Herralde at Arms, Thomas Torald.
John Roiston, John Watforde, John Carleton, Robert son to Sir Robert
Willowbie, Gilbert Halstocke, Elianor wife to Sir Hugh Fen, mother to Margaret
Lady Burgaueny, William Essex Esquier Richard Vancke Baron of the Exchequer,
and Margaret his wife, daughter to William de la Riuar, John Winderhall, John
Duram Esquier, and Elizabeth his wife, John Malwaine, Alice wife to Balstred
daughter to Kniffe, William Scarlet Esquier, John Golding, Hugh Walter
Gentleman, and the late wise and worthy Sir Walter Mildway knight, Chancellor
of the Exchequer etc.

This Priorie at the late surrender thereof made the 30. of Henry the eight was
valued at 653. ^. 15. ^. by year.

The Church and Bell Tower (having six Bells in a Tune) were sold to the parish
of S. Sepulchers, and then the church being pulled down to the Quire, the
Quire was by the kings order annexed for the enlarging of the old Parish
church thereto adjoining, and so was used till the reign of Queen Mary, who
gave it to the Friars Preachers or Black Friars, and was used as their
conuentuall Church, until the first of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth,
those Friars were once more put out, and then all the said church was wholly
as it stood in the last year of Edward the sixth given by Parliament to
remain for ever a parish Church for the inhabitants within the Close called
great S. Bartilmewes. Since the which time, that old Church is pulled down,
except the Steeple of rotten timber ready to fall of it self, I have often heard
it reported that a new steeple should be builded with the stone of the old
Parish Church, but no such thing is performed, for it is more easy to pull
down then to set up and build. On the North side of this Priory, is the lane,
truly called Long, which reaches from Smithfield toward Aldersgate street,
the rest of Smithfield, from long lane Long lane.
end to the Bars is enclosed with Innes, Brewhouses, and large tenements on
the west side is Chicken lane Chiken lane.
down to Cowbridge. Cow bridge.


Then be the Pens Pens in Smithfielde
or Foldes so called of Sheep there parted, and penned up to be sold, on the
market days.

Then is Smithfielde Pond, Smithfielde pond some time a Poole.
which of old time in records was called Horse Poole, for that men watered
horses there, and was a great water. In the 6. of Henry the fifth, a new
building was made in this west part of Smithfielde betwixt the said Poole and
the River of the Wels, or Turnemill Brook, in a place (then called the Elmes,
The Elmes in Smithfielde a place wherein Trespassers. were executed
for that there grew many Elm trees) and this had been the place of execution
for Offenders: since the which time the building there has been so increased,
that now remains not one tree growing.

Amongst these new buildinges is Cowbridge street, or Cow lane, which turns
toward Oldbourne, in which lane, the Prior of Semperingham had his Inn or
London lodging.

The rest of that west side of Smithfielde, has diverse fair Innes and other
comely buildinges up to Hosiar lane, Hosiar lane.
which also turns down to Oldbourne, till it meet with Cowbridge street.
From this lane to Cock lane, Cock lane
over against Pie corner.

And thus much for incrochmentes and enclosure of this Smithfielde, whereby
remains but a small portion, for the old uses, to wit, for marketes of
horses and cattle, neither for Military exercises, and Iustinges, Iustinges in
Smithfielde.
Turninges, and great triumphs which have been there performed before the
Princes and Nobility both of this Realm, and Foreign countries.

But now to return through Giltspurre street by Newgate where I first
began, there stands the fair parish church parish church of S. Sepulcher
called S. Sepulcher in the Bailey, or by Chamberlain gate in a fair church
yard, though not so large as of old time, for the same is letten out for
buildinges etc. This church was newly reedified or builded about the reign of
Henry the sixth, John Leyland,
or of Edward the fourth, one of the Pophames Pophames builders of S.
Sepulchers Church.
was a great builder there, namely of one fair chapel, on the south side of
the Quire, as appears by his Arms, and other monumentes in the glass
windows thereof, and also of the fair Portch of the same church toward the
South, his Image fair graven in stone, was fixed over the said Portch, but
defaced and beaten down, his title by offices was this, Chancellor of
Normandy, Captain of Vernoile, Perch, Susan, and Bayon, and Treasurer of the
kings household, he dyed rich, leaving great Treasure of strange coins and
was buried in the Charterhouse church, by west Smithfield: the first
nobilitating of these Pophames was by Mathild the Empress, daughter to Henry
the first, and by Henry her son, one Pophame gentleman of very fair lands
in Southampton shire dyed without issue male, about Henry the sixth, and leaving
four daughters they were married to Fostar, Barentine, Wodham, and Hamde^,
Popham Dean (distant 3. miles from Clarendon, and 3. miles from Motisham) was
sometime the chief Lordshippe or Manor house of these Pophames.

There lie buried in this Church, William Andrew Esquier, Stephen Clamparde
Esquier, Lawrence Warcam Esquier, John Dagworth, William Porter, Esquier,
Robert Scarlet Esquier etc.

There lies a street from Newgate west, to the end of Turnagaine lane, and
winding north to Oldbourne Conduite. Oldboorne Conduite by Oldboorne Cross.
This Conduite by Oldbourne Cross was first builded 1498. Thomasin Widow to
John Perciuall, Mayor, gave to the second making thereof twenty marks,
Richard Shore ten pound, Thomas Kensworth and others also did give toward it.

But of late a new Conduite was there builded in place of the old, namely in
the year one thousand five hundrd seauentie seven, by William Lamb sometime
a gentleman of the Chapel to king Henry the eight, and afterward a Citizen
and Clothworker of London, the water thereof he caused to be conveyed in
Lead, from diverse springes to one head and from thence to the said Conduit,
and wast of one Cock at Oldborne bridge, more then 2000. yards in length, all
which was by him performed at his own only charges (amounting to the sum
1500. pound) and by him finished.

From the west side of this Conduit is the high way there called Snor hill,
stretches out by Oldborne bridge over the ost named water of Turmill brook,
and so up to Oldeborne hill, all replenished with fair building.

Without Oldborne bridge on the right hand is Gold lane, as is before showed: up
higher on the hill be certain Innes, and other fair buildings, amongst the
which of old time was a Message called Scrops Inn, about the 37. of Henry
the sixth.

Then is the Bishop of Elies Elie place in Oldborne.
Inn, commonly called Ely place, for that it pertains unto the Bishops of
Ely, the which John de Hotham Bishop of Elie did give by the name of his
Manor and six tenements in Oldeborne to the Church and covent of Ely, as
appears by pattent Pattent.
of Record, the 9. of Edward the third. This man was 20. years Bishop of
Elie, and deceased 1336.

Thomas Arundell Bishop of Elie beautifully builded of new his Palace at
Elie, and likewise his Manors in diverse places, especially this in Oldeborne,
which he did not only repair but rather new builded, and augmented it with a
large Port gate house, or front toward the street or high way: his arms are
yet to be discerned in the stone work thereof: he also sat Bishop of Ely 14.
years, and was translated to York.

In this house for the large and commodious rooms thereof, diverse great and
solemn feasts have been kept, especially by the Sergeantes at the law,
whereof twain are to be noted for posterity. The first in the year 1464. the
fourth of Edward the fourth in Michelmas term, the Sergeants Sergeants feast
in Elie house.
at Law held their feast in this house, to the which amongst other estates,
Matthew Phillip Mayor of London, with the Aldermen, Sheriffs, and commons of
diverse crafts being invited did repair: but when the Mayor looked to keep the
state in the hall as it had been used in all places within the City and
liberties (out of the Kings presence) the Lord Gray of Ruthen, then Lord
Treasurer of England, unwitting the Sergeantes and against their wills (as
they said) was first placed: whereupon the Mayor, Aldermen, and commons
departed home, and the Mayor made the Aldermen to dine with him: howbeit he and
all the Citizens were wonderfully displeased, that he was so dealt with, and
the new Sergeantes and others were right sorry therefore, and had rather then
much good (as they said) it had not so happened.

One other feast was likewise there kept, in the year 1531. the 23. of king
Henry the 8. the Sergeants then made were in number 11. namely, Thomas Audeley,
Walter Luke, I. Bawdwine, I. Hind, Christopher Iennie, I. Dowsell, Edward
Meruine, Edmond Knightley, Roger Chomley, Edward Montague, and Roger York.

These also held their feast in this Elie house for five days, to wit, Friday
the 10. of November, Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuiesday. On Monday (which
was their principal day) King Henry King Henry the 8. and Q. Katherine dined
at the Sergeants feasts.
and Queen Katherine dined there (but in two chambers) and the foreign
Ambassadors in a third chamber. In the Hall at the high table, sat Sir
Nicholas Lambard Mayor of London, the Judges, the Barons of the Exchequer, with
certain Aldermen of the City: At the board on the south side, sat the master
of the Rowles, the masters of the Chauncerie, and worshipful Citizens: On the
North side of the Hall certain Aldermen began the boorde, and then followed
Merchantes of the City: in the Cloistrie, Chapel and gallorie, Knights,
Esquires and Gentlemen were placed: in the halles, the Crafts of London: the
Sergeants of Law and their wives kept in their own chambers.

It were tedious to set down the preparation of fish, flesh, and other
victuailes spent in this feast, and would seem almost incredible and (as to me
it seems) wanted little of a feast at a coronation: nevertheless a little I
will touch, for declaration of the change of prices. There were brought to the
slaughter house 24. great Beefes, at 26. shillings, viij.pence the piece from
the shambles, one carcass of an Ox at 24. ^. one hundred fat Muttons,
ij.^x.^. the piece, 51. great Ueales at iiij.^.viij.^.the piece: 34. Porkes
iij.^.viij.^.the piece, 91. Pigs vj.^.the piece, Capons of Greece of one
Poulter, (for they had three) 10. dozens at xxij.pence the piece, Capons of
Kent 9. dozens, and six at xij.^.the piece, Capons course 19. dozen at
vj.^.the piece, Cocks of gross 7. dozen and nine at viij.^.the piece, Cocks
course 14. dozen and 8. at iij. ^.the piece, Pullets the best ij^.ob. other
Pullets ij.^.Pigeous, 37. dozen at x.^.the dozen, Swannes 14. dozen, Larkes,
340. dozen at v.^.the dozen etc. Edward Neuill was Seneshal or stes^ard, Thomas
Ratcliffe Controwler Thomas Wildon, Clearke of the kitchen.

Next beyond this Manor of Ely house, is Lither lane, Lither lane.
turning into the field. Then is Furniualles Inn, Furniuals Inn an Inn of
Chauncery.
now an Inn of chauncerie, but sometime belonging to Sir William Furniuall
knight, and Thomasin his wife, who had in Oldborne two Messuages, and 13. shops
as appears by Record of Richard the 2. in the sixth of his reign. Then is
the Earl of Bathes Inn, The Earl of Bathes Inn.
, now called Bath place, of late for the most part new builded, and so to the
Bars. Now again from Newgate on the left hand or South side lies the Old
Bailey, which runs down by the wall upon the ditch of the City called
Hounds ditch to Ludgate: I have not read how this street took that name, but
is like to have risen of some Court of old time there kept: and I find that in
the 34. of Edward the third the tenement and ground upon Hounds ditch Hounds
ditch.
between Ludgate on the South, and Newgate on the North was appointed to John
Cambridge Fishmonger, Chamberlane The Chamberlains house and court in the old
Bailey.
of London: whereby it seems that the Chamberlaines of London have there kept
their courts, as now they do by the Guildhal and till this day the Mayor and
Justices of this City kept their sessions in a part thereof, now called the
sessions hall, The Sessions hall.
both for the city of London and shire of Middlesex. Over against the which
house on the right hand tuxneth down S. Georges lane, S. Georges lane an Inn
of Chauncery there.
toward Fleet lane. In this S. Georges lane on the North side thereof,
remains yet an old wall of stone enclosing a piece of ground up Seacoale
lane, wherein by report sometime stood an Inn of Chauncery: which house being
greatly decayed, and standing remote from other houses of that profession, the
company removed to common hosterie, called of the sign, our Lady Inn, not far
from Clements Inn, which they procured from Sir John Fineox, Lord chief
Justice of the Kings bench, and since have held it of the owners by the name
of New Inn, Original of new Inn, an Inn of Chauncery.
paying therefore vi.^. rent by the year as tenants at their own will: for
more (as it is said) cannot be gotten of them, and much less will they be put
from it. Beneath this S. Georges lane, the lane called Fleet lane windeth south
by the prison of the Fleet into Fleetstreete, by Fleet bridge. Lower down
into the Old Bailey, is at this present a standard of A standard of spring
water in the old Bailey.
timber with a cock or cocks, delivering fair spring water to the
inhabitants, and is the wast of the water, serving the prisoners in Ludgate.

Next out of the high street turns down a lane, called the little Baylie,
which runs down to the East end of S. Georges lane. The next is Seacoale
lane, I think called Limeburners lane, Seacoale lane, or Limeburners lane,
sometime so called.
of burning their lime there with Seacole. For I read in record of such a
lane to have been in the parish of S. Sepulcher, and there yet remains in
this lane an Alley, called Limeburners Alley. Near unto this Seacoale lane in
the turning toward Oldborne Conduit is Turne-againe lane, or rather as in a
record of the fifth of Edward the third, Windagaine lane, Windagaine. lane.
for that it goes down West to Fleet dike, from whence men must turn again
the same way that they came, for there it is stopped. Then the high street
turns down Snor hill, Snore hill.
to Oldborne Conduit, and from thence to Oldborne bridge, beyond the which
bridge on the left hand is Shoe lane, Shoe lane.
by the which men pass from Oldborn to Fleetestreete, by the Conduite there.
In this Shoe lane on the left hand is one old house called Oldborne hall,
Oldborne hal.
it is now letten out into diverse tenementes. On the other side at the very
corner stands the parish Church of S. Andrew, Parish Church of S. Andrew in
Oldborne.
in the which church or near thereunto was sometime kept a Grammar school
Grammar school in Oldborne.
as appears in an other place by a Pattent, made as I have showed for the
erection of schools. There be Monumentes in this Church of an Earl of
Southampton buried there Raph Rokeby, of Lincolnes Inn Esquire, Master of S.
Katherines, and one of the Masters of Requests to the Queens Majesty, who
deceased the 14. of June 1596. He gave by his testament to Christ's Hospital in
London 100.^. to the College of the poor of Queen Elizabeth in East
Greenwich 100. pound, to the poor scholars in Cambridge 100. pound, to the
poor scholars in Oxford 100. pound, to the prisoners in the two Compters in
London 200. pound, to the prisoners in the Fleet 100. pound, to the prisoners
in Ludgate 100. pound, to the prisoners in the Kings bench 100. pound, to the
prisoners in the Marshalsey an hundred pound, to the prisoners in theWhite
Lion 20. pound, to the poor of S. Katherines, 20. pound, and to every
brother and sister there 40.^. There was also of old time (as I have read in
the third of Henry the fifth) an Hospital Hospital in Oldborne.
for the poor, which was a cell to the house of Cluny in France, and was
therefore suppressed among the Priories Aliens.

From this Church of S. Andrew up Oldborne hill be diverse fair builded houses,
amongst this which on the left hand there stands three Innes of Chauncery,
whereof the first adjoining unto Crookhorne Alley Crokhorne Alley.
is called Thaues Inn Thauies Inn.
and stands opposite or over against the said Elie house. Then is Fewter lane
Fewtars lane.
which stretches south into Fleetstreet by the East end of S. Dunstones
church, and is so called of Fewterers (or idle people) lying there as in a way
leading to gardens: but the same is now of later years on both sides builded
with many fair houses.

Beyond the Fewters lane is Barnardes Inn, Barnards Inn
alias Motworth Inn, which is the second Inn of Chauncerie, belonging to the
Deane and Chapter of Lincoln, as says the Record of Henry the sixth, the 32.
of his reign. Then is Staple Inn Staple Inn.
the third Inn of Chauncery, but whereof so named I am ignorant: the same of
late is, for a great part thereof fair builded, and not a little augmented:
and then at the bar ends this Ward without Newgate.

But now without Ludgate, on the right hand or North side from the said gate
lies the Old Bailey, as I said: then the high street called Ludgate hill
Ludgate hill.
down to Fleet lane, in which lane stands the Fleet, a prison house, so
called of the fleet or water running by it.

I read that Richard the first in the first of his reign confirmed to Osbert
(brother to William Longshampe Chauncelor of England and elect of Elie) and to
his heirs for ever the custody of his house or palace at Westminster, with
the keeping of his jail at London, also King John by his pattent dated by
third of his reign, gave to S. Archdeacon of Wells, the custody of the
said Kings house at Westminster, and of his Jail of the Fleet, The Fleet or
Jail in the reign of Richard the first,
together with the Wardship of the daughter and heir of Robert Leueland etc.
Then the next is Fleet bridge, pitched over the said water.

Then also against the South end of Shoe lane stands a fair water Conduite,
whereof William Eastfield sometime Mayor, was founder: for the Mayor and
communaltie of London being possessed of a Conduit head, with diverse springs of
water gathered thereinto in the parish of Padington, and the water conueighed
from thence by pypes of lead toward London unto Teyborne: where it had layne
by the space of six years and more: The executors of Sir William Eastfield
obtained license of the Mayor and communaltie, for them in the year 1453. with
the goods of Sir William to conueigh the said waters: first in pipes of lead
into a pipe begun to be laid besides the great Conduit head at Maribone, which
stretches from thence unto a seperal late before made against the chapel of
Rounseuall by Charing cross, and no further, and then from thence to convey
the said water into the city, and there to make receipt or receiptes for the
same unto, for the weal common of the comminaltie, which water was by them
brought thus into Fleetstreete to a standarde, which they had made and finished
1471. near unto Shoe lane.

The inhabitants of Fleetestreete in the year 1478. obtained license of the
Mayor, Aldermen and communaltie to make at their own charges two cesternes,
the one to be set at the said standard, the other at Fleet bridge Conduite at
Fleet bridge.
for the receipt of the wast water: this cesterne at the standard they builded,
and on the same a fair tower of stone garnished with images of S. Christopher
on the top, and Angels with sweetsounding belles before them, whereupon by an
Engine placed in the tower) they diverse hours of the day, and night, with
hammers chymed such an hymn as was appointed.

This conduit or standard was again new builded with a larger cesterne, at the
charges of the city in the year 1582.

From this Conduit up to Fewters lane and further is the parish church of S.
Dunstan, Parish Church of Saint D^nstones.
called in the West, (for difference from S. Dunstone in the east) where lies
buried T. Duke Skinner in S. Katherines chapel by him builded 1421. Raph Bane
Bishop of Couentrie and Lichfield 1559. and other.

Next beyond this church is Cliffords Inn, Cliffordes ^^
sometime belonging to Robert Clifforde, after whose death Isabell his wife let
the same to students of the law, as by the records following may appear:
Isabell quae fuit vxor Roberti Clifford, Messuagiu^ vni partium, quod Robertus
Clifford habuit in parochia sci. Dunstoni West. in suburbi^ Londini, etc.
tenuit and illud dimisit post mortem dict. Roberti, apprenticijs de banpro
x.l.anuatium etc. Anno 18. Eduardi tertij, inquisitis post mortem Reberti
Clifford.

This house has since fallen into the Kings hands, ( as I have heard) and is
now letten to the said students for four pound by the year.

Somewhat beyond this Cliffords Inn is the South end of New street (or
Chancelar lane) New street or Chaunceler Lane.
on the the right hand whereof is Sergeantes Inn called in Chauncery lane. And
then next was sometime the house of the converted Jews, founded by king Henry
the third, in the year 1233. and the 17. of his reign, who builded there for
them a fair church, now used and called the chapel for the custody of Rolls
and records of Chauncerie. It stands not far from the old temple, but in
the midway, between the old Temple and the new, in the which house House of
conuarts.
all such Jews and infidels as were converted to the Christian faith, were
ordained and appointed (under an honest rule of life) sufficient maintneaunce,
whereby it came to pass, that in short time there were gathered a great number
of conuerts, which were baptized, instucted in the doctrine of Christ, and
there lived, under a learned Christian appointed to govern them: since the
which time, to wit, in the year 1290. all the Jews in England, were banished
out of the realm, whereby the number of conuerts in this place was almost
decayed: and therefore in the year 1377. this house was annexed by Pattent to
William Burstall Clearke Custos Rotulorum or keeper of the Rolls of the
Chauncerie by Edward the third in the one and fiftieth year of his reign: and
this first Master of the Rolls was sworn in Westminster hall, at the table
of marble stone: since the which time, that house has been commonly called
the Rolls in Chauncerie lane. Roules in Chauncerye Lane^


Notwithstanding such of the Jews or other Infidels as have in this realm
been converted to christianity and baptized, have been relieved there: for I
find in Record, that one William Piers a Jew that became a Christian, was
baptized in the fifth of Richard the second, and had two pence the day allowed
him during his life by the said king. On the West side sometime was an house
pertaining to the Prior of Necton Park Prior in Necton park his Inn or house
of the six Clearkes.
(a house of Chanons in Lincoln shire) this was commonly called Hereflete
Inn, and was a Brewhouse, but now fair builded for the six Clearkes of the
Chauncerie, and stands over against the said house, called the Rolls, and
near unto the lane which now enters Fickets croft, Fickets croft Shere lane.
or Fickets field. Then is Shire lane opening also into Fickets field, hard by
the bars. On this North side of Fleetstreet, in the year of Christ 1595. I
observed, that when the laborers had broken up the pauement, from against
Chauncerie lanes end, up toward S. Dunstones church, and had dug four foot
deep, they found one other pauement of hard stone, more sufficient then the
first, and therefore harder to be broken, under the which they found in the
made ground, piles of timber, driven very thick and almost close together the
same being as black as pitch or coal, and many of them rotten as earth, which
proves that the ground there (as sundry other places of the City) have
been a marish or full of springes.

Now on the South side from Ludgate be fair builded houses to Fleet bridge,
Conduit at Fleet bridge.
on the which bridge a Cesterne for receite of spring water was made by the men
of Fleetestreete, but the watercourse is decayed and not restored.

Next is Bridelane, and therein Bridewell, of old time the Kings house:
Bridewell the kings house.
for the Kings of this Realm have been there lodged, and their Courts of
law have been there kept of old time, to wit till the ninth of Henry the
third, the Courts were kept in the kings house whersoeuer he was lodged, as
may appear by ancient records, whereof I have seen many, but as for example
I have already set forth one, in the Chapter of Towers and Castles before.
Liber Burton snper Trentha^ fol. 46.


King Henry the eight builded there a stately and beautiful house of new, for
receipt of the Emperor Charles the 5. who in the year of Christ 1522. was
lodged himself at the Black Friars, but his Nobles in this new builded
Bridewell, a Gallery being made out of the house over the water, and through
the wall of the City into the Emperors lodging, at the Black Friars, king
Henry himself oftentimes lodged there also, as namely in the year 1525. a
Parliament being then holden in the Black Friars, he created States States
created at Bridewell.
of Nobility there, to wit, Henry Fitz Roy, a child (which he had by
Elizabeth Blunt) to be Earl of Nottingham, Duke of Richmont, and of Somerset,
Leiuetenante General, from Trent Northwarde, Warden of the East, middle, and
West Marches for Anenst Scotland.

Henry Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, Cosen German to the king to be Marquis
of Excester, Henry Brandon a child of two years old, son to the Earl of
Suffolk, to be Earl of Lincoln: Sir Thomas Mannars, Lord Rose, to be
Earl of Rutland, Sir Henry Glifforde to be Earl of Comberlaud, Sir Robert
Ratliffe to be Uicont, Fizwater, and Sir Thomas Boloine Treasurer of the
kings Householde, to be Uicont Rochforde.

In the year 1528. Cardinal Campeius was brought to the kings presence being
then at Bridewell, whether he had called all his Nobility, Judges and
Counselors etc. And there the eight of November in his great Chamber he made
unto them an oration touching his marriage with Queen Katheren, as ye may
read in Edward Hall.

In the year 1529. the same king Henry and Queen Katherine were lodged there,
whilst the question of their marriage was argued in the Black Friars etc.

But now you shall hear how this house became a house of correction. In the
year 1553. the seventh of king Edward the sixth, the tenth of April, Sir
George Baron (being Mayor of this City) was sent for to the Court at White
hall, and there at that time the king gave unto him, for the Comminaltie and
Citizens to be a Workehouse for the poor Bridewell given to the City of
London, to be a workehouse for the poor.
and idle persons of the City, his house of Bridewell, and 700. marks land
late of the possessions of the house of the Sauoy, and all the bedding and
other furniture of the said Hospital of the Sauoy toward the maintenance of
the said Workehouse of Bridewell, and the Hospital of S. Thomas in Southwarke

This gift king Edward confirmed by his Charter, dated the 26. of June next
following, and in the year 1555. in the month of February Sir William
Gerrarde Mayor and the Aldermen entered Bridewell, and took possession thereof
according to the gift of the said king Edward, the same was also confirmed by
Queen Mary.

The Bishop of S. Dauides The Bishop of S. Dauides house.
had his Inn over against the north side of this Bridewell (as I have heard.)

Then is the parish church of S. Bridget Parish church of S. Bridget.
or S. Bride, (as they term it) now a fair church, the which William Venor
Esquier, Warden of the Fleet about the year 1480 increased with a large
body, and side Isles from the Quire (which of old time was the whole Church)
down to the west end, all through this Church builded of his charges is
wrought in the stone work, round about both within and without, the figure or
likeness of a vine with Clusters of Grapes amongst the leaves etc.

The next is Salisbery court a place so called, for that it belonged to the
Bishops of Salisbery, The B. of Salisbery his house.
and was their Inn, or London house at such time as they were summond to come
to the Parliament, or came for other business, it has of late time been the
dwelling, first of Sir Richard Sakeuile, and now of Sir Thomas Sakeuile, his
son Baron of Buckhurst, one of her Majesty's most honorable Counsel.

Then is Water lane Water lane.
running down by the west side of a house called the hanging sword to the
Thames.

Then was the white Friars White Friars.
church called Fratres beatae Mariae de monte Carmeli, first founded (says
John Bale) by Richard Gray Auncestor to the Lord Gray Codnor, in the year
1241. King Edward the first gave to the Prior and Brethren of that house a
plot of ground, in Fleetestreete, whereupon to build their house, which was
since reedified or new builded, by Hugh Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, about
the year 1350. the 24. of Edward the third, John Lufken Mayor of London, and
the Comminalty of the City granted a lane called Crockars lane, Crokars lane
reaching from Fleetestreete so the Thames to build in the west end of that
Church, Sir Robert Knoles knight was a great builder there also in the reign
of Richard the second and of Henry the fourth, he deceased at his Manor of
Scone Thorp in Norfolk, in the year 1407. and was brought to London, and
honorably buried by the Lady Constance his wife, in the body of the said White
Friars church, which he had newly builded.

Robert Marshall Bishop of Hereforde, builded the Quire, Presbetery steeple,
and many other parts, and was there buried about the year 1420. there lies
buried also in the new Quire Sir John Mowbery Earl of Nottingham, Sir Edward
Courtney. Sir Hugh Mongomery, and Sir John his Brother, John VVolle, son to
Sir John Wolle, Thomas Bayholt Esquier, Elizabeth Countis of Athole, Dame Johan
wife to Sir Thomas Say of Alden, Sir Pence Castle Baron, John Lord Gray son to
Regnalde L. Gray of Wilton, 1418. Sir John Ludlow knight, Sir Richard Derois
knight, Richard Gray knight, John Ashley knight, Robert Bristow Esquier,
Thomas Perry Esquier, Robert Tempest Esquier, William Call, William Neddow.

In the old Quier, lie Dame Margaret etc. Elienor Gristles, Sir John Brown
knight, and John his son and heir, Sir Simon de Berforde knight, Peter Wigus
Esquier, Robert Matthew Esquier, Sir John Skargel knight, Sir John Norice
knight, Sir Geffrey Roose knight, Matthew Hadocke Esquier, William Clarel
Esquier, John Aprichard Esquier, William Wentworth Esquier,. Thom. Wicham
Esquier, Sir Terwhit knight, Sir Stephen Popha^ knight, Bastard de Scales,
Henry Blunt Esquier, Elizabeth Blunt, John Swan Esquier, Alice Fostar one of y^
heirs of Sir Stephen Popham, Sir Robert Brocker, knight, John Drayton Esquier,
John son to Robert Chanlowes, and his daughter Katherine, John Saluin Esquier,
William Hampton Esquier, John Bampton, Esquier, John Wintar Esquier, Edmond
Oldhall, William Appleyarde Esquier, Thomas Dabby Esquier, Sir Hugh Courtney
knight, John Drury son to Robert Drury, Elizabeth Gemersey Gentlewoman, Sir
Thomas Townesend knight, Sir Richard Green knight, William Scot Esquier,
Thomas Federinghey, I. Fulforde Esquier, Edward Eldsmere Gentleman, W. Heart
Gentleman, Dame Mary Senelare, daughter to Sir Thomas Talbot knight, Ancher
Esquier, Sir William Moris knight, and Dame Christian his wife, Sir Peter, de
Mota knight, Richard Hewton Esquier, Sir I. Heron knight, Richard Eaton
Esquier, Hugh Stapleton Gentleman, William Copley Gentleman, Sir Ralph
Saintwen knight, Sir Hugh Bromeflete, knight, Lord Vessey principal founder of
that order, the sixth of Edward the fourth, etc.

This house was valued at 62.^.7.^.3.^. and was surrendered the tenth of
November, the 30. of Henry the eight.

In place of this Friars church be now many fair houses builded, lodginges
for noble men and others. Then is the Sarieantes Inn, Sarieants Inn in
Fleetstreete.
so called for that diverse Judges and Sarieantes at the Law, keep a Commons,
and are lodged there in Term times. Next is the New Temple, New Temple.
so called because the Templars before the building of this house, had their
Temple in Oldborne. This house was founded by the knights Templars in England,
in the reign of Henry the second, and the same was dedicated to God and our
blessed Lady, by Heraclius, Patriarch of the Church, called the holy
resurrection in Iherusalem, in the year of Christ, 1185.

These knights Templars Original of the Thmplars.
took their beginning about the year 1118. in manner following. Certain
noble men, horsemen, religiously bent, bound by vow themselves in the hands of
the Patriarch of Iherusalem, to serve Christ after the manner of Regular
Chanons in chastity and obedience, and to renounce their own proper wills for
ever: she first of which order were Hugh Paganus, and Geffery de S. Andomare.
And whereas at the first they had no certain habitation, Baldwin king of
Jerusalem, granted unto them a dwelling place in his Palace, by the Temple,
and the Chanons of the same Temple, gave them the street thereby to build
there in their houses of office, and the Patriarch, the king, the Nobles, and
Prelates: gave unto them certain revenues out of their Lordshippes.

Their first profession Profession of the Templars.
was for safegarde of the Pilgrims coming to visit the Sepulcher and to
keep the high ways against the lying in wait of Thieves, etc. About ten
years after they had a rule appointed unto them, and a white Habit by
Honorius then Pope, and whereas they had been but nine in number, they began
to increase greatly. Afterward in Pope Eugenius time, they bare crosses of red
cloth on their uppermost garments, to be known by from others: and in short
time because they had their first mansion hard by the Temple of our Lord in
Jerusalem, they were called knights of the Temple.

Many noble men in all parts of Christendom, became Brethren of this order,
and builded for themselves Temples in every city or great Town. In England
this was their cheise house, which they builded after the form of the Temple,
near to the sepulcher of our Lord at Jerusalem, Matthew Par^s.
they had also an other Temple in Cambridge, one other in Bristow, in
Canterbury, Dover, Warwick, and others in other places. This Temple in London,
was often made a storehouse of men's Treasure, I mean such as feared the spoil
there of in other places.

Matthew Paris notes that in the year 1232. Huberte de Burgh Earl of Kent,
being Prisoner in the Tower of London, the king was informed that he had much
Treasure laid up in his new Temple, under the custody of the Templars,
whereupon he sent for the master of the Temple, and examined him straightly,
who confessed that money being delivered unto him and his Brethren to be kept,
he knew not how much there was of it, the king demanded to have the same
delivered, but it was answered that the money being committed unto their trust,
could not be delivered without the license of him that committed it, to
Ecclesiastical protection, whereupon the king sent his Treasurer and Iusticiar
of the Exchequer unto Hubert to require him to resign the money wholly into his
hands, who answered that he would gladly submit himself, and all his unto the
kings pleasure, and thereupon desired the knights of the Temple in his
behalf to present all the keys unto the king^ to do his pleasure, with the
goods which he had committed unto them. Then the king commanded the money to
be faithfully told and laid up in his Treasure, by Inventory, wherein was
found (besides ready money) vessels of gold, and silver vnpraiseable, and many
pretio^s stones which would make al men wonder, if they knew the worth of the^.

This Temple was again dedicated 1240. belike also newly reedified then.

These Templars at this time were in so great glory, that they entertained the
Nobility, foreign Ambassadors, and the Prince himself, very often, insomuch
that Matthew Paris cries out on them for their Pride, who being at the first so
poor, as they had but one horse to serve two of them, (in toke^ whereof they
gave in their Seal, Seal of the Templars.
two men riding upon one horse,) yet suddenly they waxed so insolent, that
they disdayned other orders, and sorted themselves with Noble men.

King Edward the first in the year 1163. taking with him Robert Waleran, and
other came to the Temple, where calling for the Keeper of the Treasure house,
as if he meant to see his mothers Jewels, that were laid up there, to be
safely kept he entered into the house, breaking the Coffers of certain persons
that had likewise brought their money thither, and he took away from thence
to the value of a thousand pound.

Many Parliamentes Parliament at the New Temple.
and great Counsels have been there kept as may appear by our histories. In
the year 1308. all the Templars in England as also in other parts of
Christendom were apprehended and committed to diverse prisons, In 1310. a
provincial Counsel was holden at London against the Templars, in England,
upon heresy, and other Articles whereof they were accused, but denied all
except one or two of them, notwithstanding they all did confess that they
could not purge themselves fully, as faultles, and so they were condemned to
perpetual penance, in several monasteries, where they behaved themselves
modestly.

Phillip king of France procured their overthrow, throughout the whole world,
and caused them to be condemned The order of Templars condemned.
by a general Counsel to his advantage, as he thought, for he believed to
have had all their lands in France, and therefore seized the same into his
hands, (as I have read) caused the Templars to the number of four and fifty,
(or after Fabian threescore) to be burned at Templars burned.
Paris.

Edward 2. in the year 1313, gave unto Aimor de Valence, Earl of Penbrooke,
Robert Fabian.
the whole place and houses called the New Temple at London, with the ground
called Ficquetes Croft, Pae^nt.
and all the Tenementes and Rentes with the Appurtenances that belonged to the
Templars in the City of London, and Suburbs thereof.

After Aimer de Valence The Temple given to Aimer de Valynce.
(says Some) Hugh Spencer, usurping the same held it during his life, by
whose death it came again to the hands of Edward the third, but in the
mean time to wit, 1324. by a Counsel holden at Vienna, all the lands of the
Templars (least the same should be put to profane uses) were given to the
knights Hospitelars of the order of S. John Baptist, called S. John of
Iherusalem, Temple given to the Hospitalers of S. John of Jerusalem.
which knights had put the Turk out of the Isle of Rhodes, and after wan upon
the said Turk daily for a long time.

The said Edward the third therefore granted the same to the said knights,
Patent 2. E 3.
who possessed it, Clase, 18. E. 3.
and in the eighteenth year of the said kings reign, were forced to repair
the Bridge of the said Temple. These knights had their head house for England
by West Smithfielde, and they in the reign of the same Edward the third
granted (for a certain rent of x.pound by the year) the said Temple, The
Temple granted to the Students of the Law and made an Inn of Court.
with the appertenants thereunto adjoining, to the students of the common Laws
of England: in whose possession the same has ever sithence remained, and is
now divided into 2. houses of several students, by the name of Innes of Court,
to wit, the Inner Temple and the Middle Temple, who keep two several Hals,
but they resort al to y^ said Temple Church, in the round walk whereof (which
is the West part without the Quire) there remains monuments Monuments in the
Temple Images of knights buried cross legged the cause why.
of Noble men there buried, to the number of xi.eight of them are Images of
armed Knights, v.lying cross legged, as men vowed to the holy land, against
the infidels and vnbeleeueing Jews: the other three straight legged: the rest
are coaped stones all of gray Marble: the first of the cross legged was
William Marshall the elder Earl of Pembroke, who died 1219. William Marshall,
his son Earl of Penbroke was the second, he died 1231. and Gilbert Marshall
his Brother, Earl of Penbroke, slain in a Turnement of Hertford, besides
Ware, twenty miles from London, was the third he died in the year 1241.

After this Robert Rose, otherwise called Fursan, being made a Templar in the
year 1245. dyed and was buried there, and these are all that I can remember to
have read of. Sir Nicholas Hare, Master of the Roles was buried there in the
year, 1557.

In the year 1581. the Rebels of Essex, and of Kent, destroyed and plucked
down the houses and lodginges of this Temple, took out of the Church the
books and Records Records of the Temple destroyed and burnt.
that were there in Hutches, of the Apprentizes of the Law, carried them into
the streets, and there brent them, the house they spoiled and brent for wrath,
that they bare Sir Robert Halles Lord Prior of S. John's in Smithfielde, but it
was since again at diverse times repaired, namely the gate house Gate house of
the Temple new builded.
of the Middle Temple in the r^igne of Henry the eight by Sir Amias Paulet
knight, upon occasion as in my Annals I have showed. The great hall Great
hall of the Temple new builded.
of the Middle Temple, was new builded in the year 1572. in the reign of our
Queen Elizabeth.

This Temple Church has a Master, and four Stipendarie, Priests, with a
Clarke, these for the ministration of divine service Order for divine service
in the Temple
there, have stipendes allowed unto them, out of the possessions and revenues
of the late Hospital and house of S. John's of Jerusalem in England, as it had
been in the reign of Edward the sixth, and thus much for the said New Temple
the farthest west part of this ward, and also of this City for the Liberties
thereof, which ward has an Alderman, and his Deputies three: In Sepulchers
parish common Counsel six, Constables four, Scauengers four, Wardmote
inquest twelve: S. Bridgetes parish, common Counselors eight, Constables
eight, Scauengers eight, Wardmote inquest, twenty: in S. Androwes common
Council two, Constables two, Scauengers three, Wardmote inquest twelve. It is
taxed to the fifteen in London, at 35.^. and in the Exchequer at 34.^.^0.^.

Bridge ward without (the 26. in number) consisting of the Borough of
Southwarke in the County of Surrey.
Having treated of Wards Bridge ward without.
in London, on the North side the Thames (in number 25.) I am now to cross
over the said River into the Borough of Southwarke, which is also a Ward of
London, without the walls, on the south side thereof, as is Portsoken on the
East, and Faringdon extra on the West.

This Borough being in the county of Surrey, consists of diverse streets,
ways, and winding lanes, all full of buildings, inhabited: and first to begin
at the West part thereof, over against the West suburb of the City.

On the bank of the river Thames, there is now a continual building of
tenementes, about half a mile in length to the bridge. Then from the bridge
straight toward the South a continual street, called long Southwarke,
builded on both sides with diverse lanes and alleyes up to S. Georges church,
and beyond it through Blackman street, toward new town, (or Newington) the
liberties of which Borough extend almost to the parish Church of New town,
aforesaid distant one mile from London bridge: and also Southwest almost to
Lambith more then one mile from the said bridge. Then from the bridge along by
the Thames Eastwardes is S. Olaues street S. Olaues street.
having continual building on both the sides, with lanes and alleyes up to
Battle bridge, to Horsedowne, and toward Rother hith: also some good half
mile in length from London bridge.

So that I account the whole continual buildings on the bank of the said
river, from the West toward the East to be more then a large mile in length.

Then have ye from the entering toward the said Horsedowne one other
continual street called Bermondes eye street, which stretches South,
likewise furnished with buildings on both sides, almost half a mile in length,
up to the late dissolved Monastery of S. Savior called Bermondsey. And from
thence is one long lane (so called of the length) turning West to Saint Georges
church before named. Out of the which late mentioned long lane breaks one
other street toward the South, and by East, and this is called Kentish
street, for that it is the way leading into that country: and so have you the
bounds of this Borough.

The Antiquities most notable in this Borough are these: first for
ecclesiastical, there was Beremondsey, an Abbey An Abbey.
of black Monks, S. Mary Oueries, a Priorie A Priorie.
of Channons Regular, S. Thomas a college or Hospital A college and
Hospital.
for the poor, and the Look a Lazar house in Kent street. Parish churches A
lazar house Parish churches.
there have been 6. whereof 5. do remain viz. S. Mary Magdalens in the Priorie
of S. Mary Ouerie. Now the same S. Marie Ouery is the parish Church for the
said Mary Magdalen, and for S. Margaret on the hill, and is called S. Savior.

S. Margaret on the hill being put down, is now a Court for Justice, S. Thomas
in the Hospital serves for a parish Church as before. S. George a parish
church as before it did: so does S. Olaue, and S. Mary Magdalen by the Abbey
of Bermondsey.

There be also these five prisons or gaoles.

The Clinke on the bank.

The Compter in the late parish Church of S. Margaret.

The Marshalsey.

The Kings Bench.

And the White Lion, all in long Southwarke.

Houses most notable be these.

The Bishop of Winchesters house.

The Bishop of Rochesters house.

The Duke of Suffolkes house, or Southwarke place.

The Tabard, an Hosterie or Inn.

The Abbot of Hyde his house.

The Prior of Jews his house.

The Abbot of S. Augustine his house.

The Bridge house.

The Abbot of Battle his house.

Battle bridge.

The Stews on the bank of the Thames.

And the Bear gardens there.

Now to return to the West bank, there be the two Bearegardens, The bear
Gardens.
the old and new places wherein be kept Bears, Bulls, and other beasts, to
be bayted. As also Mastiues in several kenels are there nourished to bait
them. These Bears and other beasts are there bayted in plottes of ground,
scaffolded about for the beholders to stand safe.

Next on this bank was sometime the Bordello (or Stews) a place so called,
Liber mane script.
of certain stew The stew on the bank side.
houses privileged there, for the repair of incontinent men to the like women
of the which privilege, I have read thus.

In a Parliament holden at Westminster the 8. of Henry the second, it was
ordained by the commons and confirmed, by the King and Lords, that diverse
constitutions for ever should be kept within that Lordship or franchise,
according to the old customs that had been there used time out of mind.
Amongst the which, these following were some, viz. That no stewholder or his
wife should let or stay any single woman to go and come freely at all times
when they listed.

No stewholder to keep any woman to board, but she to board abroad at her
pleasure.

To take no more for the woman's chamber in the week then fourteen pence.

Not to keep open his doors upon the holy days.

Not to keep any single woman in his house on the holy days, but the Bailiefe
to see them voided out to the Lordship.

No single woman to be kept against her will that would leave her sin.

No stewholder to receive any woman of religion, or any man's wife.

No single woman to take money to lie with any man, but she lie with him all
night till the morrow.

No man to be drawn or enticed into any stewhouse.

The Constables, Bailife, and others every week to search every stewhouse.

No Stewholder to keep any woman that has the perilous infirmity of
burning, nor to sell bread, ale, flesh, fish, wood, coal or any victuailes,
etc.

These and many more orders were to be observed, upon great pain and
punishment: I have also seen diverse Pattents of confirmation, ^^s. Mary ^bor^m.
namely one dated 1345. the nineteenth of Edward the third. Also I find that in
the fourth of Rychard the second, these Stewhouses belonging to William
VValworth then Mayor of London, were farmed by Froes of Flaunders, English
people disdained ^o be baudes: ^roes of Flau^^ers were women^ for that ^urpose.
and were spoiled by Walter Teighler, and other rebels of Kent:
Notwithstanding I find that ordinances for the the same place, and houses were
again confirmed in the reign of Henry the sixth to be continued as before.
Also Robert Fabian Robert Fabian.
writes that in the year 1506. the 21. of Henry the seventh, the said
stewehouses Stewhouses ^ut down by Henry the 7. ^or a time.
in Southwarke were for a season inhibited, and the doors closed up, but it was
not long (says he) ere the houses there were set open again for so many as
were permitted, for (as it was said) whereas before were eighteen houses, from
thenceforth were appointed to be used but twelve only. These allowed
stewhouses had signs Signs on the stewhouses.
on their frontes, toward the Thames, not hanged out, but painted on the
walls, as a Bears head, the Cross Keys, the Gunne, the Castle, the Crane,
the Cardinals Hatte, the Bell, the Swanne, etc. I have heard ancient men of
good credit report, that these single women were forbidden the rightes of the
Church, Single women ^orbidden ^ightes of the church.
so long as they continued that sinful life, and were excluded from Christian
burial, if they were not reconciled before their death. And therefore there
was a plot of ground, (called the single woman's Churchyard) appointed for them,
far from the parish Church.

In the year of Christ 1546. the 37. of Henry the eight, this row of stews in
Southwarke was put down Stewhouses put down.
by the kings commandment, which was proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, no more
to be privileged, and used as a common Bordell, but the inhabitants of the
same to keep good and honest rule as in other places of this realm etc.

Then next is the Clinke, a Gayle or prison for the trespassers in those parts,
Namely in old time for such as should brabble, frey, break the peace on the
said bank, or in the Brothell houses, they were by the inhabitants there about
apprehended, and committed to this Gayle, where they were straightly imprisoned.

Next is the Bishop of Winchesters house, Wincheste house.
or lodging, when he comes to this City: which house was first builded by
William Gifford, Bishop of Winchester, about the 1107. the seventh of Henry
the first, upon a plot of ground pertaining to the Prior of Bermondsey, as
appears by a writ directed unto the Barons of the Exchequer, in the year
one thousand three hundred sixty six, the one and fortieth year of Edward
the third, (the Bishops Sea being void) for 8. ^. due to the Monks
Bermondsey, for the Bishop of Winchesters lodging in Southwarke. This is a very
fair house well repaired, and has a large wharfe and landing place called the
Bishop of Winchesters stairs.

Adjoining to this on the South side thereof is the Bishoop of Rochesters
Rochester house.
Inn or lodging by whom first erected, I do not now remember me to have
read, but well I wot the same of long time has not been frequented by any
Bishop, and lies ruinous for lack of reparations.

East from the Bishop of Winchesters house directly over against it, stands a
fair Church, called Saint Mary, over the Rye, or Ouerie, S. Mary Oue^ ries a
Priorie, and now a parish church
that is over the water. This Church or some other in place thereof was of old
time (long before the conquest) an house of sisters, founded by a maiden named
Mary, unto the which house and sisters she left (as was left to her by her
parents) the oversight, and profits of a cross ferrie or trauerse ferrie
over the Thames, there kept before that any bridge was builded. This house of
sisters was after by Swithen, a noble Lady, converted unto a College of
Priests, who in place of the ferrie builded a bridge of timber, and from time
to time kept the same in good reparations, but lastly the same bridge was
builded of stone, and then was this church again founded for Channons Regular,
by William Pont de le Arche, and William Dauncy, Knights, Normans.

William Gifford Bishop of Winchester was a good benefactor also: for he (as
some have noted) builded the body of that church in the years 1106. the
seventh of Henry the first.

The Cannons first entered the said Church then. Liber Rufen. Liber Bermondsey.


King Henry the first by his Charter gave them the church of S. Margaret in
Southwarke.

King Stephen confirmed the gift of king Henry, and also gave the stone house,
which was Williams de Pont le Arche by Downegate.

This Priorie was burned about the year 1207. wherefore the Chanons did found
an Hospital near unto their Priorie, where they celebrated until the Priorie
was repaired: which Hospital was after by consent of Peter de la Roch Bishop
of Winchester removed into the land of Anicius Archdeacon of Surrey in the
year 1228. a place where the water was more plentiful, and the air more
wholesome, and was dedicate to S. Thomas.

This Peter de Rupibus, S. Thomas Hospital.
or de la Roche founded a large chapel of S. Mary Magdalen Parish church of
S. Mary Magdalen.
in the said Church of S. Mary Ouery, which Chapel was after appointed to be
the parish church for the inhabitants near adjoining.

This Church was again newly builded, in the reign of Richard the second and
King Henry the fourth.

John Gower John Gower was no knight neither had he any garland of Iuie and
Roses but a Chaplet of four Roses only.
a learned Gentleman and a famous Poet, (but no knight as some have mistaken
it) was then as especial benefactor to that work, and was there buried on the
North side of the said church under a tomb of stone, with his image also of
stone lying over him: The hair of his head aburne, long to his sholders, but
curling up, a small forked bearde, and on his head a chaplet, like a Coronet of
four Roses, thereupon an habit of purple, damasked down to his feet, a
collar of Esses gold about his neck, under his head the likeness of three
books, which he compiled. The first named Speculum Meditantis, written in
French: The second Vox clamantis penned in Latin. The third Confessio Amantis,
set forth in English.

This Priorie was surrendered to Henry the eight, the 31. of his reign, the 27.
of October, the year of Christ 1539. and was valued at 624. pound, six
shillinges six pence by the year. About Christmasse next following, the
church of the said Priorie was purchased of the King by the inhabitants of
the Borough. Doctor Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester putting to his
helping hand, they made thereof a parish church, Priorie of S. Marie Ouery
made a parish church.
for the parish church of S. Mary Magdalen, on the south side of the said
quire, and of S. Margaret on the hill which were made one parish of S. Savior.

There be monumentes in this Church of Robert Liliarde or Hiliarde Esquire,
Margaret daughter to the Lady Audley, wife to Sir Thomas Audley, Margaret wife
to William Greuell Esquire, and one of the heirs of William Spershut Esquire,
William Greuel Esquire, Dame Katherine wife to John Stoke Alderman, Robert
Merfin Esquire, William Vndall Esquire, Lord Ospay Ferrar, Sir George Brewes
Knight, John Brown, Lady Brandon, wife to Sir Thomas Brandon, William Lord
Scales, William Earl Warren, Dame Maud wife to Sir John Peach, Lewknor, Dame
Margaret Elrington, one of the heirs of Sir Thomas Elrington, John Bowden
Esquire, Robert, S. Magill, John Sandhurst, John Gower Poet, John Sturton
Esquire, Robert Rouse.

Now passing through S. Mary Ouers close, S. Mary Ouers Close.
(in possession of the Lord Mountacute) and Pepper Alley Pepper Alley.
into long Southwarke, on the right hand thereof the Market hill, where the
leather is sold, there stood the late named parish church of S. Margaret, S.
Margaret on the hill made a Court of Justice.
given to S. Mary Oueries by Henry the first, put down and joined with the
parish of S. Mary Magdaline, and united to the late dissolved Priorie church of
S. Mary Ouery.

A part of this parish church of S. Margaret is now a Court, and wherein the
Assizes and sessions be kept, and the Court of Admiraltie Court of Admiraltie.
is also there kept. One other part of the same church is now a prison called
the Compter in Southwarke, Compter in Southwarke.
etc.

Farther up on that side, almost directly over against S. Georges church was
sometime a large and most sumptuous house, builded by Charles Brandon late Duke
of Suffolk, in the reign of Henry the eight, which was called Suffolk house,
Suffolk house
but coming afterward into the Kings hands, the same was called Southwarke
place, and a Mint A mint in Southwarke.
of coynage was there kept for the king.

To this place came king Edward the sixth, in the second of his reign, from
Hampton Court, and dined in it. He at which time made John York one of the
Sheriffs of London knight, and then rode through the city to Westminster.

Queen Mary gave this house to Nicholas Heth Archbishop of York, and to his
successors for ever, so be their Inn (or lodging for their repair to London
in recompense of York house near to Westminster, which King Henry her father
had taken from Cardinal Wolsey, and from the sea of York.

Archbishop Heth has sold the same house to a merchant, or to certain
merchants, that pulled it down, sold the lead, stone, iron etc. And in place
thereof builded many small cottages of great rents, to the increasing of beggars
in that Borough. The Archbishop bought Norwich house, or Suffolk place, near
unto Charing Cross, because it was near unto the Court, and left it to his
successors. Now on the south side to return back again toward the bridge.
Over against this Suffolk lane is the parrish Church of S. George, Parish
church of S. George.
sometime pertaining to the Priorie of Barmondsey, by the gift of Thomas
Arderne, and Thomas his son, in the year 1122. There lie buried in this
Church William Kerton Esquire, and his wives 1464.

Then is the white Lion a Jail White Lion a Jail for Surrey.
so called, for that the same was a common hosterie for the receipt of
travelers by that sign: This house was first used as a Jail within these
forty years last, since the which time the prisoners were once removed thence
to an house in Newtowne, where they remained for a short time, and were
returned back again to the foresaid White Lion, there to remain as in the
appointed Jail for the County of Surrey.

Next is the Jail or prison of the kings Benche, Kings Bench.
but of what antiquity the same is I know not. For I have read that the
Courts of the Kings Bench and Chauncery have often times been removed from
London to other places, and so has likewise the Gayles that serve those
courts, as in the year 1304, Edward the first commanded the Courts of the
kings Bench and the Exchequer, which had remained seven years at York, to be
removed to their old places at London. And in the year 1387. the 11. of
Richard the 2. Robert Trasilian chief Justice came to y^ city of Couentry, and
there sat by the space of a month, as Justice of the kings Benches, and
caused to be indighted in that Court, about the number of two thousand persons
of that country, etc. H. Kinghlon.


It seems therefore, that for that time, the prison or gayle of that court
was not far off. Also in the year 1392. the sixteenth of the same Richard,
the Archbishop of York, being Lord Chauncelor, for good will that he bare to
his city, caused the Kings Bench and Chauncery to be removed from London to
York, but ere long they were returned to London.

Then is the Marshalsey Marshalsey in Southwarke.
an other Gayle or prison, so called, as pertaining to the Marshalles of
England. Of what continuance kept in Southwarke I have not learned: but like
it is, that the same has been remoueable, at the pleasure of the Marshalles:
for I find, that in the year, one thousand three hundred seventy six, the
fiftieth of Edward the third, Henry Percy (being Marshall) kept his prisoners
in the city of London, where having committed one John Prendargest, of
Norwiche, contrary to the liberties of the City of London, the citizens (by
persuasion of the Lord Fitzwalter their Standart-bearer) took Armor and ran
with great rage to the Marshalles Inn, brake up the gates, brought out the
prisoner, and conveyed him away, minding to have brent the Stocks in the
midst of their city, but they first sought for sir Henry Percy to have
punished him, as I have noted in my Annalles.

More, about the Feast of Easter next following, John Duke of Lancaster, having
caused all the whole Navy of England, to be gathered together at London: It
chanced a certain Esquire, to kill one of the ship men, which act, the other
shipmen taking in ill part, they brought their suite into the kings court of
the Marshalsey, which then as chaunsed (says mine Author) was kept in
Southwarke: but when they perceived that Court to be too favorable to the
murderer, and further, that the Kings warrant was also gotten for his pardon,
they in great fury ran to the house, wherein the murderer was imprisoned,
brake into it, Sailors brake up the Marshalsey.
and brought forth the prisoner, with his Gyues on his legs: then thrust they
a knife to his heart, and sticked him, as if he had been a Hog, then after
this, they tied a rope to his Gyues, and drew him to the gallows, where when
they hanged him, as though they had done a great act, they caused the
Trompettes to be sounded before them to their Ships, and there in great
triumph they spent the rest of the day.

Also the Rebels of Kent, Rebels of Kent brake up the Marshalsey.
in the year 1381. brake down the houses of the Marshalsey, and Kings Bench
in Southwarke, took from thence the prisoners, brake down the house of Sir
John Imworth, then Marshall of the Marshalsey, and Kings Bench, etc. After
this, in the year, 1387. the eleventh of Richard the second, the morrow after
Bartholomewe day, the King kept a great Council in the Castle of Nottingham,
and the Marshalsey of the King, was then kept at Lugborough, by the space of
six days or more. In the year 1443. Sir Walter Many was Marshall of the
Marshalsey, the twenty two of Henry the sixth. In the year 1504 the prisoners
of the Marshalsey (then in Southwarke) brake out, and many of them being
taken, were executed, especially such as had been committed for Felony or
Treason. From thence, toward London Bridge, on the same side, be many fair
Innes, for receipt of travelers, by these signs: the Spur, Christopher,
Bull, Queens head, Tabarde, The Tabarde in Southwarke.
George, Heart, Kings head, etc. Amongst the which, the most ancient, is the
Tabard, so called of the sign, which (as we now term it) is of a Iacquit, or
sleeuel^sse coat, whole before, open on both sides, with a square collor,
winged at the shoulders: a stately garment of old time, commonly worn of
Noble men and others, both at home and abroad in the Wars, but then (to
wit in the wars) their Arms embrodered, or otherwise depicte upon them,
that every man by his Coat of Arms might be known from others: but now
these Tabardes are only worn by the Heraults, and be called their coats of
Arms in service: For the Inn of the Tabard, Geffrey Chauser Geffrey Chauser.
Esquire, the most famous Poet of England, in commendation thereof, in the
reign of E. the 3. writes thus.

It befell in that season, on a day,
In Southwarke at the Tabart, as I lay,
Ready to wend on my Pilgrimage,
To Canterbury, with full devout courage:
That night was comen into the Hosterie,
Well nine and twenty, in a company:
Of sundry folk, by adventure yfall,
In fellowship, and Pilgrims were they all,
That toward Canterbury, woulden ride,
The stables and chambers, weren wide
And well we were eased, at the best, etc.
Within this Inn was also the lodging of the Abbot of Hide, The Abbot of Hide
his lodging.
(by the City of Winchester) a fair house for him and his train, when he
came to the city to Parliament, etc.

Then next have ye the Hospital of Saint Thomas, Hospital of S. Thomas.
first founded by Richard Pryor of Bermondsey, in the Selerars ground against
the wall of the Monastery, in the year, 1213. he named it the Almerie, or
house of Alms, for conuarts and poor children, for the which ground, the
Pryor ordained that the Almoner should pay ten shillings four pence yearly
to the Selerar at Michaelmas.

Peter de Rupibous, S. Thomas Hospital the second time founded.
Bishop of Winchester, for Cannons, Regular, in place of the first Hospital:
he increased the rent thereof, to three hundredth forty four pound by the
year: thus was this Hospital holden of the Pryor and Abbot of Bermondsey,
till the year, one thousand four hundred twenty eight, at which time a
composition was made between Thomas Thetforde, Abbot of Bermondsey, and
Nicholas Buckland, Master of the said Hospital of Saint Thomas, for all the
lands and Tenements which were holden, of the said Abbot and Covent in
Southwarke, or elsewhere, for the old Rent to be paid unto the said Abbot
and Covent.

There be the Monuments in this Hospital Church, of Sir Robert Chamber
Knight, William Fnes, Lord Say, Richard Chaunar Esquire, John Gloucestar
Esquire, Adam Atwoode Esquire, John Ward Esquire, Michaell Cambridge Esquire,
Will. West Esquire: John Golding Esquire: John Benham Gentleman: George Kirks
gentleman: Thomas Knynton gentleman: Thomas Baker Gentleman: Robert son to
sir Thomas Fleming: Agnes Wife to Sir Walter Dennis Knight, daughter and one of
the h^ires of Sir Robet Danvars: John Euarey Gentleman, etc.

This Hospital being in the year 1220. made to dispend three hundred forty
four pound by the year, was by the visitors, in the year 1538. valued at
266. pound seventeen shillings 6. pence, and was surrendered to Henry the 8. in
the thirtieth of his reign. In the year 1552. the citizens of London, having
purchased the void suppressed Hospital, of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, in the
month of July, began the reparations thereof, for poor, impotent, lame, and
diseased people, so that in the month of November next following, the sick
and poor people, were taken in. The 3. foundation of S. Thomas Hospital, by
the Cititizens of London.
And in the year 1553. on the tenth of April, King Edward the sixth, in the
seventh of his reign, gave to the Mayor, Communaltie, and citizens of London,
to be a workehouse for the poor and idle persons of the city, his house of
Bride-well, and seven hundred Marks lands, of the Sauoy rents (which Hospital
he had suppressed) with all the beds, bedding, and other furniture belonging
to the same, toward the maintenance of the said workehouse of Bridewell, and
of this Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwarke. Gift of E. the 6. to the
Hospital of S. Thomas in Southwarke.
This gift, the King confirmed by his Charter, dated the twenty six of June,
next following, and willed it to be called the Kings Hospital in Southwarke.

The Church of this Hospital, which of old time served for the Tenements
near adjoining and pertaining to the said Hospital, remains now as it was
before, a parish church.

But now to come to Saint Olaues street: on the Bank of the river of Thames,
is the parish church of Saint Olaue, S. Thomas a parish church. S. Olaues
street and parish church.
a fair and meetely large church, but a far larger Parrish, especially of
Aliens or Strangers, and poor people: in which Church, there lies intombed,
Sir John Burcettur Knight, 1466.

Over against this Parish Church, on the South side the Street, was sometime
one great house builded of Stone, with arched gates, pertained to the Prior of
Jews Prior of lewe his Inn.
in Suffex, and was his lodging when he came to London: it is now a common
hostery for travelers, and has to sign, the Walnut-tree. Then East from the
said Parish church of Saint Olaue, is a Keye, In the year, 1330. by the
license of Simond Swanlond, Mayor of London, builded by Isabell widow to Hamond
Goodchepe. And next thereunto, was then a great house, of stone and timber,
belonging to the Abbot of Saint Augustine, Abbot of Augustins Inn.
without the walls of Canterbury, which was an ancient piece of work, and
seems to be one of the first builded houses on that side the river, over
against the city: It was called y^ Abbots Inn of S. Augustine in Southwarke,
and was sometime holden, of the Earls of Warren and Surrey, as appears by a
deed, made 1281. which I have read, and may be Englished thus. Will. Thorn.


To all to whom this present writing shall come, John Earl Warren, sends
greeting. Know ye, that we have altogether remised, and quite claymed for us
and our heirs for ever, to Nicholas Abbot of Saint Augustines of Canterbury,
and the Covent of the same, and their successors, suite to our court of
Southwarke, which they owe unto us, for all that Message and houses thereon
builded, and all their appurtenances, which they have of our Fee in Southwarke,
situate upon the Thames, between the Bridge-house, and church of Saint Olaue.
And the said Message, with the buildings thereon builded, and all their
appurtenances to them and their successors, we have granted in perpetual
alms to hold of us, and our heirs, for the same: saving the service due to
any other persons, if any such be, then to us: and for this remitte and
grant, the said Abbot and covent, have given unto us. 5. shillings of rent
yearly in Southwarke, and have received us and our heirs in all benefices
which shall be in their church for ever. This suite of Court, one William
Graspeis was bound to do to the said Earl, for the said Message: and
heretofore to acquit in all things, the church of Saint Augustine, against the
said Earl.

This house of late time, belonged to Sir Anthony Sentlegar, then to Warham
Sentlegar, etc. And is now called Sentlegar house, Sentlegar house.
but divided into sundry tenements. Next is the Bridgehouse, The Bridge house.
so called as being a Store house, for stone, timber, or whatsoever pertaining
to the building or repairing of London bridge.

This house seems to have taken beginning, with the first founding of the
bridge either of stone or timber: it is a large plot of ground, on the banque
of the River Thames: containing diverse large buildings, for stowage of things
necessary, toward reparation of the said bridge.

There are also diverse Garners, for laying up of Wheat, and other grayners for
service of the City, as need requires. Garners for corn in the Bridge-house.
Moreover there be certain Ouens builded in number ten: of which six be
very large, the other four being but half so big. These were purposely made
to bake out the bread corn of the said Grayners, to the best advantage for
relief of the poor Citizens, when need should require. Sir John Throstone
knight, sometime an Embrotheror, then a Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs, 1516.
gave by his Testament toward the making of these Ouens, two hundredth pound,
which thing was performed by his Executors. Sir John Monday Goldsmith, then
being Mayor: there was of late, for the enlarging of the said Bridge-house,
Ouens in the Bridge house.
taken in, an old Brew House, called Goldings, which was given to the City by
George Monex, sometime^ Mayor, and in place thereof, is now a fair Brew House
new builded, A brew house builded in the Bridge-house.
for service of the City with Beer.

Next, was the Abbotte Battles Inn, Abbot of Bartaile his Inn.
betwixt the Bridge-house, and Battle Bridge, likewise on the banque of the
river of Thames: the walks and gardens thereunto appertaining, on the other
side of the way, before the gate of the said house, and was called the Maze:
There is now an Inn, called the Flower de Luce, for that the sign is three
Flower de Luces. Much other buildings of small tenements are thereon builded,
replenished with strangers and other, for the most part poor people.

Then is Battle bridge, Battle bridge.
so called of Battle Abbey, for that it stands on the ground, and over a
water course (flowing out of Thames) pertaining to that Abbey, and was
therefore both builded and repaired, by the Abbots of that house, as being hard
adjoining to the Abbots lodging.

Beyond this Bridge, is Bermondsey street, Bermondsey street.
turning South, in the South end whereof, was sometime a Pryorie, or Abbey, of
Saint Savior, called Bermonds Eye in Southwarke, founded by Alwin Child, a
citizen of London, in the year, 1081.

Peter, Richard, Obstert, and Vmbalde Monks, de Charitate came unto
Bermondsey, in the year 1089. and Peter was made first Pryor there, by
appointment of the Pryor of the house, called Charity in France: by which
means, this Pryorie of Bermondsey (being a Cell to that in France) was
accounted a Pryorie of Aliens. In the year, 1094. deceased Alwine Child
founder of this house. Then William Rufus gave to the Moonks, his manor of
Bermondsey, with the appurtenances, and builded for them there, a new great
church.

Robert Blewet, Bishop of Lincoln (King Williams Chancellor) gave them the
manor of Charlton, with the appurtenances. Also Geffrey Martell, by the grant
of Geffrey Magdauile, gave them the land of Halingbury, and the tithe of
Alferton, etc.

More, in the year 1122. Thomas of Arderne and Thomas his son, gave to the
Moonks of Bermonds Hide of Southwarke to the Monks of Bermondsey.
Eye, the Church of Saint George in Southwarke, etc. In the year, 1165. King
Henry the second, confirmed to them the hyde or territory of Southwarke, and
Laygham Wadden, with the land of Coleman, etc. In the year 1371. the Pryories
of Aliens, through out England, being seized into the Kings hands, Richard
Denton an English man, was made Prior of Bermondsey: To whom was committed the
custody of the said Pryory, by the letters patents of king E. the 3. saving to
y^ king, the aduowsons of churches. In the year, 1380. the 4. of Richard the
2. this Pryorie was made a Dinison (or free English) for y^ fine of 200.
Bermonds Eye made an Abbey.
Marks, paid to the kings Hanaper in the Chauncery. In the year, 1399. John
Attelborough, Pryor of Bermondsey, was made the first Abbot of that house, by
Pope Boniface the ninth, at the suite of King Richard the second.

In the year, 1417. Thomas Thetforde Abbot of Bermondsey, held a Plea in the
Chauncery against the King, Abbot of Bermondsey held Ple against the King, and
prevailed.
for the manors of Preston, Bermondsey, and Stone, in the County of Summerset,
in the which suite the Abbot prevailed, and recovered against the King.

In the year, 1539. this Abbey was valued to dispend by the year, four
hundred seventy four pound fourteen shillings four pence half penny, and
was surrendered to Henry the eight, the one and thirtieth of his reign: the
Abbey church was then pulled down, by sir Thomas Pope Knight, and in place
thereof, a goodly house builded of stone and timber, now pertaining to the
Earls of Sussex.

There are buried in that church, Sir William Bows knight, and Dame Elizabeth
his wife. Sir Thomas Pikeworth Knight: Dame Anne Audley: George, son to John
Lord Audley. John Winkefield Esquire. Sir Nicholas Blonket knight. Dame
Bridget, wife to William Trussell. Holgraue Baron of the Exchequer, etc.

Next unto this Abbey church, stands a proper church of S. Mary Magdale^,
Pariw Church of Saint Mary Magdalen.
builded by the Pryors of Bermondsey, serving for the resort of the
inhabitants, (tenants to the Pryor, or Abbots near adjoining) there to have
their divine service: this church remains and serves as before, and is called
a Parish church.

Then in Kent street is a Lazer house, The Look a Lazar house in Kent street.
for Leprous people: called the Look in Southwarke: the foundation whereof I
find not. Now having touched diverse principal parts of this Borough, I am to
speak somewhat of government, and so to end.

This Borough upon petition made by the citizens of London, Liberties of
Southwarke, farmed by the Citizens of London.
to Edward the first, in the first year of his reign, was for diverse causes,
by Parliament, granted to them for ever, yielding into the Exchequer the Fee
firm, of ten pound by the year: which grant was confirmed by Edward the 3.
who in y^ third of his reign, gave them license to take a tole toward the
charge of pauing the said Borough with stone. Southwarke first paued.
Henry the fourth confirmed the grant of his predecessors: so did Edward the
4. etc.

But in the year 1550. King Edward the 6. for the sum of six hundredth
forty seven pound two shillings and one penny, paid into his court of
Augmentations, and revenues of his crown, granted to the Mayor and
Communaltie, all his lands and tenements in Southwarke, Liberties of Southwarke
purchased.
except and reserved the capital Message, two mansions called Southwarke
Place, late the Duke of Suffolkes, and all the gardens and lands to the same
appertaining: the Parks and the Message called the Antilope. Moreover, he gave
them the Lordship and Manor of Southwark, The Lordship and Manor of
Southwarke pertaining to the Monastery of Bermondsey.
with all members and rights thereof, late pertaining to the Monastery of
Bermondsey. And all Messuages, places, buildings, rents, Courts, Waffes and
streyes, to y^ same appertaining, in the County of Surrey, except as is before
except. He also granted unto them, his Manor and Borough of Southwarke, The
Kings Manor, Borow of Southwarke.
with all the members, rights and appurtenances, late of the possession of the
Archbishop of Canterbury and his sea, in Southwarke. Moreover for y^ sum of
500. Marks, he granted to y^ said Mayor and Communaltie, and their successors,
in and through the Borough and Town of Southwarke: And in all the Parishes of
S. Savior, S. Olaue, and S. George, and the Parish of S. Thomas Hospital, now
called the Kings Hospital: And elsewhere in the said Town and Borough of
Southwarke, and Kentish street, Bermondsey street, in the Parish of
Newington, All Waiffes and streyes, treasure troue, All fellons goods, etc.
within the Parrishes and precinct aforesaid, etc. The return of writtes,
processes, and warrants, etc. together with a fair in Fair in Southwarke.
the whole Town, for three days: to wit, the 7. 8. and 9. of September,
yearly, with a Court of Pye-powders: A view of Frank pledge, with Attachments,
Arrests, etc. Also to arrest all Fellons, and other Malefactors, within their
precinct, and send them to Ward, and to Newgate. Provided that nothing in that
grant should be prejudicial to the Steward and Marshall of the Kings house.
The same premises to be holden of the Manor of East Greenwitch, in the
County of Kent, by fealty in free socage. Dated at Westminster the 23. day of
April, in the 4. of his reign. All which was also confirmed by Parliament,
etc. And the same year in the Whitson week, in a Court of Aldermen, kept at
the Guild Hall of London, Sir John Aylophe Knight, was sworn the first
Alderman First Alderman of Southwarke.
of the Bridge Ward without, and made up the number of 26. Aldermen of London.
Borough of Southwarke, one of the Wards of London.


This Borough at a subsidy to ye king, yields about 1000. Marks, or 800.
pounds, which is more then any one City in England pay^th, except the City of
London. And also the Muster of men Muster of men in Southwarke
in this Borough, does likewise in number surpass all other cities, except
London. And thus much for the Borough of Southwarke: one of the 26. Wards of
London: which has an Alderman. Deputies 3. and a Bayliffe. Common Council
none. Constables 16. Scauingers 6. Wardmo^e Inquest 20. And is taxed to the
fifteen, at 17.li. 17.s.8.d.

The Suburbs without the Walls of the City, briefly touched. As also without
the Liberties, more at large described.
Having spoken of this city, the original, and increase, by degrees. The
Walls, Gates, Dich, Castles, Towers, Bridges, the Schools and Houses of
learning. Of the Orders and Customs, Sports and Pastimes. Of the honor of
Citizens, and worthiness of the men. And last of all, how the same City. is
divided into parts and Wards. And how the same be bounded. And what Monuments
of antiquity, or Ornaments of building be in every of the^, as also in the
Borough of Southwarke. I am next to speak briefly of the Suburbs, as well
without the gates and walls, as without the Liberties. And of the Monuments in
them.

Concerning the estate of the Suburbs of this City, in the reign of H. the 2.
Eitz Stephens Fitz Stephens.
has these words. Upwards on the West (says he) is the Kings Palace, which
is an incomparable building, rising with a Uawmure and Bulwark. Aloft upon the
river, two miles from the wall of the city, but yet conjoined with a
continual Suburb. On all sides, without the houses of the Suburbs, are the
citizens Gardens and Orchards, planted with trees, both large, sightly, and
adjoining together. On the North side, are pastures, and plain medows, with
brooks running through them, turning water mils, with a pleasant noise. Not
far off, is a great Forest, A well wodded Chase, having good covert for Hearts,
Buckes, Does, Boores, and wild bulls. The corn fields are not of a hungry
sandy mould, but as the fruitful fields of Asia: yielding plentiful
increase, and filling the barnes with corn. There are near London on the
North side, especial wells in the Subburbes, sweet, wholesome, and clear.
Amongst which, Holywell, Clarkenwell, and S. Clemons well, are most famous, and
most frequented, by scholars and youths of y^ city in Summer euenings, when
they walk forth to take the air. Thus far out of Fitz Stephen, for the
Subburbes at that time. Libar albo.
The 2. year of H. the 3. the Forest of Midlesex, and the Warren of Stanes
were disaforested: since the which time, the Subburbs about London has bin
also mightily increased with buildings: for first, to begin in the East, by the
Tower of London, Subburbe with out the Posterne by the Tower of Lon. Wapping in
the Wose.
is the Hospital of S. Kathren, founded by Matilde the Queen, wife to King
Stephen, as is before showed in Porsoken Ward, from this Precinct of Saint
Kathren, to Wapping in the Wose, and Wapping it self, (the usual place of
Execution for the hanging of Pirates and sea Rouers, at the low water mark,
and there to remain, till three Tides had ouerflowed them) and never a house
standing within these forty years, but is now made a continual street, or
rather a filthy straight passage, with Lanes and Allies, of small Tenements
inhabited by Saylors, and Uictuallers, along by the River of Thames, almost to
Radliffe, a good mile from the Tower.

Now on the East side, and by North of the Tower, lies East-Smithfield, Hogs
street, and Tower hill: and East from them both, was the New Abbeycalled
Grace, founded by Edward the third. From thence toward Radliffe, up East
Smithfielde, by Nightingale Lane Nightingale Lane.
(which runs South by the Hermitage, The hermitage by S. Kathre^s. Villa
Estsmith field and Villa de Brambly.
to Wapping) to the manner of Brambley, called in the records of Richard the
second, Vila East Smithfield, and Villa de Brambley.

Not far from thence, of very late, (where of old time, stood the manor of
Shadwell, Manor of Shadwell.
belonging to the Deane of Powles, there have been raised many small Tenements
toward Radliffe: Radliffe.
and Radliffe it self, has bin so increased in building Eastward (in place
where, I have known fair hedges, long rows of Elm, and other trees) that
the same have now taken hold of Lime hurst, Limehurst.
(or Lime host it self) commonly called Lime house, sometime distant a mile
from Radliffe, etc.

Now for Tower hill: Tower Hall without the Walls.
the plain there, is likewise greatly diminished, by incrochments for building
of small tenements, and taking in of garden plots, timbaryars, or what they
list. From this Tower Hill toward Aldegate, (being a long continual street)
amongst other buildings, was that Abbey of Nuns, called the Minorities, or
Minories, whereof I have spoken. And on the other side of that street, lies
the Ditche, without the wall of the City, from the Tower unto Aldegate.

From Aldegate East, Suburb without Aldegate.
again lies a large street, replenished with buildings: to wit, on the North
side, the parish church of Saint Buttolphe, and so other buildings to Hog Lane,
and to the Bars on both the sides. Also without the Bars, both the sides of
the street be pestered with Cotages and Allies, even up to white Chapple
church: and almost half a mile beyond it, into the common field: all which
ought to lie open and free for all men. But this common field, I say, being
sometimes the beauty of this City on that part, is so incroched upon by
building of filthy Cotages, and with other prepesterous like enclosures and
Laystalles, (that notwithstanding all Proclamations and Acts of Parliament made
to the contrary) that in some places it scarce remains a sufficient high way
for the meeting of Carriages and droues of Cattle, much less is there any
fair, pleasant, or wholesome way for people to walk on foot: which is no small
blemish to so famous a city, to have so unsavory and unseemly an entry or
passage thereunto. Now of white Chaple Of white Chapple.
Church somewhat, and the^ back again to Aldegate. This church is as it were a
chapple of ^ase, to the parish of Stebinhithe, and the Parson of Stebinhithe
has the gift thereof: which being first dedicated to the name of God, and the
blessed Uirgin, is now called S. Mary Matfellon, S. Mary Matfellon.
upon this occasion following. About the year 1428. the 6. of King H. the 6. A
devout Widow A devout widow murdered
of that parish had long time cherished, and brought up of Alms, a certain
Frenchman or Briton borne, which most unkindly and cruelly, in a night
murdered the said widow sleeping in her bed, and after fled with such Jewels
and other stuff of hers as he might carry: but he was so freshly pursued, that
for fear he took the church of S. George in Southwarke, and challenged
privilege of Sanctuary there, and so abiured ye Kings land. Then the
Constables (having charge of him) brought him into London, intending to have
conveyed him Eastward) but so soon as he was come into the Parish, where
before he had committed the murder, the wives cast upon him so much filth and
ordure of the street, that (notwithstanding the best resistance made by the
Constables,) they slew him out of hand: And for this fact, that Parish
purchased the name of Mary Mat-fellon. Now again from Algegate, Northwest to
Bishops gate, Suburb with-Bishops gate.
lies Howndes Ditche, and so to Bishops gate. North and by East from Bishops
gate, lies a large street or high way, having on the West side thereof, the
Parish church of S. Buttolphe. Then is the Hospital of S. Mary of Bethelem,
founded by a citizen of London, as before is showed. Thence up to the Bars,
and to Norton fall gate Nortonfall gate.
(a liberty so called, belonging to the Deane of Powles. Thence also up to the
late dissolved Priory of S. John Baptist, called Holywell, Priory of Saint John
Baptist at Holywell.
a house of Nuns, of old time founded by a Bishop of London: reedified by Sir
Thomas Louell, brought up in Lincolne^ Inn, who builded much there. And in
this place, in the reigns of H. the 7. and H. the 8. he endowed this house
with fair lands, and was there buried in a large chapple by him builded for
that purpose. This Priory was valued at the suppression, to have of lands
293.li. by year, and was surrendered 1539. in the 31. of H. the 8. The church
thereof being pulled down, many houses have been their builded for the lodgings
of Noble men, of strangers borne, and other. And near thereunto, are builded
two public houses for the acting and show of Comedies, Tragedies, and
Histories, for recreation. Whereof the one is called the Courtein, The Courtin.
the other the Theater: The Theater.
both standing on the Southwest side toward the field.

From Hollywell in the high street, is a continual building of Tenements to
Sors Ditche, or Sewers Ditche, saving one small side of a field, already made
a Gardein plotte. Over against the North corner of this field, between it and
the church of S. Leonarde in Soersditch, sometime stood a Cross, now a Smithes
Forge, A Cross at Soersditch, now a Smithes Forge.
dividing three ways: forth right the high way, is builded upon either side,
more then a good flight shot, toward Kings Land, Newington, Totenham, etc.

On the left hand is Ealdestreete, which reaches West to a stone Cross, over
against the North end of Grubstreete, and so to the end of Goswell street. On
the right hand of this Ealdestreete, not far from Soers Ditch, but on the
North side thereof is Hoxton, Hoxton.
a long street, with houses on both sides, and is a Prebend belonging to
Powles church in London, but of Soers ditch parish.

On the right hand beyond Soersditch Church toward Hackney, are some late
builded houses upon the common soil (for it was a Laystall) belonging to the
Parish of Stebinhithe. On the other side of the high way, from Bishopsgate and
Hownsditch, the first building is a large Inn for receipt of Travelers: then
a fair house lately builded by the Lord John Powlet. Next to that, a large
house, with Gardens of pleasure, builded by Jasper Eisher. From this up to the
West end of Hog Lane, is a continual building of small cottages.

Then was the Hospital called Saint Mary Spittle, hard within the Bars,
whereof I have spoken, in Bishopsgate Ward. From the which Bars toward
Soersditch, is all along a continued building of small and base Tenements, for
the most part lately erected. Amongst the which (I mean of the auncientest
buildings) was one row of proper small houses Alms houses in Soersditch.
with Gardens for poor decayed people, there placed by the Pryor of the said
Hospital: every one Tennant whereof, paid one penny Rent by the year at
Christmas: and dyned with the Pryor on Christmas day: but after the suppression
of the Hospital, these houses (for want of reparations) in few years were so
decayed, that it was called Rotten Row: Rotten Row, or Russel Row.
and the poor worn out (for there came no new in their place) the houses were
sold from Goddard, to Russell a Draper, who new builded them, and let them out
for Rent enough, taking also large Fines of the Tenants, (which some think to
be near as much as the houses cost him in the purchase, and building: for he
made his bargains so hardly with all men, that both Carpenter, Bricklayer, and
Playsterer, were by that work utterly undone. And yet in honor of his name,
it is now called Russels Row.

Now for the Parish of S. Leonards at Soersditch, Parish Church of S. Leonard,
at Soersditch.
the Archdeacon of London, is always Parson thereof, and the Cure is served by
a Uicure. In this Church have been diverse honorable persons buried, as
appears by their Monuments Monuments defaced.
yet remaining. Notwithstanding that of late, one Uicure there for
covetousness of the brass which he converted into coined silver, plucked up
many plates fixed on the graves, and left no memory of such as had been buried
under them: A great injury both to the living and the dead, forbidden by
publicque proclamation, in the reign of our sovereign Lady the Queen that
now is: but not forborne by many, that either of a preposterous zeal, or of a
greedy mind, spare not to satisfy themselves, by so wicked means.

Now will I pass through the Hospital of S. Mary Bethelem, into Moore field,
which lies without the Posterne called Mooregate. Suburb wit^^ out the
Postern of Mor^^gate.
This field of old time was called the Moore. As appears by the Charter of
William Conqueror, to the College of S. Martin: declaring a runnning water to
pass into the City from the same Moore. Also Fitz Stephen writes of this
Moore, saying thus. When the great Fenne or Moore, which waters the walls on
the North side is frozen, etc. Fensberry fields, and Mor^^fields, an
unprofitable ground.
This Fen or Moore field, stretching from the wall of the city, betwixt
Bishopsgate and the Posterne called Criples gate, to Fensberry, and so to
Holywell, continued a waste and unprofitable ground, a long time, so that the
same was all letten for four Marks the year, in the reign of Edward the 2.
But in the year 1415. the 3. of Henry the 5. Thomas Fawconer Mayor, as I have
showed, caused the wall of the City to be broken toward the said Moore, and
builded the Posterne called Mooregate, for the ease of the Citizens, to walk
that way upon Causwayes into the fields toward Iseldon and Hoxton. Moreover,
he caused the Ditche of the City, and other Ditches thereabout, to be new cast
and cleansed, by mean whereof, the said Fen or Moore was greatly dreyned and
dried. And shortly after, to wit, 1477. Raphe Ioceline Mayor, for repairing of
the wall of this City, caused the said Moore to be searched for Clay and
Brick to be brent there, etc. by which means this field was made the worse for
a long time.

In the year 1498. all the Gardens which had continued time out of mind,
without Mooregate, Gardens with^out Mooregate, destroyed and made plaingrounde.
to wit, about, and beyond the Lordship of Fensberry, were destroyed. And of
them was made a plain field for Archers so shoot in. And in the year 1512.
Roger Archley Mayor, caused diverse Dikes to be cast, and made to drene the
waters of the said Moore fields, Ditches cast to dreine the Moore Field.
with Bridges Arched over them, and the grounds about to be leuelled, whereby
the said field was made somewhat more commodious, but yet it stood full of
noisome waters: Wherepon in the year 1527. Sir Thomas Semor Mayor, caused
diverse Slewces Slewces to convey the standing water out of the Moore.
to be made, to convey the said waters, over the Town Ditch, into the course
of Walbrooke, and so into the Thames: and by these degrees, was this Fenne or
Moore, at length made maine and hard ground, which before being ouergrowne
with Flagges, Sedges, and Rushes, served to no use, since the which time, also
the further grounds beyond Fensbury Court, have been so ouerheigthned with
Laystalles of Doong, that now three windmilles are thereon: Moorefielde raised,
and windmilles set thereon.
the ditches be filled up, and the bridges overwhelmed.

And now concerning the enclosures of common grounds about this city: Edward
Hall sets down a note of his time, to wit, in the 5. or rather the sixth of
Henry the eight. Before this time says he, the inhabitants of the Towns about
London, as I^eldone, Hoxton, Shorsdich and others, had so enclosed the common
fields with hedges, and diches, that neither the young men of the city might
shoot, nor the ancient persons walk for their pleasures in those fields,
Edward Hall.
but that either their Bows and Arrows were taken away or broken, or the
honest persons arested or indighted: Saying, that no Londoner ought to go out
of the City, but in the high ways. This saying so grieved the Londoners,
that suddenly this year, a great number of the City, assembled themselves in
a morning, and a Turner in a fools coat, came crying through the city,
shouelles and spades, shouelles and spades: so many of the people followed,
that it was a wonder to behold: and within a short space all the hedges Hedges
pulled down and diches filled up.
about the City were cast down, and the diches filled up, and every thing
made plain, such was the diligence of these workmen. The kings counsel
hearing of this assembly, came to the gray Friars, and sent for the Mayor, and
council of the city, to know the cause, which declared to them, the injury
and annoying done to the citizens, and to their liberties, which though they
would not seek disorderly to redress, yet the communaltie and young persons
could not be stayed, thus to remedy the same: when the kings counsel had
heard their answer, they dissimuled the matter, and commanded the Mayor to see
that no other thing were attempted, but that they should forthwith call home
the yoonger sort: who having speedily achieved their desire, returned home
before the Kings Council, and the Mayor departed without more harm, after
which time (says Hall,) these fields were never hedged, but now we see the
thing in worse case then ever, before it was by the means of enclosure for
gardens, Banquetin^ houses like Banquerou^ bearing gre^^ show and li^^ worth.
wherein are builded many fair Summer houses, and as in other places of the
Suburbs, some of them like Midsommer Pageants, with Towers, Turrets and
Chimney tops, not so much for use, or profits, as for show and pleasure,
bewraying the vanity of many men's minds, much unlike to ye disposition of the
ancient Citizens, who delighted in the building of Hospitalles, and Alms
houses for the poor and therein both employed their wits, and spent their
wealths in preferment of the common commodity of this our City.

But to come back again to Moregate and from thence west through a narrow
lane called the Posterne, because it has at either end a door to be shut in
the night season, betwixt the More ditch enclosed with brick for Teyntar
yards, and the Gardens of the said More field, to More lane: a part of the
Suburb, without Criples gate, Suburb wit^^out Cripple gate.
and without this Posterne called Criples gate, also lay a part of the said
More even to the river of the Wels (as in another place I have showed) and no
houses were there builded, till the later end of the reign of William the
Conqueror and the reign of his son William Rufus, about which times some
few houses being there builded along east and west thwart before the said
gate. One Alfune builded for the Inhabitants a parish Church which is of S.
Giles Parish church of S. Giles.
somewhat west from the said gate, on the bank of the Town ditch, and so was
there a street since called Forstreete, as standing before the gate.

This Alfune in the reign of Henry the first became the first Hospitaler of S.
Bartilmewes Hospital in Smithfielde, as in another place I have noted. And this
Parish church of S. Giles being at the first a small thing stood in place where
now stands the Uicarage house: but has been since at diverse times much
enlarged according as the parish has increased, and was at the length newly
builded in place where now it, stands. But the same new church being large,
strongly builded and richly furnished with ornaments, was in the year 1545.
sore brent and consumed, notwithstanding it was again within a short space of
time restored as now it shows.

Some little distance from the east end of this Church, stands a fair
Conduite castellated in Forstreete. Then had ye a Bosse of sweet water in the
wall of the Church yard now lately made a Pumpe, but already decayed.

Then had ye a fair Poole of sweet water near to the Church of S. Giles
wherein Anne of Lodbery was drowned as I have before declared.

In the east end of Forestreete is More lane, then next is Grubstreete, of late
years inhabited (for the most part by Bowyers, Fletchers, Bowstring makers,
and such like, occupations, now little occupied, Archerie giving place to a
number of Bowling Allies and dycing houses in all places are increased, and too
much frequented.

This street stretches north to Euerades well street Euerades well street.
which thwarteth it to White Cross street, the next from Forestreete North is
White Cross street, likewise extending it self up to the west end of
Euerades well street, and from the end thereof to Ealdstreete.

From the west end of Forstreete lies Red cross street from the which Cross
on the right hand east lies Bech lane, and reaches to the White cross
street. From that Cross north lies Golding lane Golding lane.
which stretches up to a Cross in Ealdestreete which Golding lane on both the
sides is replenished with many Tenementes of poor people.

On the left hand and west of the Red Cross lies a street of old time,
called Hounds ditch, and of later time named Barbican, of such cause as I have
before noted. And thus have you all the suburb without Criplegate being almost
altogether in the parish of S. Giles which has more then 1800. Householders,
and above 4000. Communicantes.

Without Aldersgate on the left hand is the parish Church of S. Buttolph on the
north side of the which church lies a way called Little Britain street,
toward the Priorie of Saint Bartlemew in Smithfielde, but the high way
without Aldersgate Suburb without Aldersgate
runs straight north from the said gate unto Hounds ditch or Barbican
street on the right hand, and Long lane of the left hand which runs into
Smithfielde.

Then from the farther end of Aldersgate street, straight north to the Bar
is called Goswell street replenished with small Tenementes, Cottages and Allies,
Gardens banqueting houses, and Bowling places.

Beyond these Bars, leaving the Charterhouse on the left hand or the west side
the way stretches up toward Iseldon, and on the right hand, or east side at
a red Cross turns into Ealdstreet Ealdstreete.
(so called, for that it was the old high way from Aldersgate street for the
northeast parts of England before Bishopsgate was builded) which street
runs East to a Smithes Forge, sometime ^ Cross before Shoreditch Church
from whence the Passengers and Carriages were to turn North to Kings land,
Totenham, Waltham, Ware, etc.

There was sometime in this suburb without Aldersgate an Hospital Hospital
without Aldersgate.
for the poor, but an Alien of Cluny, a French order and therefore suppressed
by king Henry the fifth, who gave y^ house with lands and goods, to the parish
of S. Buttolph and a Brotherhoode of the Trinity was there founded which was
afterward suppressed by Henry the eight or Edward the sixth.

There is at the farthest north corner of this Suburb a windmill which was
sometime by a Tempest of wind overthrown and in place thereof a Chapel was
builded by Queen Katherine (first wife to Henry the eight,) who named it the
mount The Mount.
of Caluerie, because it was of Christ's passion, and was in the end of Henry
the eight pulled down, and a Windmill newly set up as before.

Without Newgate lies the west, and by North Suburb, Suburb without Newgate.
on the r^ght hand or Northside whereof betwixt the said gate and the Parish
of S. Sepulcher turns a way toward west Smithfielde, called as I have showed
Giltspurre street, or Knightridars, street, then is Smithfielde it self
compassed about with buildinges as I have before declared in Faringdon ward
without.

And without the Bar of west Smithfield lies a large street or way called of
the house of S. John the^e S. John's street S. John's street Charterhouse
and stretches toward Iseldon, on the right hand whereof stood the late
dissolved Monastery, called the Charter house founded by Sir Walter Many
knight, a stranger borne Lord of the town of Many in the Dioces of Cambrey,
beyond the seas, who for service done to king Edward the third was made knight
of the Garter. This house Charterhouse
he founded upon this occasion, a great Pestilence entering this Island, began
first in Dorset shire, then proceeded into Devonshire, Somerset shire,
Gloucester shire, and Oxforde shire, and at length came to London, and
ouerspread all England, so wasting the people, that scarce the tenth person of
all sorts was left alive, and Churchyards were not sufficient to receive the
dead but men were forced to choose out certain fields for burials, whereupon
Ralph Stratforde Bishop of London, in the year 1348. bought a piece of ground
called no man's land, No man's land
which he enclosed with a wall of Brick and dedicated for burial of the
dead, builded thereupon a proper Chapel, which is now enlarged and made a
dwelling house, as this burying plot is, became a fair Garden, retayning the
old name of Pardon Church yard. pardon church yard by the Charterhouse.


After this in the year 1349. the said Sir Walter Many in respect of danger
that might befall in this time of so great a plague and infection, purchased
thirteen acres and a rode of ground adjoining to the said no man's land, and
lying in a place called Spittle Crossed, because it belonged to S. Bartilmewes
Hospital, since that called the New Church Haw, and caused it to be
consecrated by the said Bishop of London, to the use of Burialles.

In this plot of ground there was in that year more then 50000. persons
buried, as I have read in the Charters of Edward the third: Also I have
seen and read an inscription fixed on a stone cross, sometime standing in the
same Church yard and having these words: Anno Domini 1349. regnante magna
pestilentia consecratum fuit hoc coemiterium, in quo and infra septa presentis
m^nasterii sepulta fuerunt mortuo^um corpora plusquam quinquaginta millia,
praeter alia multa abhinc, vsque ad presens, quorum animabus propitietur Deus,
Amen. In consideration of the number of Christian people here buried, the said
Sir Walter Many caused first a Chapel to be builded, where for the space of
23. years offeringes were made, and in the year 1371. he caused there to be
founded an house of Carthusian Monks, which he willed to be called the
Salutation, and that one of the Monks should be called Prior, and he gave them
the said place of thirteen Acres and a Rode of land with the Chapel, and
houses there builded for their habitation: But the three Acres of land lying
without the walls on the north part betwixt the lands of the Abbote of
Westminster, the lands of the Prior of S. John, (which three Acres were
purchased, enclosed and dedicated by Ralph Stratforde Bishop of London, as is
before showed,) remained till our time, by the name of Pardon Church yard, and
served for burying of such as desperately ended their lives, or were executed
for Felonies, who were fetched thither usually in a close cart, vayled over and
covered with black, having a plain white Cross thwarting, and at the fore
end a S. John's Cross without, and within a Bell ringing whereby the Cart
might be heard when it passed, and this was called the Frery Cart, which
belonged to S. John's, and had the privilege as Sanctuary. In this Charter
house be the monumentes of the said Sir Walter Many and Margaret his wife,
Marmeduke Lumley, Lawrence Brumley, knight, Sir Edward Hederset knight, Sir
William Many knight, Dame Iahan Borough John Door, Want water knight, Robert
Olney Esquier, Katheren daughter to Sir William Babington knight, Blanch
daughter to Hugh Waterton, Katherine wife to John at Poote daughter and heir
to Richard Lacie, William Rawlin, Sir John Lenthaine and Dame Margaret his
wife, daughter to John Fray, John Peake Esquier, William Baron, and William
Baron Esquier, Sir Thomas Thawites knight.

In the Cloystrie monuments of Bartilmew Read knight, Mayor of London, buried
1505. Sir John Popham etc.

This Monastery at the suppression in the 29. of Henry the 8. was valued at 642
^. four pence halfepenny yearly.

A little without the Bars of west Smithfielde is Charter house lane Charter
house lane.
so called, for that it leads to the said plot of the late dissolved
monastery in place whereof, first the Lord North, but since Thomas Howarde
late Duke of Norfolk, have made large and sumptuous buildinges both for
lodging and pleasure. At the gate of this Charterhouse Conduite by the
Charterhouse.
is a fair water Conduite with two Cocks serving the use of the neighbors to
their great commodity.

Saint John's street from the entering this lane is also on both the sides
replenished with buildinges up to Clarken well. On the left hand of which
street lies a lane called Cow cross, Cow Cross.
of a cross sometime standing there, which lane turns down to another lane
called Turnemill street which stretches up to the west side of Clarken well,
and was called Turnemill street, for such cause as is before declared.

One other lane there is called S. Peter's lane, which turns from S. John's
street to Cow Cross.

On the left hand also stood the late dissolved Priorie of S. John of
Jerusalem Priorie of S. John of Jerusalem.
in England, founded about the year of Christ, 1100. by Jorden Brises Baron
and Muriell his wife, near unto Clerks well besides w^st Smithfielde, which
Brian having first founded the Priory of Nuns at Clerks well bought of them
ten acres of land, giving them in exchange ten acres of land in his Lordshippe
of Welling hal in the County of Kent, S. John's church was dedicated by Eraclius
Patriarch of the whole resurrection of Christ at Jerusalem, in the year 1185.
and was the chief seat in England of the religious knights of S. John of
Jerusalem, whose profession was besides their daily service of God to defend
Christians against Pagans, and to fight for the Church, using for their habit
a black upper garment, with a white cross on the fore part thereof, and for
their good service was so highly esteemed, that when the order of Templars was
dissolved, their lands and possession^ were by Parliament granted unto these,
who after the loss of Jerusalem recovered the Isle of Rodes from the Turk,
and there placed themselves, being called thereof for many years knights of
the Rhodes, but after the loss thereof 1523. they removed to the Isle of
Malta, manfully opposing themselves against the Turkish invasions.

The Rebels of Essex and of Kent 1381, set fire on this house, causing it to
burn by the space of seven days together, not suffering any to quench it,
since the which time the Priors of that house have new builded both the Church
and houses thereunto appertayning, which church was finished by Thomas Docwrey
late Lord Prior there, about the year 1504. as appears by the inscription
over the Gate house, yet remaining, this house at the suppression in the 32. of
Henry the eight, was valued to dispend in lands 3385.^.19. ^. 8.^. yearly,
Sir William Weston being then Lord Prior, dyed on the same seventh of May, on
which the house was suppressed, so that great yearly pensions being granted to
the knights by the king, and namely to the Lord Prior during his life 1000.^.
he never received penny.

The king took into his hands all the lands that belonged to that house and
that order wheresoever in England, and Ireland, for the augmentation of his
Crown.

This Priorie Church and house, of S. John was preserved from spoil, or down
pulling, so long as king Henry the eight, reigned, and was employed as a store
house for the kings toils and tents, for hunting, and for the wars etc. but
in the third of king Edward the sixth, the Church for the most part, to wit
the body and side Isles with the great Bell Tower (a most curious piece of
workemanshippe, graven, guilt, and inameled to the great beutifiyng of the
City, and passing all other that I have seen) was undermined and blown up,
with Gunpowder, the stone thereof was employed in building of the Lord
Protectors house at the Strand: that part of the Quire which remained with some
side Chapels, was by Cardinal Poole in the reign of Queen Mary, closed up
at the west end, and otherwise repaired, and Sir Thomas Tresham knight was then
made Lord Prior there, restitution of some lands, but the same was again
suppressed in the first year of Queen Elizabeth.

There was buried in this Church Brethren of that house, and knights of that
order, William Begecote Richard Barrow John Vanclay, Thomas Launcelen, John
Mallore, William Turney, William Hulles, Hills, or Hayles, John Weston,
Redington William Longstrother, John Langstrother, William Tongue, John
Wakeline. Then of other Thomas Thornburgh Gentleman, William West Gentleman,
John Fulling, and Adam Gill Esquiers, Sir John Mortimor and Dame Elianor his
wife, Nicholas Siluerston, William Plompton Esquier, Margaret Tongue, and Isabel
Tongue, Walter Bellingham, alias Ireland, king of Arms of Ireland, Thomas Bedle
Gentleman, Katheren daughter of William Plompton Esquier, Richard Turpin
Gentleman, Johan Wife to Alexander Dikes, John Bottle, and Richard Bottle
Esquiers, Rowland Darcie, Richard Sutton Gentleman, Richard Bottill
Gentleman, Sir William Harpden knight, Robert Kingston Esquier, and Margery his
wife, John Roch, Richard Cednor Gentleman, Simon Mallory Esquier, 1442.
William Mallorie Esquier, Robert Longstrother Esquier, Ralph Asteley Esquier,
William Marshall, Esquier, Robert Savage Esquier, Robert Gondall Esquier, and
Margery his wife, William Babthorpe Baron of the Exchequer 1442.

Beyond this house of S. John's north from the house was the Priorie of Clarken
well so called of Clerks well adjoining, which Priorie was also founded about
the year 1100. by Jorden Briset Baron the son of Ralph, the son of Brian
Bryset: who gave to Robert a Priest, fourteen Acres of land lying in the
field next adjoining to the said Clerks well, Priorie of Clarken well.
thereupon to build an house of religious persons, which he builded to the
honor of God, and the Assumption of our Lady, and placed therein Black Nuns,
this Jorden Briset gave also to that house one piece of ground, thereby to
build a Windmill upon etc. he and Muriall his wife were buried in the
Chapter house there, and there lie buried in this Church John Wikes Esquier,
and Isabell his wife, Dame Agnes Clifforde, Ralph Timbleby Esquier, Dame Iahan
Baronnesse of Greystocke, Dame Iahan Lady Ferrars etc. This house was valued to
dispend 262.^. 19.^ by year, and was surrendered in the 31. of Henry the eight.
Many fair houses for Gentlemen and others, are now builded about this
Priorie, especially by the high way toward Iseldon.

So much of the Church which remains, (for one great I Will thereof fell down)
serves as a Parish church of S. John, for not only the Tenementes and near
inhabitants, but also (as is before said for all up to Highgate, Moswell etc.
Near unto this Church besides Clerks well, lie diverse other wels, as I told
you, namely Skinners well, Fags well, Todewell, Loders well, Redewell etc. Now
to return again to Giltspurre street where I first began with this suburb,
there stands the parish church of Saint Sepulcher in the Bailey, as is before
showed, from this street to Turnagaine lane by Hosiar lane, Cow lane and
Holborne conduit down Snore hill to Oldborne bridge, and up to Oldborne hill,
by Gold lane on the right hand, and Lither lane beyond it, up to the Bars,
beyond the which bars on the same side is Port Poole lane or Greyes Inn
lane, Port Poole or Greyes Inn lane.
so called of the Inn of Court; Greyes Inn an Inn of Court.
named Greyes Inn, a goodly house there situate, by whom builded or first
begun I have not yet learned, but seems to be since Edward the thirdes time,
and is a prebend to Paul's Church in London. This lane is furnished with fair
buildings, and many tenements on both the sides, leading to the fields,
toward Highgate and Hamsted.

On the high street have ye many fair houses builded, and lodgings for
Gentlemen, Innes for travelers, and such like up almost (for it lacks but
little) to S. Giles in the fields: amongst the which buildinges for the most
part being very new, one passes the rest in largeness of rooms lately
builded, by a widow Widow Alington her building.
sometime wife to Richard Allington Esquire, which Richard Allington deceased
in the year 1561. And thus much for that North side of Oldborne.

Now from Newgate on the left hand or south side lies the Old baylie, and so
down by Seacole lane end to Oldborne bridge, up Oldborne South side of
Oldborne.
hill, by Shoe lane and Fewters lane to the bars.

Beyond the Bars had ye in old time a Temple builded by the Templers, whose
order first began in the year of Christ 1118. in the 19. of Henry the first.
This temple was left and fell to ruin since the year 1184. when the Templers
had builded them a new Temple in Fleetstreet, near to the river of Thames. A
great part of this old Temple was pulled down but of late in the year 1595.
The same was after the Bishop of Lincolnes Inn, where he lodged when he
repaired to the City, and John Russell Bishop in Lincoln, The Bishop of
Lincolnes Inn in Oldborne.
Lord Chauncelor in the reign of Richard the 3. was lodged there. It has of
late years belonged to the Earls of Southampton, and is therefore called
Southamton Southhampto^ house.
house. One Master Roper has of late builded there, by means whereof, part
of the ruins of the old Temple were seen to remain builded of Cane stone,
round inform as the new temple by Temple bar. Beyond this Southampton house
is New street, so called in the reign of Henry the 3. when he founded the
house of Conuertes, betwixt the Old Temple and the new.

The same street has sithence been called Chauncery lane, Newstreet or
Chancery lane
by reason that king Edward the third annexed the house of Conuerts by Pattent
to the office of Custos Rotulorum, or master of the Rolls, in the 15. of his
reign.

In this street the first fair building to be noted on the East side, is
called the Coursitors office, Coursitors office in Chauncery lane.
builded with diverse fair lodgings for Gentlemen, all of Brick and timber, by
Sir Nicholas Bacon late Lord Keeper of the great seal, deceased in the year
1578.

Near unto this Coursitors Office be diverse fair houses and large gardens
builded and made in a ground, sometime belonging to one great house on the
other side the street there made by Raph Neuell Bishop of Chichester. Then was
the house of Conuerts wherein now the Rolls of Chauncerie be kept. Then the
Serieants Inn.

On the West side toward the North end thereof was of old time the church and
house of the preaching Friars: Black Friars Church in Oldborne.
the which house I find that in the year of Christ 1221. the Friars preachers
13. in number came into England, and having to their Prior one named Gilbert de
Fraxineto, in company of Peter de la Roche Bishop of Winchester, came to
Canterbury, where presenting themselves before the Archbishop Stephen, he
commanded the said Prior to preach, whose sermon he liked so well, that ever
after he loved that Order. These Friars came to London, and had their first
house without the wall of the City by Oldborne, near unto the old Temple.

Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent was a great benefactor unto these Friars, and
deceasing at his Manor of Bansted in Surrey, or (after some writers) at his
Castle of Barkamsted in Hartfordshire, in the year 1242. was buried in their
Church, unto the which Church he had given his place at Westminster, which the
said Friars Earl of Kent buried in the Black Friars.
afterward sold to Walter Gray Archbishop of York, and he left it to his
successors in that Sea, for ever to be their house when they should repair to
the City of London. And therefore the same was called York Place, which name
so continued until the year 1529. that King Henry the eight took it from
Thomas Wolsey Cardinal, and Archbishop of York, and then gave it to name
White hall.

Margaret sister to the king of Scotts, widow to Geffrey Earl Marshall
deceased 1244. and was buried in this church.

In the year 1250. the Friars of this order of preachers through Christendom
and from Jerusalem, were by a Convocation Convocation of black Friars in
Oldborne.
assembled together, at this their house by Oldborne to entreat of their
estate, to the number of 400. having meat and drink found them of alms,
because they had no possessions of their own. The first day the king came to
their Chapter, found them meat and drink and dined with them. An other day
the Queen found them meat and drink: afterward the Bishop of London, then
the Abbot of Westminster, of S. Albones, Waltham, and others. In the year
1276. Gregory Rokesley Mayor, and the Barons of London granted and gave to
Robert Kilwerbie Archbishop of Canterbury, two lanes, or ways next the street
of Baynards Castle, and the Tower of Mountfichet, to be destroyed. On the
which place the said Robert builded the late new church, with the rest of the
stones that were left of the said Tower. And thus the black Friars left their
Church and house by Oldborne, and departed to their new. This old Friar house (
iuxta Holborne says the Pattent) was by King Edward the first, in the 16. of
his reign given to Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln.

Next to this house of Friars, was one other great house, sometime belonging to
the Bishop of Chichester, whereof Matthew Paris writes thus: Raph de Noua villa
or Neuill, Bishop of Chichester, Bishop of Chichesters Inn.
and Chauncellor of England sometime builded a noble house, even from the
ground not far from the new Temple, and house of Conuertes, in the which
place he deceased in the year 1244. In this place after the decease of the
said Bishop, and in place of the house of Black Friars, before spoken of,
Henry Lacie Earl of Lincoln, Lycons Inn.
Constable of Chester, and Custos of England, builded his Inn, and for the
most part was ^lodged there: he deceased in this house in the year 1310. and
was buried in the new work, (whereunto he had been a great benefactor) of S.
Paul's church betwixt our Lady Chapel, and S. Dunstones Chapel. This
Lincolnes Inn sometime pertaining to the Bishops of Chichester as a part of
the said great house, is now an Inn of Court, retayning the name of Lincolnes
Inn as before, but now lately increased with fair buildings, and replenished
with Gentlemen studious in the common laws: this house was greatly increased
with new buildinges.

In the reign of Henry the eight Sir Thomas Louell was a great builder there,
especially he builded the gate house and forefront toward the east, placing
thereon as well the Lacies arms, as his own: he caused the Lacies arms to be
cast and wrought in lead, on the lover of the hall of that house, which was in
the 3. Escutcheons, a Lion rampant for Lacie, 7. Masculles voyded for Quincie,
and 3. Lincolns Inn an Inn of Court.
Wheat sheaues for Chester. This Lover being of late repaired the said
Escutcheons were left out. The rest of that side even to Fleetstreet is
replenished with fair buildings.

Now the high Oldborne street, from the North end of Newstreet, stre^cheth on
the left hand in building lately framed, up to S. Giles in the field, which
was an Hospital founded by Matilde the Queen, wife to Henry the first, about
the year 1117. This Hospital (says the record of Edward the third the 19.
year) was founded without the bar veteris Templi London conuersorum.
Moreover (says the same Record) in the 20. of Edward the third, the said
King sent commandment under his great seal, to the Mayor and Sheriffs of
London, Hospital of S. Giles founded for Leprose persons of the city of
London and shire of Middlesex.
willing them to make proclamation in every Ward of the City and suburbs,
that all leprous persons, within the said City and suburbs should avoid
within fifteen days, and that no man suffer any such laprose person to abide
within his house, upon pain to forfeite his said house, and to incur the
Kings farther displeasure. And that they should cause the said Lepers to be
removed into some out places of the fields, All leprose heople to be voided
the city and suburbs.
from the haunt or company of all sound people: whereupon it followed that the
citizens required of the Guardian of Saint Giles Hospital, to take from them
and to keep continually the number of fourteen persons, according to the
foundation of Matilde the Queen which was for Leprose persons of the City of
London and the shire of Middlesex. Pattent.
W. Dunthorne
At this Hospital the prisoners conveyed toward Tyborne, there to be
executed, were saluted with a Bowl of Ale, thereof to drink as their last
refreshing in this life.

Now without Ludgate lies the south end of ye old Baylie, then down Ludgate
hill by Fleet lane over Fleet bridge, up Fleetstreet by Shoe lane, Fewters
lane, Newstreet, or Chauncery lane and to Shire lane by the bar on the right
hand. And from Ludgate Suburb without Ludgate.
on the left hand or south side by Bride lane, Water lane, Crokers lane,
Sergeantes Inn, and the new Temple by the Bar, all which is of Faringdon
Ward, as is before showed.

Liberties of the Duchy.
NExt without the bar and liberty of the city of London and the liberties
of the Duchy of Lancaster, Without the bar of the City, called Temple
bar, and first of the Duchy of Lancaster.
on the said south side or left hand near unto the River of Thames, amongst
other buildings memorable for greatness, the first was Excester house, so
called for that the same belonged to the Bishop of Excester, and was their Inn
or London lodging: the same has been sithence called Paget house, because the
Lord William Paget enlarged and possessed it. Then is Leycester house so named
because Robert Dudley late Earl of Leycester, of late new builded there. And
now Essex house, Excester house since Leycester house, now Essex house.
of the late Earl of Essex there inhabiting.

Then west was a Chapel dedicate to the Holy Ghost, called S. Spirit, Chapel
of S. Spirit.
upon what occasion founded I have not read.

Then is Milford lane Milford lane.
down to the Thames, why so called I have not heard nor can conjecture.

Then was the Bishop of Bathes Inn, Bishop of Bathes Inn, or Arundell house.
lately new builded, for a great part thereof by the Lord Thomas Seamer
Admiral, which came sithence to be possessed by the Earl of Arondell, and
thereof called Arundell house.

Next beyond the which on the street side, was sometime a fair Cemitorie (or
Churchyard) and in the same a parish Church, Parish church of S. Mary at the
strand.
called of the nativity of our Lady, and the innocents at the Strand, and of
some, by mean of a brotherhood kept there, called of S. Vrsula at the Strand.

And near adjoining to the said church, betwixt it and the river of Thames,
was an Inn of Chauncery, commonly called Chosters Inn Chesters Inn or Strand
Inn an Inn of Chauncery.
(because it belonged to the Bishop of Chester) by others named of the
situation Strand Inn.

Then had ye in the high street a fair bridge called Strande bridge, Strand
bridge.
and under it a lane or way down to the landing place on the bank of the
Thames.

Then was the Bishop of Chesters Inn, The Bishop of Chesters Inn.
or his London lodging. And next adjoining to it the Bishop of Worcesters
Inn: The Bishop of Worcesters Inn.
all which to wit, the parrish of Saint Mary at Strande, Strand Inn, Strand
bridge, with the lane under it, the Bishop of Chesters Inn, the Bishop of
Worcesters Inn, with all the tenementes adjoining were by commandment of
Edward Duke of Sommerset uncle to Edward the sixth, and Lord Protector, pulled
down, and made level ground, in the year 1549. In this place whereof he
builded that large and goodly house, now called Somerset house. Sommerset house.


In the high street near unto the Strande sometime stood a cross of stone
against the Bishop of Couentrie or Chester his house, whereof I read, that
in the year 1294. and diverse other times, the Justices Itinerantes, sat
without London, at the stone cross over against the Bishop of Couentries
house, and sometime they sat in the Bishops house, which was hard by the
Strand. Stone cross at Strand.


Then next is the Sauoy so called of Peter Earl of Sauoy, and Richmond, Sauoy
house first builded by Peter Earl of Sauoy and Richmond.
son to Thomas Earl of Sauoy, brother to Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury,
and uncle unto Helenor wife to king Henry the third.

He first builded this house in the year 1245. and here is some occasion
offered to prove that this Peter of Sauoy was also Earl of Sauoy. Wherefore
out of a book of the Genealogies of all the whole house of Sauoy, compiled by
Phillebert Pingonio, Baron of Guzani, remaining in the hands of W. Smith, alias
Rongedragon officer of arms, I have gathered this. Thomas Earl of Sauoy
Thomas Earl of Sauoy his pedegrie by occasion.
had issue by Beatrix daughter to Aimon Earl of Geneua 9. sons, and 3.
daughters: Amades his first son succeeded Earl of Sauoy in the year 1253.
Peter his second son, Earl of Sauoy, and of Richmond, in 1268. Philip his
third son Earl of Sauoy and Burgundy, 1284. Thomas the 4. Earl of
Flaunders and prince of Piemon, Boniface the eight, Archbishop of Canterbury,
Beatrix Beatrix sister to Peter Earl of Sauoy, mother to five Queens.
his daughter married so Reymond Beringarius of Aragon, Earl of Province and
Narbone, had issue, and was mother to five Queens: The first Margaret wife to
Jews king of France, 2. Elianor wife to Henry the 3. King of England: 3.
Sanctia, wife to Richard king of Romans. 4. Beatrix, wife to Charles king of
Naples. 5. Iohanna, wife to Philip king of Navarre. To return again to the
house of Sauoy, Queen Eleanor wife to king Heury the third, purchased this
place afterward of the fraternity Fra^res de mo^te Iouis or Priory de
Cornuto by ^auering at the boowre.
or brethren of Montioy (unto whom Peter as it seems gave it) for her son
Edmond Earl of Lancaster (as M. Camden has noted out of a register book, of
the Dukes of Lancaster, H. Knighton^
Henry Duke of Lancaster repaired or rather new builded it with the charges of
^ 2000. Marks, which money he had gathered together at the town of
Bridgerike.

John the French King was lodged there, in the year 1357. and also in the
year 1363. for it was at that time the fairest Manor in England.

In the year 1381. H. Knighton^
the rebels of Kent and Essex burnt this house, unto the which there was none
in the realm to be compared in beauty, and stateliness (says mine Author.)
They set fire on it round about, and made Proclamation that none (on pain to
lose his head) should convert to his own use any thing that there was, Sauoy
brent blown up with Gu^^ powder.
but that they should break such plate and vessel of Gold and silver, as was
found in that house, (which was in great plenty) into small pieces and throw
the same into the river of Thames: Rebels more malicious the^ co^etous, spoil
all before them.
Precious stones they should bruise in morters that the same might be to no
use: and so it was done by them: One of their companiens they burned in the
fire, because he minded to have reserved one goodly piece of plate.

They found there certain barrels of Gunpowder, which they thought had been
Gold or silver, Liber mane script, french.
and throwing them into the fire, more suddenly then they thought, the Hall was
blown up, the houses destroyed, and themselves very hardly escaped away.

This house being thus defaced and almost ouerthrown by these rebels for
malice they bare ^o John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster of later time came to the
Kings hands, and was again raised and beautifully builded, for an Hospital of
S. John Baptist, by king Henry the seventh, about the year 1509, for the which
Hospital (retayning still the old name of Sauoy Sauoy builded for an Hospital.
) he purchased lands to be employed upon the relleuing of an hundred poor
people: This Hospital being valued to dispend 529. pound, fifteen shillings
etc. by year, was suppressed the tenth of June, the seventh of Edward the
sixth: the beds, bedding and other furniture belonging thereunto, with seven
hundred marks of the said lands by year, he gave, to the Citizens of London,
with his house of Bridewell, to the furnishing thereof, to be a workehouse for
the poor and idle persons, and toward the furnishing of the Hospital of S.
Thomas in Southwarke lately suppressed. Hospital of Sauoy suppressed.


This Hospital of Sauoy Hospital of Sauoy a new foundation ^hereof.
was again new founded, erected, corporated and endowed with lands by Queen
Mary, the third of November: in the fourth of her reign one Iackson took
possession, and was made master thereof in the same Month of November. The
Ladies of the Court, and Maidens of honor (a thing not to be forgotten) stored
the same of new with veddes, bedding and other furniture, in very ample manner
etc. and it was by pattent so confirmed at Westminster the ninth of May the
fourth and fifth of Phillip and Mary.

The Chapel of this Hospital serves now as a Parish church to the tenements
thereof near adjoining and others.

The next was sometime the Bishop of Carliles his Inn, which now belongs
to the Earl of Bedford, and is called Russell or Bedford house. Parish church
of S. John in the Sauoy. B. of Carlisle his Inn or Bedford house
It stretches from the Hospital of Sauoy, West to Iuie bridge. And thus far
on this South side the high street is of the liberty of the Duchy of
Lancaster.

Iuie bridge Iuie bridge.
in the high street has a way or low going down under it, stretching to the
Thames: the like as sometime had the Strand bridge before spoken of.

This whole street The street betwixt Temple Bar and the Sauoy first paued
the 24. of Henry the 6.
from Temple Bar to the Sauoy was commanded to be paued, and Tole to be taken
toward the charges thereof in the 24. year of Henry the sixth.

Now to begin again at Temple Bar over against it. In the high street
stands a pair of Stocks, and then one large middle Row of houses and small
Tenements builded partly opening to the south, partly toward the North.
Amongst the which stands the Parish church of S, Clement Danes Parish church
of S. Clement Danes.
so called because Harolde a Danish king and other Danes were buried there, and
in that Churchyard, This Harolde whom king Canutus had by a Concubine,
reigned three years and was buried at Westminster, but afterward Hardicanutus
the lawful son of Canutus, in revenge of a displeasure done to his mother by
expelling her out of the Realm, and the murder of his Brother Allured,
commanded the body of Harold to be dug out of the earth and to be thrown
into the Thames, where it was by a Fisherman taken up, and buried in this
Churchyard. This said Middle Row of houses stretching west to a stone Cross
now headless, Hedlesse cross by the Strand
by or against the Strand including the said parish Church of S. Clement, is
wholly of the liberty of Duchy of Lancaster, which liberty is governed by
the Chancellor of that said Duchy, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
now at this present, Sir Robert Cecill knight principal Secretary to her
Majesty, and one of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counselors, there is
under him a Steward that keeps court and Leete for the Queen, gives the
charge and takes the oaths of every under Officer, then is there four
Burgesses, and 4. Assistantes to take up Controversies, a Bayliffe which has
two or three under Bayliffes that make Arests within that liberty, 4.
Constables, four Wardens that keep the Lands and Stock for the poor, four
Wardens, for high ways, a Jury or Inquest of fourteen or sixteen to present
defaultes, four Alecunners which look to assisse of weightes and measures,
etc. four Scauengers and a Beadle, and their common Prison is Newgate.

Thus much for the Suburb in the Liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster.

The City of Westminster, with the Antiquities, Bounds, and Liberties
thereof.
NOw touching the City of Westminster, I will begin at Temple Bar, on the
right hand or Northside, and so pass up west, through a Back lane or street,
wherein do stand three Innes of Chancery the first is called Clementes Inn,
Clements Inn of Chancery.
because it stands near to S. Clementes church, but nearer to the fair
fountain called Clementes well, Clements well.
the second is New Inn New Inn of Chancery.
so called, as Lateliar made an Inn of Chancery for students, then another, to
wit, about the beginning of the reign of Henry the seventh, and not so
late as some have supposed, to ^^tte at the pulling down of Strand Inn in the
reign of King Edward the sixth: for I read that Sir Thomas Moore sometime Lord
Chancellor was a student in this New Inn, and went from thence to Lincolnes
Inn etc. The third is Lions Inn, Lions Inn of Chancery.
an Inn of Chancerie also. This street stretches up unto Drury lane, Druery
lane.
so called, for that there is a house belonging to the Family of the Druries.
This lane furneth North toward S. Giles in the field, from the south end of
this lane in the high street are diverse fair buildinges, Hosteries, and houses
for Gentlemen, and men of honor, amongst the which Cecile house Cecill house.
is one, which sometime belonged to the Parson of S. Martins in the field, and
by composition came to Sir Thomas Palmer knight in the reign of Edward the
sixth, who began to build the fame of Brick, and Timber, very large and
spacious, but of later tune it has been far more bewtifully increased by
the late Sir William Cecile Baron of Burghley, Lord Treasurer, and great
Councellor of the estate of England.

From thence is now a continual new building of diverse fair houses even up to
the Earl of Bedfordes house, Bedford house
which is a goodly house, lately builded nigh to Iuy Bridge, over against the
old Bedforde house, namely, called Russell house and Dacres house, now the
house of Sir Thomas Cecile Lord Burghley, and so on the North side to a lane
that turns to the Parish Church of S. Martin in the field, Parish church of
S. Martin in the field.
and stretches to S. Giles in the field. Then had ye the Chapel of our Lady
Chapel of our Lady in the Pew an house belonging to Bethle^.
called the Pew, with an house wherein sometime were distraight and Lunatike
people.

Amongst other things of this Chapel I have read that on the 17. of February
in the year of Christ 1452. by negligence of a scholar appointed by his
Scholemaister, to put forth the lights of this Chapel, the Image of our Lady
Chapel of our Lady the Pew brent.
richly decked with Jewels, precious stones, pearls, and ringes (more then any
Ieweller could judge the price) (for so says mine Author) was with all this
apparel, ornaments and Chapple it self brent. John Piggot.


Then is the Mewse The Meuse by Charing Cross.
so called of the kings Faulchons there kept by the kings Faulconer, which of
old time was an office of great account, as appears by a Record of Richard
the second, in the first of his reign, for Sir Simon Burley knight, was made
Constable for the Castles of Windsor, Wigmore and Guilforde, and of the Mauor
of Kenington, and also Master of the kings Faulcons, at his Mewse near unto
Charing Cross by West. Of later time king Henry the eight having fair
stabling there for horses in the year 1534. and the 28. of his reign, it was
burned with many great houses and much hay ^ therein: The Meuse burned.
but it was again reedified in the reigns of king. Edward the sixth, and
Queen Marie, and this is the farthest building westwarde, on the northside of
that high street.

On the southside of the which street, in the Liberties of Westminster
(beginning at Iuie bridge) first is Durham house, builded by Thomas Hatfielde
Bishop of Durham, The Bishop of Durhams house.
who was made Bishop of that See in the year 1345. and sat Bishop there 36.
years.

Amongst matters memorable concerning this house, this is one, In the year of
Christ 1540. the 32. of Henry the eight, on May day a great and triumphant
Iusting Iusting feast at Durham house.
was holden at Westminster, which had been formarly proclaimed in France,
Flanders, Scotland, and Spain, for all comers that would undertake the
challengers of England, which were Sir John Dudley, Sir Thomas Seymar Sir
Thomas Ponings, and Sir George Carew knights, and Anthony Kingston, and
Richard Crumwell Esquiers, at which came into the Lists that dayrichly
apparelled and their horses trapped all in white Ueluet, there came against
them the said day 46. Defendantes or Undertakers vzthe Earl of Surrey
foremost, Lord William Howarde, Lord. Clinton, and Lord Cromwell, son and heir
to Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex, and Chamberlain of England with other, and
that day after the Iustes performed the Challengers rode unto this Durham house
where they kept open householde, and feasted the king and Queen with her
Ladies and all the Court, the second day Anthony Kingston, and Richard
Cromwell were made knights there, the third day of May the said chalengers
did Turney on horseback with swords, and against them came 49. Defendantes:
Sir John Dudley, and the Earl of Surrey running first, which at the first
course lost their Gauntletes: and that day Sir Richard Cromwell overthrew
master Palmer and his horse in the field to the great honor of the
chalengers, the ^^ft of May the Chalengers fought on foot at the Baryars, and
against them came 50. Def^ndantes, which fought valiantly: but Sir Richard
Cromwell overthrew that day at the Barryars master Culpepper in the field,
and the sixth day the chalengers brake up their householde.

In this time of their housekeeping they had not only feasted the king,
Pencione^s.
Queen, Ladies and all the court, as is before showed, but also they cheared
all the knights and Burgesses of the common house in the Parliament, and
entertained the Mayor of London with the Aldermen and their wives at a Dinner
etc. The king gave to every of the said challengers, and their heirs for
ever, in reward of their valiant actiuitie one hundred marks and a house to
dwell in of yearly reuenewe out of the lands pertaining to the Hospital of
S. John of Jerusalem.

Next beyond this Durham house is one other great house sometime belonging to
the Bishop of Norwitch, The Bishop of Norwitch his house.
and was his London lodging, which now pertayneth to the Archbishop of York by
this occasion. In the year 1529. when Cardinal Wolsey Archbishop of York
was indighted in the Premunirey, whereby king Henry the eight was entitled to
his goods and possessions: he also seized into his hands, the said
Archbishoppes house, commonly called York place, and changed the name thereof
into White hall whereby the Archbishops of York being dispossessed and having
no house of repair about London, Queen Marie gave unto Nicholas Heth then
Archbishop of York and to his successors, Suffolk house in Southwarke,
lately builded by Charles Bramdon Duke of Suffolk, as I have showed.

This house the said Archbishops sold, and bought the aforesaid house of
old time belonging to the Bishops of Norwich, which of this last purchase is
now called York house, the Lord Chancellors, or Lord Keepers of the great
Seal of England, have been lately there lodged.

Then was there an Hospital of S. Marie Rounceual Hospital of S. Marie
Rounciuall.
by Charing Cross (a Cell to the Priorie and Covent of Rounceual in Nauar in
Pampelion Diocese) where a Fraternity was founded in the 15. of Edward the
fourth, but now the same is suppressed and turned into Tenementes.

Near unto this Hospital was an Hermitage, with a Chapel of S. Katherine
Hermitage with a Chapel of S. Katherine.
over against Charing Cross, Charing cross
which Cross builded of stone, was of old time a fair piece of work there
made by commandment of Edward the first, in the one and twentieth year of his
reign, in memory of Helenor his deceased Queen as is before declared.

West from this Cross stood sometime an Hospital of Saint James, Hospital of
S. James.
consisting of two hydes of Land with the appurtenances in the parish of Saint
Margaret in Westminster, and founded by the Citizens of London, before the time
of any man's memory, for fourteen sisters maidens that were leprouse, living
chastely, and hon^stly ^^diuine service.

Afterward diverse Citizens of London, gave six and fifty pound rent
thereunto, and then were adjoined eight Brethren to minister divine service
there. After this also sundry devout men of London gave to this Hospital
four hydes of land in the field at Westminster, and in Hendon, Calcote, and
Hampsted, eighty ^ of ^ande ^ Wood etc. king Edward the first, confirmed
those gifts and granted a Fair to be kept on the Eu^ of S James, S. James
Fair for 7. days.
the day, the morrow, and four days following, in the eighteenth of his
reign.

This Hospital was surrendered to Henry the eight the three and twentieth of his
reign, and the Sisters being compounded with all were allowed Pensions for
term of their lives, and the king builded there a goodly Manor, annexing
thereunto a Park, S. James Park
closed about with a wall, of brick now called S. James Park serving
indifferently to the said Manor, and to the Manor or Palace of White hall.

South from Chating Cross on the right hand, are diverse fair houses lately
builded before the Park, then a large Tyltyarde for Noble men, Tylt yard at
Westminster.
and other to exercise themselves in Iusting, Turning, and Feighting at the
Barryars.

On the left hand from Charing Cross, be also diverse fair, Tenementes lately
builded till ye come to a large plot of ground enclosed with brick, and is
called Scotland, Scotland a plot of giound so called.
where great building has been for receipt of the kings of Scotland, and
other estates of that Country: for Margaret Queen of Scots and Systar to king
Henry the eight had her abiding there, when she came into England after the
death of her husband, as the king of Scotland, had in former times, when they
came to the Parliament of England.

Then is the said White hal White hall.
sometime belonging to Hubart de Brugh Earl of Kent, and Iustici^^ of England,
who gave it to the Black Friars in Oldborne as I have before noted. King Henry
the eight ordained it to be called an honor, and builded there a sumptuous
Gallery and a bewtifull Gate house, thwart the high street to S. James Park,
etc.

In this Gallorie the Princes with their Nobility, use to stand or sit, and at
Windows to behold all triumphant Iustinges, and other military exercises.

Beyond this Gallerie on the left hand is the garden or orchyard belonging to
the said White hall. On the right hand be diverse fair Tennis courts,
bowling Allies, and a Cock pit, Tennis courts Bowling Allies and Cock pit
all built by king Henry the eight, and then one other arched gate with a way
over it thwarting the street from the kings gardens to the said Park.

From this gate up kings street, to a Bridge over Long ditch Long pitch.
(so called for that the same almost insulateth the City of Westminster) near
which Bridge is a way leading to Chanon Row, so called for that the same
belonged to the Deane and Chanons of S. Stephens Chapel, S. Stephens Allie.
who were there lodged as now diverse Noblemen, and Gentlemen be.

From this way up to the Woolestable and to the high Tower, or gate which
enters the Palace Court, all is replenished with buildinges, and inhabitants.

Touching this Woolestable, T. Glifforde.
I read that in the reign of Edward the first, the Staple being at
Westminster the parrishioners of S. Margaret, and Marchantes of the Staple
builded of new the said Church, the great Chancell excepted, which was lately
before new builded, by the Abbote of Westminster.

Moreover that in the 27. of Edward the third the Staple of Woole, before
kept at Bruges in Flanders, was ordained by Parliament to be kept in diverse
places of England, Wales, and Ireland, as at Newcastle, York, Lincoln,
Canterbury, Norwitch, Westminster, Chichester, Winchester, Excester, Bristow,
and Carmarden, etc. to the great benefit of the king, and loss unto
strangers, and marchantes. For there grew unto the king by this means (as it
was said) the sum of one thousand a hundred and two pounds by the year more
then any his predicessors before had received, the Staple at Westminster at
that time began on the next morrow after the feast of S. Peter Ad vincula. The
next year there was granted to the king by Parliament toward the recovery of
his title in France, fifty shillinges of every sack of Wool transported over
seas, for the space of six years next ensuing, Robert de A. nesbery.
by means whereof the king might dispend daily during those years, more then
a thousand marks starling. For by the common opinion there were more then
100000. sackes of Wool yearly transported into foreign lands, so that during
six years the said grant extended to fifteen hundred thousand pound starling.

In the 37. of Edward the third it was granted unto him for two years to
take six and twenty shillinges eight pence, upon every sack of Woolle
transported and the same year the Staple of Woole (notwithstanding the kings
oath and other great estates) was ordained to be kept at Callis and six and
twenty merchants the best and welthiest of all England, to be Farmers there,
both of the Town and Staple for three years, every merchant to have six men
of Arms, and four Archers at the kings roast. He ordained there also two
Majors, one for the town, and one for the Staple, and he took for mala capta
commonly called Maltorth (I think Custom) twenty shillinges, and of the
said marchantes Gardians of the Town forty pence, upon every sack of Woolle.

In the 44. of Edward the third, Quamborough Kingston upon Hull, and Boston,
were made Staples of Wool, which matter so much offended some, that in the 50.
of his reign in a Parliament at London, it was complained that the Staple of
Woole, was so removed from Callis to diverse towns in England contrary to the
statute, appointing that Citizens and marchantes should keep it there, and
that the king might have the profits and customs with the exchange of gold
and silver that was there made, by all the Marchantes in Christendom (esteemed
to amount to 8000 ^. by year) the Exchange only: and the Citizens and
marchantes so ordered the matter that the king spent nothing upon soldiers
neither upon defense of the town against the ennemies, whereas now he spent
eight thousand pound by year.

In the year 1388. the twelfth of Richard the second, Manu script. French.
in a Parliament at Cambridge, it was ordained that the staple of Wooles Wool
Staple at Middle. b^ough.
should be brought from Middlebrough in Holland to Callis.

In the foureteenth of his reign there was granted 40. ^. upon every sack of
Woole, and in the one and twentieth was granted 50. ^. upon every sack
transported by english men, and three pound of by strangers etc. It seems
that the marchantes of this staple be the most ancient marchantes of this
Realm, and that all commodities of the Realm or Staple, Staple Marchantes the
most ancientst of this realm.
marchandizes by law and Charter, as Wooles, Leather, Wool fels, Lead, Tyn,
cloth etc.

King Henry the sixth had six Wool^ houses within the Staple at Westminster^^
those he granted to the Deane and Cannons of S. Stephen at Westminster, and
confirmed ^t the ^^. of his reign. Thus much for the Staple have I shortly
noted:

And now to pass to the famous Monastery of Westminster: At the very entrance
of the Close thereof is a lane that leads toward the West^ called Theeuing
lane, Theeuing lane.
for that thieves were led that way to the Gate house, while the Sanctuary
continued in force.

This Monastery was founded and builded by Sebert king of the East Saxons,
upon the persuasion of Ethelbert king of Kent, who having embraced
christianity, and being baptized by Melitus Bishop of London: immediately (to
show himself a christian indeed) built a church to the honor of God and Saint
Peter, on the West side of the city of London, in a place (which because it
was ouergrowen with thorns, and environed with water) the Saxons called
Thorney, and now of the Monastery and West situation thereof is called
Westminster. Foundation of Westminster by Sebert a Christian king not only in
word but in deed.


In this place (says Fulcardus Fulcardus.
) long before was a Temple of Apollo, which being overthrown, King Lucius
built therein a Church of Christianity.

Sebert was buried in this church, with his wife Athelgoda, whose bodies many
years after, to wit in the reign of Richard the second (says Walsingham
Walsingham.
) were translated from the old church to the new, and there interred.

Edgare King of the West Saxons repaired this Monastery about the year of
Christ ^958. Edward the Confessor builded it of new, whereupon T. Clifford
writes thus.

Without the walls of London (says he) upon the River of Thames there was in
times passed a little Monastery, T. Clifford.
builded to the honor of God, and Saint Peter, with a few Benedict Monks in
it, under an Abbotte serving Christ: very poor they were, and little was given
them for their relief, here the king intended (for that it was near to the
famous city of London and the River of Thames, that brought in all kind of
Marchandizes from all parts of the world) to make his Sepulcher, be commanded
therefore that of the tenthes of all his rentes, the work should be begun in
such sort as should become the Prince of the Apo^tles.

At this his commandment the work is nobly begun, even from the foundation and
happily proceeds till the same was finished: the charges bestowed, or to be
bestowed are not regarded. He granted to this church great privileges, above
all the churches in this land as partly appear by this his Charter.

(...)

Edward King greet William Bishop and Leofstane and Aelffie Portreeues, and
all my Burgesses of London friendly, and I tell you that I have this given and
granted to Christ and S. Peter the holy Apostle at Westminster full freedom
over all the land, that belongs to that holy place. etc.

He also caused y^ parish Church of S. Margaret Parish church of S. Margaret
to be newly builded, without the Abbie church of Westminster for the ease and
commodity of the Monks, because before that time the parish Church stood
within the old Abbey church in the South Isle, some what to their annoyance.
This church of S. Margaret (which that king Edward builded) continued till the
days of King Edward the first, at what time the staple of woolles was at
Westminster, and then the parishioners and Merchantes of the Staple builded it
all of new (the great chancell excepted, which was done by the Abbots of
Westminster as is before showed.

King Henry the third in the year of Christ 1220. began the new work of our
Ladies Chapel, and in the year 1245. the walls and steeple of the old
Church (builded by king Edward) were taken down, and enlarging the same
Church, caused them to be made more comely, for the furtherance whereof in the
year 1246. the same king (devising how to extort money from the citizens of
London toward the charges) appointed a Mart to be kept at Westminster, A Mart
at Westminster.
the same to last fifteen days, and in the mean space all trade of
Merchandise to cease in the City, which thing the citizens were feign to
redeem with two thousand pound of silver.

The work of this Church with the houses of Office, was finished to the end of
the Quire in the year 1285. the 14. of Edward the first. All which labor of
66. years, was in the year 1299. defaced by a fire kindled in the lesser Hall
of the Kings Palace at Westminster, Westminster with the palace burned.
the same with many other houses adjoining, and with the Queens chamber were
all consumed, the flame thereof also (being driven with the wind) fired the
Monastery, which was also with the palace consumed.

Then was this Monastery again repaired by the Abbotes of that Church, king
Edward the first and his successors putting to their helping hands.

Edward the second apropriated unto this Church the patronages of the Churches
of Kelueden and Sabritsworth in Essex in the Diocese of London.

Simon Langham Abbot (having been a great builder there in the year 1362.)
gave 400. ^. to the building of the body of the church: but (amongst others)
Abbot Islip was in his time a great builder there, as may appear in the stone
work, and glass windows of the Church.

Since whose decease that work has staide as he left it, unperfected, the
Church and steeple being all of one height.

King Henry the seventh about the year of Christ 1502. caused the Chapel of
our Lady, New Chapel at Westminster.
builded by Henry the third, with a Tavern also called the White Rose near
adjoining to be taken down: In which plot of ground, on the 24. of January,
the first stone of the new chapel was laid by the hands of Abbot Islip, Sir
Reginald Bray, Knight of the Garter, Doctor Barnes, master of the Rolls,
Doctor Wall, Chaplen to the King, Master Hugh Aldham, Chaplen to the Countess
of Darbie, and Richmond (the kings mother) Sir Edward Stanho^ knight, and
diverse other: upon the^ which stone was engraven the same day and year, etc.

The charges in building this Chapel amounted to the sum of 14000. pound:
the stone for this work (as I have been informed) was brought from
Huddlestone quarrie in York shire: The Altar and se^^ture of the same King
Henry the seventh, wherein his body rests in this his new chapel, was made
and finished in the year 1519. by one Peter a Painter of Florence: for the
which he received 1000. pound starling for the whole stuff and workmanship,
at the hands of the kings executors, Richard Bishop of Winchester, Richard
Bishop of London, Thomas Bishop of Dutham, John Bishop of Rochester, ^^^^
Duke of Norfolk, Treasurer of Englande^ Edward Earl of Worcester the kings
Chamberlain, John Fineaux knight, Chief Justice of the Common place, etc.

This Monastery being valued to dispend by the year 3470. pound etc. was
surrendered to Henry, the eight, in the year 1539. And Benson then Abbot was
made the first Deane and not long after it was advanced to a Bishops Sea,
Westminster a Bishops sea.
in the year 1541. Thomas Thurley being both the first and last Bishop there,
who when he had impouerished the church was translated to Norwich in the year
1550. the fourth of Edward the sixth, and from thence to Elie, in the year
1554. the second of Queen Mary, Richard Cox Doctor in Divinity (late
schoolmaister to king Edward 6.) was made Deane of Westminster whom Queen Mary
put out, and made Doctor Weston Deane, until the year 1556. and then he being
removed from thence on the 21. of November, John Fekenham (late Deane of
Paul's) was made Abbot of Westminster, and took possession of the same, being
installed, and fourteen Monks more received the habbot with him that day of
the order of Saint Benedict: but the said John^ Fe^kenham with his Monks
enjoyed not that place fully three years for in the year 1559. in the month
of July they were all put out, and Queen Elizabeth made the said Monastery a
College, Westminster made a college.
instituting there a Deane, twelve Prehendes, ^^^^ ^^^^^ Almesmen^ and ^ortie
scholars, calling them the Queens scholars: and so was it named the College
at Westminster, founded by O. Elizabeth. D. Bill one of her Majesty's Chaplens
was made the first Dean: after whom succeeded M. D. Gabriel Goodman, now
Resident.

Of the Kings and Queens crowned Kings and Queens crowned at Westminster.
in this Church William surnamed Conqueror, and Matilde his wife were the
first: and since them all other Kings and Queens of this realm, have been
here crowned.

The kings and Queens buried Kings and Queens buried at Westminster.
in this Church are these: Sebert king of the East Saxons, with his wife
Athelgode, Harold surnamed Herefote, king of the West Saxons: Edward the
simple, surnamed Confessor, sometime richly shrined in a Tomb of silver and
Gold, curiously wrought by commandment of William the Conqueror, Egitha his
wife was there buried also, King Henry the third, whose Sepulture was richly
garnished with precious stones of Jasper, which his son Edward S. Edwardes
shrine at Westminster.
the first brought out of France for that purpose: Eleanor wife to Henry the
third, Edward the first who offered to the shrine of Edward the Confessor the
chair of marble, wherein the Kings of Scotland were crowned, with the
scepter and Crown also to the same king belonging. He gave also to that
church lands to the value of 100. pound by the year, twenty pound thereof
yearly to be distributed to the poor for ever: then there lies Eleanor his
wife, daughter, to Ferdinando king of Castile, Edward the third by Queen
Phillip of Henault his wife. Richard the second and Anne his wife, with their
images upon them, with cost more then four hundred marks for the guilding:
Henry the fifth with a royal image of silver and guilt, which Katherine his
wife caused to be laid upon him, but the head of this image being of massy
silver is broken off, and conuayed away with the plates of silver and guilt
that covered his body: Katherine his wife was buried in the old Lady chapel,
but her corpse being taken up in the reign of Henry the seventh (when a new
foundation was to be laid) she was never since buried, but remayueth above
ground in a coffin of bordes behind the East end of the Presbytery: Henry
the seventh in a sumptuous sepulture, and chapel before specified, and
Elizabeth his wife, Edward the sixth in the same Chapel without any monument,
Queen Mary without any Monument in the same chapel: Matilde daughter to
Malcolne king of Scotts, wife to Henry the first, lies in the Reuestrie: Anne
wife to Richard the third, Margaret Countess of Richmond and Darbie, mother to
Henry the seventh, Anne of Cleue, wife to Henry the eight: Edmond second son
to Henry the third, first Earl of Lancaster, Darby, and Leycester, and Aueline
his wife, daughter and heir to William de Fortibus Earl of Albemarle. In S.
Thomas chapel lie the bones of the children of Henry the third, and of Edward
the first, in number nine. In the Chapter house, Alianor countess of Bar,
daughter to Edward the first, William of Windsore, and Blaunch his sister,
children to Edward the third: John of Eltham Earl of Cornewell, son to
Edward the second, Elianor wife to Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester:
Thomas of Woodstocke by king Edward the third his father: Margaret daughter to
Edward the fourth, Elizabeth daughter to Henry the seventh, William de Valence
Earl of Pembrooke, Aimer de Valence Earl of Pembrooke, Margaret and John
son and daughter to William de Valence, John Waltham Bishop of Sarum
Treasurer of England, Thomas Ruthall Bishop of Durham 1522. Gyles Lord Dawbeny
Earl of Bridgewater, Chamberlain to king Henry the seventh 1508. and his wife
of the family of the Arundelles in Cornewell, John Vicount Wells, 1498. The
Lady Katherine daughter to the Duchess of Norfolk, Sir. T. Hungerford
knight, father to Sir John Hungerford of Downampney knight, a son and daughter
to Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, and Elizabeth his wife, Philip
Duchess of York, daughter to the Lord Mohun, thrice married, to the Lord
Fitzwalter, Sir John Golofer, and to the Duke of York: William Dudley Bishop
of Durham, Nicholas Baron Carew, Walter Hungerford son to Edmond, Sir John
Burley Knight, and Anne his wife, Sir John Golofer Knight, Humfrey Bourchere,
Lord Cromwell, Henry Bourchere son and heir to the Lord Barons, and both
slain at Barnet, Sir William Trussell knight, Sir Thomas Vaughan knight,
Francis Brandon Duchess of Suffolk, Mary her daughter, Sir John Hampden
Knight, Sir Jews Vicount Robsart Knight, Lord Bourchere of Henalt, and his
wife daughter and heir to the Lord Bourchere: Robert Brown and William Brown
Esquires: The Lady Iohane Tokyne daughter of Dabridge court: George Mortimer
bastard, John Felby Esquire, Anne wife to John Watkins, William Southwike
Esquire, William Southcot Esquire, Raph Constantine gentleman, Arthur Froffote
Esquire, Robert Hall Knight, slain in that church, Sir Richard Rouse Knight,
Sir Geffrey Maundeuil Earl of Essex, and Athelard his wife, Sir Foulk of
Newcastle, Sir James Barons Knight, Sir John Salisberie knight, Margaret
Dowglasse Countess of Lineaux, with Charles her son, Earl of Lineaux: Henry
Scogan a learned Poet, in the cloister. Geffrey Chaucer the most famous Poet of
England, Geffrey Chaucer the famous poet of England.
also in the Cloister, 1400. but since Nicholas Brigham Gentleman, raised a
Monument for him in the South cross I Will of the Church: his works were partly
plublished in print by William Caxton in the reign of Henry the sixth:
Increased by William Thin Esquire, in the reign of Henry the eight:
Corrected and twice increased through mine own painful labors, in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, to wit, in the year 1561. and again beautified
with noates, by me collected out of diverse Records and Monumentes, which I
delivered to my loving friend Thomas Speight, and he having drawn the same
into a good form and method, as also explaned the old and obscure words etc.
has published them in Anno 1597.

Anne Stahanhope Duchess of Sommerset and Jane her daughter, Anne Cecill
Countess of Oxford daughter to the Lord Burghley, with Mildred Burghley her
mother, Elizabeth Barkley Countess of Ormond, Frauncis Sidney Countess of
Sussex, Elizabeth Countess of Hertford, Thomas Baron Wentworth, Thomas Baron
Wharton: John Lord Rustell, Sir Thomas Bromley Lord Chauncellor, Sir John
Puckering Lord Keeper. etc.

This Church has had great privilege of Sanctuary Sanctuary at Westminster.
within the precinct thereof, to wit, the church, churchyard, and close, etc.
from whence it has not been lawful for any Prince or other, to take any
person that fled thither for any cause: which privilege was first granted by
Sebert king of the East Saxons, since increased by Edgare king of the West
Saxons, renewed and confirmed by king Edward the Confessor, as appears by
this his charter following.

Edward by the grace of God, King of Englishmen: I make it to be known to all
generations of the world after me, that by special commandment of our holy
Father Pope Leo, I have renewed and honored the holy church of the blessed
Apostle S. Peter of Westminster, and I order and establish for ever, that what
person of what condition or estate soever he be, from whence soever he come,
or for what offense or cause it be, either for his refuge into the said holy
place, he be assured of his life, liberty and limbs: And over this I forbid
under the pain of everlasting damnation, that no minister of mine, or of my
successors intermeddle them with any the goods, lands or possessions of the
said persons taking the said Sanctuary: for I have taken their goods and
liuelod into my special protection, and therefore I grant to every each of
them in as much as my terrestrial power may suffice, all manner freedom of
joyous liberty: And whosoeuerpresumes or does contrary to this my grant, I
will he lose his name, worship, dignity, and power, and that with the great
traitor Judas that betrayed our Savior, he be in the everlasting fire of hell,
and I will and ordain that this my grant endure as long as there remains in
England, either love or dread of christian name.

More of this Sactuarie ye may read in our histories, and also in the statute
of Henry the eight, the 32. year.

Next to this famous Monastery, is the Kings principal Palace, of what
antiquity it is uncertain: but Edward the Confessor held his Court there: as
may appear by the testimony of sundry, and namely of Ingulphus, as I have
before told you. The said king had his Palace, and for the most part remained
there: where he also ended his life, and was buried in the Monastery which he
had builded. It is not to be doubted, but that King William the first, as he
was crowned there, so he builded much at this Palace: for he found it far
inferior to the building of princely palaces in France. And it is manifest,
by the testimony of many Authors, that William Rufus builded the great Hall
there, about the year of Christ, 1097 amongst others, Roger of Windouar, and
Mathewe Parris, Great hall at Westminster. Matthew Paris.
do write, that King William (being returned out of Normandy into England)
kept his feast of Whitsontide very royally at Westminster, in the new Hall
which he had lately builded, the length whereof (say some) was 270. foot, and
seventy four foot in breadth, and when he heard men say, that this Hall was
too great, he answered, Liber Woodbridge.
and said: this Hall is not big enough, by the one half, and is but a Beade
chamber in comparison of that I mean to make: a diligent searcher (says
Paris) might find out the foundation of the hall, which he had supposed to
have builded, stretching from the River of Thames, even to the common high way.
This Palace was repaired about the year, Palace repaired.
1163. by Thomas Becket, W. Fitzstephe^s
Chauncelor of England, with exceeding great celeritie and speed: which
before, was ready to have fallen down. This has been the principal seat
and Palace of all the Kings of England, since the Conquest: for here have
they in the great Hall kept their feasts of Coronation especially, and other
solemn feasts, as at Christmas, and such like, most commonly: for proof
whereof, I find Recorded, that in the year, 1236. and the twentieth of Henry
the third, on the 29. of December, Record Tower.
William de Hauarhull the Kings Treasurer, is commanded, that upon the day of
Circumcision of our Lord, he caused 6000. poor people to be fed at
Westminster, for the state of the King, the Queen, and their children: the
weak and aged to be placed in the great Hall: The use of great Halles was to
feed the Poor.
and in the lesser, those that were most strong, and in reasonable plight: in
the Kings Chamber, the children in the Queens: and when the King knows the
charge, he would allow it in the accounts. The like commandment, the said
King Henry gave to Hugh Gifford and William Brown, that upon Friday next after
the Epiphany, they should cause to be fed in the great Hal of Windfor, at a
good fire, all the poor and needy children that could be found, and the kings
children, being waighed and measured, their weight and measure to be
distributed for their good estates.

In the year 1238. the same King Henry kept his feast of Christmas at
Westminster, Matthew Paris.
in the great Hall: so did he in the year 1241. where he placed the Legate in
the most honorable place of the Table, to wit, in the midst, which the Noble
men took in evil part: the King sat on the right hand, and the Archbishop on
the left, and then all the Prelates and Nobles according to their estates: for
the King himself set the Guests. The year 1242. he likewise kept his
Christmas in the Hall, etc. Also in the year 1243. Richard Earl of Cornwell
the Kings brother, married Cincia, daughter to Beatrice, Countess of Province,
and kept his marriage feast in the great Hall at Westminster, with great
royalty and company of Noble men: insomuch, that there were told ( triginta
milia) 30000. dishes of meats at that dinner.

In the year 1256. King Henry sat in the Exchequer H. the 3. sat in the
Exchequer and merced the Sheriffs.
of this Hall, and there set down order for the appearance of Sheriffs, and
bringing in of their accounts: there was five Marks set on every Sheriffs
head for a fine, because they had not distrained every person, that might
dispend fifteen pound land by the year to receive the order of Knighthoode,
as the same Sheriffs were commanded.

In the years 1268 and 1269. the same king kept his Christmas feasts at
Westminster as before, and also in the same, 1269. he translated with great
solemnity, the body of king E. the Confessor, Translation of E. the Confessor.
into a new Chapel, at the back of the high Alter: which Chapel he had
prepaired of a marvelous workmanship, bestowing a new Tomb or Shrine of
Gold, and on the day of his translation, he kept a royal feast in the great
Hall of the Palace: thus much for the feast of old time in this Hall.

We read also, that in the year 1236. the river of thames ouerflowing the
Banques, caused the Marshes about Woolwitch to be all on a Sea, Marshes about
Woolwitch drowned.
wherein Boats and other vessels were carried with the stream, so that
besides cattle, the greatest number of men women, and children, inhabitants
there, were drowned: and in the great Palace of Westminster, men did row with
wheries, Wheries rowed in Westminster Hall.
in the midst of the hall, being forced to ride to their chambers.

Moreover, in the year 1242. the Thames ouerflowing the banques about
Lambhithe, drowned houses and fields, by the space of six miles, so that in
the great hall at Westminster, men took their horse, because the water ran
over all. This Palace was (in the year, 1299. the twenty seventh of Edward
the first, brent by a vehement fire, T. Walsingha^. Palace at Westminster
brent.
kindled in the lesser hall of the Kings house, the same with many other houses
adjoining, and with the Queens chamber, were consumed, but after that
repaired. In the year, 1313. the 31. of E. the first, the kings treasury at
Westminster was robbed, The kings Treasury at Westminster robbed.
for y^ which, Walter Abbot of Westminster, The Abbot and Monks sent to the
Tower.
with 49. of his brethren, and 32. other were thrown into the Tower of London,
and indighted of the robbery, of an hundred thousand pound: but they affirming
themselves to be clear of the fact, and desiring the King of speedy justice,
a commission, was directed for inquiry of the truth, and they were freed. In
the year 1316 E. the 2. did solemnize his feast of Penticost, at Westminster,
in the great Hall, E. the 2. keeping his feasts at Westminster. hal. was presented
with a complaint, of not rewarding soldiers.
where sitting royally at the table, with his Pears about him, there entered a
woman adorned like a Minstrell, sitting on a great horse, trapped as
Minstrelles then used, who rode round about the tables, showing pastime, and at
length, came up to the kings table, and laid before him a letter, and
forthwith turning her horse, saluted every one, and departed. The letters being
opened, had these contents. Our Sovereign Lord the King, has nothing
courteously respected his knights, that in his fathers time, and also in his
own, have put forth their persons to diverse perils, and have utterly lost, or
greatly diminished their substance, for honor of the said King, and he has
enriched abundantly such as have not borne the weight as yet, of the
business, etc. This great Hall was begun to be repaired Great Hall at
Westminster repaired.
in the year, 1397. by R^. the 2. who caused the walls, windows, and roof,
to be taken down, and new made, with a stately portch, and diverse lodgings of
a marvelous work, and with great Costs: all which, he levied of strangers
banished, or flying out of their countries, who obtained license to remain in
this land by the kings charters, which they had purchased with great sums of
money.

This hall being finished in the year, 1399. the same King kept a most royal
Christmas there, with daily Iustings and runnings at Tylt, whereunto resorted
such a number of people, that there was every day spent, twenty eight, or
twenty six Oxen, and three hundredth Sheep, besides foul, without number:
he caused a gown for himself to be made of Gold, garnished with Pearl and
precious Stone, to the value of 3000. Marks: he was guarded by Cheshiere men,
and had about him commonly thirteen Bishops, besides Barons, Knights,
Esquires, and other more then needed: insomuch, that to the household, came
every day to meat 10000. people, as appeared by the messes told out from the
Kitchen to 300. Seruitors.

Thus was this great Hall for the honor of the Prince oftentimes furnished
with guests, To. Iuelefe.
not only in this kings time (a prodigal Prince) but in the time or other
also, both before and since, though not so usually noted. For when it is said,
the King held his Feast of Christmas, or such a Feast at Westminster, it may
well be supposed to be kept in this great Hall, as most sufficient to such a
purpose.

I find noted by Robert Fabian, To. Fabian.
the Chronickler (sometime a Citizen and an Alderman of London) that king Henry
the seventh, King Henry the 7. feasted the Mayor of London, etc.
in the ninth of his reign (holding his royal feast of Christmas, at
Westminster) on the twelfth day, feasted Raphe Austry, then Mayor of London,
and his brethren the Aldermen, with other Commoners in great number, and after
dinner, dubbing the Mayor Knight, caused him with his brethren, to stay and
behold the disguizings and other disports, in the night following, showed in
the great Hall, which was richly hanged with Arras, and Staged about on both
sides: which disports being ended in the morning, the King, the Queen, the
Ambassadors, and other states, being set at a table of stone, 60. knights, and
Esquires, served 60. dishes to the Kings Mess, and as many to the Queens
(neither flesh nor fish) and served the Mayor with twenty four dishes to his
Mess, of the same manner, with sundry wynes, in most plentious wise: and
finally, the King and Queen, being conveyed with great lights into the
Palace, the Mayor with his Company in Barges, returned and came to London, by
break of the next day. Thus much for building of this great hall, and feasting
therein. It moreover appears, that many Parliaments have been kept there:
(...)
for I find noted, that in the year 1397. the great Hall at Westminster,
being out of reparations, and therefore (as it were new builded by Richard
the second, (as is before showed) the same Richard in the mean time having
occasion to hold a Parliament, caused for that purpose a large house to be
builded in the midst of the Palace Court, betwixt the clock Tower, and the
gate of the old great Hall, this house was very large and long, made of
timber, covered with Tyle, open on both the sides, and at both the ends, that
all men might see and hear what was both said and done.

The Kings archers (in number, 4000. Chesh^ire men) compassed the house about
with their Bows bent, and Arrows nocked in their hands, always ready to
shoot: they had bouch of court Bouch of Court.
(to wit, meat and drink) and great wages, of six pence by the day.

The old great Hall being new builded, Parliaments were again there kept as
before: namely, one in the year 1399. for the deposing of Richard the second.
A great part of this Palace at Westminster was once again brent in the year
1512. the fourth of Henry the eight, since the which time, it has not been
reedified: only the great Hall, with the offices near adjoining, are kept in
good reparations, and serves as before it did, for feasts at Coronations,
Arraignments of great persons charged with treasons, keeping of the courts of
justice, etc. But the Princes have been lodged in other places about the
city, as at Baynards Castle, at Bridewell, and White Hall, sometime called
York Place, and sometimes at S. James.

This great Hall has been the usual place of pleadings, and ministration of
Justice, whereof somewhat shortly I will note. In times past, the courts and
benches followed the King, wheresoever he went, as well since the conquest, as
before, which thing at length being thought combersome, painful, and
chargeable to the people, it was in the year 1224. the 9. of H. the 3. agreed,
that there should be a standing place appointed, where matters should be heard
and judged, which was in the great Hall at Westminster. Magna carta. Common
place in Westminster Hall.


In this Hall, be ordained three judgment seats, to wit, at the entry on the
right hand, the common place, where civil matters are to be pleaded, T. Smith.
specially such as touch lands, or contracts, at the upper end of the Hall, on
the right hand (or Southeast corner) the Kings bench where pleas of the Crown
have their hearing: and on the left hand or Southwest corner, sits the Lord
Chancellor, accompanied with the master of the Rowles, and with certain other of
the 11. me^ (learned for the most part in the Civil Law, and called masters
of the Chauncery) Court of the Chauncery.
which have the Kings fee. The times of pleading in these courts are four, in
the year which are called Terms, the first is Hillary Term, which begins
the 23. of January (if it be not Sunday) and ends the 12. of February. The
second, is Easter Term, and begins 17. days after Easter day, and ends
4. days after Assencion day. The third Term begins 6. or seven days after
Trinity Sunday, and ends the Wednesday fortnight after. The fourth is
Michelmas Term, which begins the 9. of October (if it be not Sunday) and
ends the 28. of November.

And here is to be noted, that the Kings of this Realm, have used sometimes to
sit in person in the Kings Bench, namely, King Edward the fourth, in the year,
1462. in Michelmas Term sat in the Kings Bench Kings of this Realm have sat
on the Kings Bench, in West^ Hall.
three days together, in the open Court, to understand how his laws were
ministered and executed.

Within the Port, or entry into the Hall, on either side, are ascendings up
into large chambers: without the Hall adjoining thereunto, wherein certain
Courts be kept, namely, on the right hand, is the court of the Exchequer, Court
of the Exchequer.
a place of account, for the revenues of the crown: the hearers of the
account, have Auditors under them, but they which are the chief for the
accounts of the prince, are called Barons of the Exchequer, whereof one is
called the chief Baron. The greatest officer of al, is called the high
Treasurer of England. In this court be heard, those that are delators (or
informers) in popular and penal actions, having thereby part of the profit by
the law assigned unto them.

In this Court, Informers.
(if any question be) it is determined after the order of the common Law of
England, by twelve men, and all subsidies, Taxes, and Customs, by account, for
in this office, the Sheriffs of the Shire do attend upon the execution of the
commandments of the judges, which the Earl should do, if he were not
attending upon the Princes in the Wars, or otherwise about him: for the
chief office of the Earl was, to see the Kings justice to have course, and to
be well executed in the Shire, and the Princes Revenues to be well answered
and brought into the Treasury.

If any fines or amerciaments be extracted out of any of the said courts upon
any man, or any arrerages of accounts, of such things as is of customs, taxes
and subsidies, or other such like occasions, the same the Sheriff of the Shire
does gather, and is answerable therefore in the Exchequer, as for other
ordinary rents, of patrimoniall lands, and most commonly of taxes, customs,
and subsidies, there be particular receivers and collectors, which do answer it
into the Exchequer. This Court of the Exchequer, has of old time (and as I
think, since the conquest) been kept at Westminster, notwithstanding,
sometimes removed thence by commandment of the king, for a time, and after
restored again, as namely, in the year, 1209. King John commanded the
Exchequer to be removed from Westminster, to Northampton, etc.

On the left hand above the staire is the Duchy chamber, wherein is kept, the
court for the Duchy of Lancaster, by a Chauncelor of that Duchy, and other
officers under him. Douch court.
Then is there in an other chamber, the office of receipts office of recei^
of the Queens Revenues, for the Crown: then is there also, the Star
chamber, Star chamber.
where in the Term time every week once at the least, (which is commonly on
Fridayes and Wednesdayes, and on the next day after, the Term ends) the Lord
Chauncelor and the Lords, and other of the privy counsel, and the two chief
Justices of England, from 9. of the clock, till it be 11. do sit. This place is
called the Star chamber, because the roof thereof is decked with the
likeness of Stars guilt, there be plaints heard, of ryots, rowtes, and other
misdemeanors, which if they be found by the Kings Council, the party the
offender, shall be censured by these persons, which speak one after another, and
he shall be both fined and commanded to the prison.

Then at the upper end of the great Hall, by the Kings Bench, is a going up,
to a great chamber, called the white Hall, wherein is now kept the Court of
Wards, and Liueries: The court of Wards and Liueries.
and adjoining thereunto, is the Court of Requests. Court of Requests.
Then is Saint Stephens chapel, S. Stephens Chapel.
of old time founded by King Stephen, and again since, of a far more
curious workmanship, new builded by King Edward the third, in the year,
1347. for thirty eight persons, in that church to serve God, to wit, a Deane,
twelve secular Cannons, thirteen Uickars, four Clerks, six Chorsles, two
Seruitors, to wit, a Uerger, and a keeper of the Chapel. He builded for
those, from the house of receipt, along nigh to the Thames, within the same
Palace, there to inhabit, and since that, there was also builded for them,
betwixt the the clock house, and the wool staple, called the wey-house. He
also builded to the use of this chapel, (though out of the Palace court) some
distance West, in the little Sanctuary, Little Sanctuary.
a strong Clotchard of stone and timber, covered with Lead, and placed
therein, three belles, about the biggest of the which (as I have been
informed) was written.

King Edward made me,
Thirty thousand and three,
Take me down and wey me,
And more shall ye find me.
The said King Edward, endowed this chapel with lands, to the yearly value of
500. pound. Doctor John Chambers, the kings physician (the last Deane of this
College) builded thereunto a cloister Cloister of S. Stephens Chapel builded.
of curious workmanship, to the charges of 11000. Marks. This chapel (or
college) at the suppression, was valued to dispend in lands by the year 1085.
pound 10. shillings 5. pence, and was surrendered to E. the 6. since the which
time, the same chapel has served as a Parliament house. Parliament house.
This Palace (before the entry thereinto) has a large court, and in the same,
a tower of stone, containing a clock, Clock house at Westminster.
which strikes every hour on a great bell, to be heard into the Hall, in
sitting time of the courts, or otherwise: for the same clock (in a calm) will
be heard into the city of London. King H. the sixth, gave the keeping of this
clock, Fountain in the Palace Court.
with the Tower, called the clock house and the appurtenances, unto W. Walsby,
Deane of S. Stephens, with the wages of six pence by the day, out of the
Exchequer. By this Tower stands a Fountain, which at the Coronations, and
other great triumphs, is made to run with wine out of diverse spouts. On the
East side of this court, is an arched gate to the river of Thames, with a fair
bridge and landing place, Westminst^^ bridge or co^^mon landing place.
for all men that have occasion. On the North side, is the South end of S.
Stephens Alley, or Canon Row; and also, a way into the old wool staple: and
on the west side is a very fair gate begun by Ri. the 3. in the year 1484.
and was by him builded a great height, and many fair lodgings in it, but left
unfinished, and is called the high Tower at Westminster. High tower ^^
Westminster^
Thus much for the Monastery and Palace, may suffice. And now will I speak of
the Gate House, Gate house a^ Westminster^
and of Totehilstreete, stretching from the West part of the Close. The
Gate House is so called of two Gates, the one out of the college court toward
the North, on the East side whereof, was the Bishop of Londons prison, for
clerks convict, and the other gate adjoining to the first, but toward the
west, is a gaile, or prison for offenders thither committed. Walter Warfield
celerar to the Monastery, caused both these gates with the appurtenances to be
builded in the reign of E. the 3. On the South side of this gate, King H. the
7. founded an almeshouse, Almeshouse o^ Henry the 7.^
for 13. poor men: one of them to be a Priest, aged 45. years, a good
Gramarian, the other 12 to be aged fifty years without wives, euey Satterday
the Priest to receive of the Abbot, or Pryor, 4. pence by the day, and each
other 2 pence half penny by the day for ever, for their sustenance, and every
year to each one a gown and a hood ready made: and to 3. women that dressed
their meat, and kept them in their sickness, each to have every Satterday 16.
pence, and every year a gown ready made. More to the 13. poor men yearly
80. quarters of cole, and 1000. of good faggots to their use: in the hall and
kitchen of their mansion, a discreet Monk to be ouerseer of them, and he to
have 40. shillings by the year, etc. and hereunto was every Abbot and Pryor
sworn. Neareunto this house westward, was an old chapel of S. Anne, Chapel
of S. Anne.
over against the which, the Lady Margaret, Almeshouse founded by Lady Margaret.
mother to king H. the 7 erected an Almeshouse for poor women, which is now
turned into lodgings for the singing men of the college: the place wherein
this chapel and Almeshouse stands, was called the Elemosinary or Almory,
Almory at Westminster.
now corruptly the Ambry, for that the Alms of the Abbey were there
distributed to the poor. And therein Islip Abbet of Westminster, first
practiced and erected the first Press of book Printing that ever was in
England, Printing of books at Westminster. the first in England.
about the year of Christ, 1471. From the West gate runs along Totehill
street, Totehil street.
wherein is a house of the Lord Gray of Wilton, and on the other side at the
entry into Totehill field, Stourton house, which Gyles, the last L. Dacre of
the South, purchased and built new, whose Lady, and wife Anne, (sister to
Thomas the Lord Buckhurst) left money to her Executors to build an Hospital
for 20. poor women, and so many children to be brought up under the^, or whose
maintenance she assigned lands, to the value of 100. pound by the year: which
Hospital, Hospital founded by Lady Anne Dacre.
her Executors have new begun, in the field adjoining. From the entry into
Totehil field, the street is called Petty France, Petty France.
in which, and upon S. Hermits hill, on the South side thereof, Cornelius van
dun (a Brabander borne, Yeomen of the Guard, to King H. the 8. King E. the 6.
Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth) built 20. houses for poor women to dwell
rent free: Almeshouses for poor wowomen.
and near hereunto was a chapel of Mary Magdalen, Chapel of Mary Magdalen.
now wholly ruinated. The city of Westminster for civil government is divided
in 12. several Wards, for the which, the Deane of the Collegiat church of
Westminster. or the high Steward, do elect 12. Burgesses, and as many assistants,
that is, one Burgess, Government of Westminster City.
and one Assistant, for every Ward, out of the which 12 Burgesses, 2. are
nominated yearly, upon Thursday in Easter week, for chief Burgesses to
continue for one year next following, who have authority given them by the
Act of Parliament 27. Elizabeth, to hear, examine, determine, and punish
according to y^ laws of the Realm, and lawful customs of the city of
London, matters of incontinencie, common scoldes, inmates, and common
annoyances, and likewise, to commit such persons as shall offend against the
peace, and thereof to give knowledge within 24. hours to some Justice of
peace, in the county of Midlesex.

Spiritual Governor. Governors of the City of London, and first of the
Ecclesiastical, Bishops, and other Ministers there.
Having thus run through the description of these cities of London and
Westminster, as well in their Original foundations, as in their increases of
buildings and Ornaments, together with such incide^ts of sundry sorts, as are
before, both generally and particularly discoursed: It remains, that somewhat
be noted by me, touching the policy and government, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, of London, as I have already done for Westminster, W^^almesbery.
the order whereof, is appointed by late Statute, even as that of London is
maintained by the customs thereof, Antiquities of Gla^to.
most laudably used before all the time of memory. And first, to begin with
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, I read, that the Christian faith was first
preached in this Island (then called Britain) by Joseph of Aram^thia, and his
brethren Disciples of Christ, in the time of Aruiragus, then Governor here,
under the Roman Emperor: after which time, Lucius (King of the Britains) sent
his Ambassadors Eluanus, and Meduuinus (two men learned in the Scriptures) with
letters to Eleutherius Lib. consti L. Eleutherius died in the year, 186. when
he had sitten Bishop 15 years.
Bishop of Rome, desiring him to send some devout and learned men, by whose
instruction he and his people might be taught the faith and religion of Christ.
Eleutherius baptized those messe^gers, making Eluanus a Bishop, and Meduuinus a
Teacher, and sent over with them into Britain, two other famous Clerks,
Faganus and Deuuianus, by whose diligence, Lucius and his people of Britain,
were instructed in the faith of Christ, and baptized: the Temples of Idols,
were converted into Cathedral churches, and Bishops were placed where
Fla^mines before had bin: at London, York, and Carleon upon Vske, were placed
Archbishops, etc. The Epistle said to be sent, by Eleutherius to king Lucius,
for the establishing of the faith, ye may read in my Annalles, Sommaries, and
Chronicles, truly translated and set down, as mine author has it, Liber albu^
constitut.
for some have curtolled and corrupted it, and then fathered it upon the
reverend Bid, who never wrote word thereof, or otherwise, to that effect. But
to my matter of our London Bishops, as I find it written: First, there
remains in the Parish church of Saint Peter upon Cornhill in London, a
Table, wherein is written, that Lucius founded the same church to be an
Archbishops See, and Metrapolitane, or chief church of his Kingdom, and that
it so endured the space of four hundred years, until the coming in of
Augustine the Moonke, and others, from Rome, in the reign of the Saxons.

The Archbishops names, I find only to be set down by Ioceline of Furdes,
Socelin of Furnes.
in his book of British Bishops, and not elsewhere.

1. Thean (says he) was the first Archbishop of London in the time of Lucius,
who builded the said church of S. Peter, in a place called Cornhill in London,
by the aid of Ciran, chief butler to the king Lucius. 2. Eluanus was the
second, and he builded a Library to the same Church adjoining, and converted
many of the Dreudes (learned men in the Paganne law) to the Christian faith.
3. Cadar was the third: then followed, 4. Obinus. 5. Conan. 6. Paludius. 7.
Stephen. 8. Iltute. 9. Dedwin. 10. Thedred. 11. Hillary. 12. Guidelium. 13.
Vodimus, he was slain by the Saxons. 14. Theanus (the fourteenth and the last)
for he fled with the Britains into Wales, about the year of Chrst, 587. Thus
much out of Iocelin of the Archbishops: ^. Tome com.
the credit whereof I leave to the judgment of the learned: for I read of a
Bishop of London (not before named) in the year of Christ 326. to be present
at the 2. general Council holden at Arles, in the time of Constantine the
great, who subscribed thereunto in these words, Ex prouincia Britaniae
Ciuitate Londinensi Restitutus Episcopus: as plainly appears in the first
Tomb of the Counsels.
he writes not himself Archbishop, and therefore makes the matter of
Archbishops doubtful, or rather overthrows that opinion.

The Saxons being Pagons, having chased the Brittons, with the Christian
Preachers, into the Mountains of Wales and Cornwall: and having divided this
Kingdom of the Brittons amongst themselves, at the length (to wit, in the
year 596.) Pope Gregory moved of a godly instinction (says Bid) in the
147. year, after the arriual of the Angles (or Saxons) in Britain, sent
Augustine, Miletus, Iustus, and John, with other Moonks, to preach of Gospel,
to the said Nation of the Angles in Britain: these landed in the I Will of
Thanet, and were first received by Ethelbert, King of Kent, whom they converted
to the Faith of Christ, with diverse other of his people in the 34. year of his
Reign: which Ethelbert gave unto Augustine, the City of Canterbury.

This Augustine in the year of Christ, 604. consecrated Melitus, and Iustus
Bishops, appointing Melitus to preach unto the East Saxons, whose chief City
was London: and there King Sebert Nephewe to Ethelbert by preaching of Melitus,
received the word of life: the then Ethelbert (King of Kent) builded in the
City of London, Saint Paul's, Saint Paul's Church in London first founded.
Church wherein Melitus began to be Bishop, in the year, 619. 1. Melitus
first Bishop of London, 619.
and sat five years. Ethelbert by his Charter, gave lands to this Church of
Saint Paul: so did other kings after him: King Sebert through the good life
and like preaching of Melitus, having received Baptism, To show himself a
Christian, builded a Church, to the honor of God and S. Peter, on the West
side of London, which Church is called Westminster, but the Successors of
Sebert (being Pagannes) expelled Melitus.

Iustus 2. Iustus, 24.
the second, Bishop for a time, and then Melitus again: after whose decease,
the seat was void for a time: at length Sigebert (son to Sigebert, brother
to Sebert) ruled in Essex, heh became a Christian, and took to him, a holy man
named Cedde, or ( Chadde) who wan many by preaching, and good life to the
Christian Religion.

Cedde or ( Chad) was by Finan consecrated Bishop of the East Saxons, and he
ordered Priests and Deacons in all the parts of Essex, but especially at
Ithancaster, and Tilberry. 3. Cedde, B. of London, 58. Ithancaster and
Tilberrie.
This City (says Raphe Cogshall Raphe Cogshall.
) stood on the banque of the River, Pont that runs by the Maldun in the
hundred of Danesey, but now that City is drowned in Paute, so that nothing
remains but the ruin of the City in the River, Tilburie (both the West and
East) stands on the Thames side, nigh over against Grauesende.

Wina 4. Wina, 666.
expelled from the church of Winchester, by Cenewalche the King, was adopted to
be the fourth Bishop of London, in the reign of Wolferus, King of Mercia, and
sat 9. years.

Erkenwalde 5. Erkenwald 680.
(borne in the Castle, or town of Stallingborough in Lindsey) first Abbot of
Crotesey, was by Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, appointed to be Bishop of
the East Saxons, in the City of London. This Erkenwald in the year of Christ,
677. (before that he was made Bishop) had builded two Monasteries, one for
himself (being a Monk) at Crotsey Crotesey, or Chartesey.
in the I Will of Crote, in Surrey, by the River of Thames, and an other for his
sister Edilburge, being a Nun, in a certain place, called Berching in Essex:
he deceased at Berching, in the year, 697. and was buried in Paul's church, and
was from thence, translated into the new Church of Saint Paul, on the
eighteenth kallendes of December, in the year, 1148.

Waldhere 6. Waldhere 697.
Bishop of London, Sebba King King Sebba became a Monk in Paul's church.
of the East Saxons, came to this Waldhere, Bishop of London, and at his hands
received the habit of a Monk (for at that time, there were Monks in Paul's
Church, as writes Radulphus Dedicato, and others) to this Bishop he brought a
great sum of money, to be bestowed and given to the poor, reserving nothing
to himself, but rather desired to remain poor in goods, as in Spirit, for
the Kingdom of Heaven: when he had reigned 30. year, he deceased at Powles,
and was there buried, and lies now in a coffin of stone on the North side of
the I Will next the Quire.

Ingwaldus the Bishop of London, was at the Consecration of Tatwine, Archbishop
of Canterbrie: and he confirmed the foundation of Crowland in the year, seven
hundred sixteen, (says Ingulfus) and deceased in the year, 744. as says
Houedon.

Engulfe Bishop of London. Wichet. or Wigerns Bishop of London. Eaderightus, or
Edbrithe, Bishop of London. Eadgain or Eadgarus, Bishop of London. Kenewallth,
Bishop of London. Eadbaldus Bishop of London, Heatbright, or Hutbright, Bishop
of London, deceased 802. says Heueden. Osmondus Bishop of London: he was
witness to a Charter made to Crowland in the year 833. says Engulfe.
Ethelnothe Bishop of London. Elbertus, or Celbertus Bishop of London. Caulfe
Bishop of London. Swithulfus Bishop of London: he likewise was witness to a
Charter of Crowland 851. Edstanus Bishop of London, witness to a Charter to
Crowland, 860. Vlsius Bishop of London. Etheliuardus, Bishop of London.
Elstanus Bishop of London, dyed in the year 900. says Asser, and all these
(says the Author of Flores Historiarum) were buried in the old church of S.
Paul: but there remains memories there. Theodoricus Bishop of London: this
man confirmed king Edreds Charter, made to Winchester, in the year, 947.
whereby it seems that he was B. of London of a later time, then he is here
placed. Welstanus Bishop of London. Brithelme Bishop of London. Dunstanus Abbot
of Glastonberry, the^ B. of Wircestar, and the^ B. of London: he was afterward
translated to Canterbury, 960. Ealfstanns Bishop of London, the 28. Edgare
Bishop of London: he confirmed the grauntes made to Winchester and to
Crowland, 966. and again to Crowland 970. the Charter of Etheldred, concerning
Vlfrunhampton, 996. Elphinus Bishop of London. Alwinus Bishop of London.
Alfhune Bishop of London: he was sent into Normandy in the year 1013. says
Asser. Robert Bishop of London, 7. years a Monk of G^met, in Normandy:
afterward translated from London to Canterbury. Spechasius elected but
r^iected by the King. William a Norman, Chaplain to Edward the Confessor, was
made Bishop of London, 1051. sat 17. years, and deceased 1070. he obtained of
William the Conqueror, the Charter of liberties for the City of London, as I
have set down in my Summarie. Hugh de Orwell Bishop of London: he died of a
Leaprosie when he had sitten fifteen years. Mauricius Bishop of London: in
whose time (to wit, in the year, 1086.) the Church of Saint Paul was brent,
with the most part of this City: and therefore he laid the foundation of a
new large church, and having sitten twenty two years, he deceased 1107 says
Paris. Richard Beams (or Beamor) Bishop of London, did wonderfully increase
the work of this church begun, purchasing the streets and Lanes adjoining
of his own money, and he founded the Monastery of S. Osyth in Essex, he sat
Bishop 19. years, and deceased, 1127. Gilbertus Vniuersalis a Canon of Lions,
elected by Henry the 1. he deceased 1141, when he had sitten 14. years. Robert
de Segillo a Monk of Reading, Whom Mawde the Empress, made Bishop of London:
where he sat eleven years. Geffrey de Magnauile, took him prisoner, at
Fulham, and he deceased, 1152. Richard Beams, Archdeacon of Essex, Bishop of
London 10. years, who deceased 1162. Gilbert Folio^ Bishop of Hereford, from
whence he was translated to London, and there sat twenty three years, and
deceased, 1186. Richard Fitz Nele the kings treasurer, Archdeacon of Essex,
elected Bishop of London, at Pipwell, 1189. he sat nine years, and deceased
1198. this man also took great pains about the building of Powles church, and
raised, many other goodly buildings in his decease. William S. Mary Church, a
Norman, Bishop of London, who was one of the three Bishops that by the Popes
commandment executed his interdiction or curse upon the whole realm of
England, but he was forced with the other Bishops to fly the Realm in 1208.
and his Castle at Stortforde in Essex, was by commandment of king John
ouerthrown, 1210. This William in company of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
of the Bishop of Ely went to Rome, and there complained against the King 1212.
and returned, so as in the year 1215. King John in the Church of Saint Paul,
at the hands of this William took upon him the Cross for the holy land, he
resigned his Bishopric of his own voluntary, in the year 1221. says
Cogshall. Eustachius de Fauconbridge, Treasurer of the Exchequer (says Paris)
Chancellor of the Exchequer (says Textor, and Cogshall) Bishop of London,
1223. whilst at Chelm^sforde he was giving holy orders, a great Tempest of
wind and rain annoyed so many as came thither, whereof it was gathered, how
highly God was displeased with such as came to receive orders, to the end they
may live a more easy life of the stipendes appointed to Church men giving
themselves to banqueting, and so with unclean and filthy bodies, (but more
unclean souls) presume to minister unto God, the author of purity and
cleanenesse. Falcatius de Brent, was delivered to his custody in the year
1224: this Eustacius deceased in the year 1228. and was buried in Paul's
church, in the southside without the Quire. Roger Niger Archdeacon of
Cholchester, made Bishop of London, in the year 1230. (says Paris upon the
feast day of the conversion of S. Paul) when he was at Mass in the Cathedral
Church of S. Paul, a great multitude of people being there present, suddenly
the weather waxed dark, so as one could skantly see another, and an horrible
thunder clap lighted on the church, which so shook it that it was like to have
fallen, and there of withal out of a dark cloud proceeded such a flash of
such lightning, that all the church seemed to be on fire, whereupon such a
stench ensued, that all men thought they should have dyed, thousands of men
and women, ran out of the Church, and being astonished fell upon the ground,
void of all sense, and understanding, none of all the multitude tarried in the
church, save the Bishop and one Deacon, which stood still before the high
Alter, awaiting the will of God, and when the air was cleansed, the multitude
returned into the Church, and the Bishop ended the service. This Roger Niger is
commended to have been a man of worthy life, excellently well learned, a
notable Preacher, pleasant in talk, mild of countenance, and liberal at his
table, he fell sick, and dyed at his Manor of Bishops hall in Stebunheth, in
the year 1241. and was buried in Paul's Church, on the North side of the
Quire, in a fair Tomb of gray Marble. Fulco Basset, Deane of York, Bishop of
London, deceased on the 21. day of May, in the year 1259. (as says Textor)
and was buried in Powles church. Henry Wingham Chancellor of England, made
Bishop of London, deceased in the year 1262, (says Textor) and was buried in
Powles Church, on the south side without the Quire in a marble monument.
Richard Talot Bishop of London, straight ways after his consecration deceased,
says Euersden. Henry Sandwich Bishop of London deceased in the year 1273. as
the same Author affirms. John Cheshull Deane of Poules, Treasurer of England,
and keeper of the great Seal, was Bishop of London, and deceased in the year
1279. says Euersden. Fulco Louel, Archdeacon of Colchester, elected bishop of
London, but refused the place. Richard Grauesend, Archedeacon of Northampton
Bishop of London. It appears by the Charter warren granted to this Bishop,
that in this time there were two woods in the parish of Stebunhith pertaining
to the said Bishop: I have my self known the one of them by Bishops Hall, but
now they are both made plain, and not to be discerned from other grounds.
Some have fabuled that this Richard Grauesend Bishop of London, in the year
1392. the 16. of Richard of second, purchased the Charter of liberties, to
this City: which thing has no possibility of truth, as I have proved, for
he deceased in the year 1303. almost 90. years before that time. Fable of
Richard Grauesend reproved.
Ralphe Baldoke Deane of Paul's, Bishop of London consecrated at Lions by Peter
Bishop of Alba in the year 1307. he was a great furtherer of the new work of
Paul's, to wit, ye east end called our lady chapel, and other adjoining this
Ralph deceased in ye year 1313. and was buried in ye said Lady Chapel, under a
flat stone. Gilbert Segraue was consecrated Bishop of London, and sat 3.
years. Richard Newport Bishop of London sat 2. years, and was buried in
Paul's Church. Stephen Grauesend Bishop of London sat 20. years. Richard
Wentworth or Bentworth, Bishop of London and Chancellor of England, deceased
the year 1339. Ralphe Stratford Bishop of London, he purchased the piece of
ground called Nomans land, besides Smithfield, and dedicated it to the use of
buryall, as before has appeared: he was borne at Stratford upon Auon: and
therefore builed a chapel to S. Thomas there, he sat 14. years, deceased at
Stebinhith. Michael Norbroke Bishop of London deceased in the year 1361. says
Mirimouth, sat 7. years. Simond Sudbery Bishop of London sat 13. years,
translated to be Archbishop of Canterbury in the year 1375. William Courteny
translated from Hereford to the bishopric of London, and after translated
from thence to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury in the year 1381. Robert Brey
broke Chanon of Lichfielde, Bishop of London, made Lord Chancellor in the 6.
of Richard the second, sat Bishop 20. years, and deceased in the year 1404,
he was buried in the said Lady chapel at Paul's. Roger Walden Treasurer of
England, Archbishop of Canterbury, was deposed and after made Bishop of London:
he deceased in the year 1406. and was buried at S. Bartilmewes Pryorie in
Smithfield. Nicholas Bubwithe Bishop of London, Treasurer of England,
translated to Salisbury, and from thence to Bathe, and lies buried at Wells.
Richard Clifford removed from Worcester to London, deceased 1422. as says
Thomas Walsingham, and was buried in Paul's. John Kempe fellow of Martin
college in Oxford, was made Bishop of Rochester, from whence removed to
Chichester, and thence to London: he was made Lord Chancellor in the year
1425. the 4. of Henry the sixth, and was removed from London to York in the
year 1426. he sat Archbishop thence 25. years, and was translated to
Canterbury: he was afterward made Cardinal in the year 1352. In the Bishop
of Londons house at Fulham he received the Cross, and the next day the Pale at
the hands of Thomas Kempe Bishop of London, he deceased in the year 1454.
William Gray Deane of York, consecrated Bishop of London, who founded a
college at Thele in Hartfordshire for a Master and 4. chanons, and made it a
cell to Elsing Spittle in London it had of old time been a college decayed,
and therefore newly founded^ ^hee^ was translated to Lincoln 1431. Robert
Fitzhugh Archdeacon of Northampton, consecrated Bishop of London, sat 5.
years, deceased in the year 1435, and was buried on the south side of the
Quire of Pawles. Robert Gilbert Doctor of Divinity, Deane of York,
consecrated Bishop of London, sat 12. years, deceased 1448. Thomas Kempe,
Archdeacon of Richmond, consecrated Bishop of London at York house, (now White
hall) by the hands of his uncle John Kempe, Archbishop of Canterbury, the
eight of February, 1449. he founded a Chapel of the Trinity in the body of
S. Pawles Church on the North side, he sat Bishop of London 39. years, and
48. days, and then deceased in the year 1489. was there buried. John Marshall
Bishop of London deceased in the year 1393. Richard Hall bishop of London,
deceased 1495. and was buried in the body of S. Paul's Church. Thomas Savage
first bishop of Rochester, then bishop of London 5. years, was translated to
York 1501. where he sat Archbishop 7. years, and was there buried in the
year 1507. William Warrham Bishop of London, made keeper of the great Seal,
sat 2. years, was translated to Canterbury William Barons Bishop of London,
sat 10. months, and 11. days, deceased in the year 1505. Richard Fitz James
fellow of Martin College in Oxford in the reign of Henry the 6. was made
Bishop of Rochester, after bishop of Chchester, and then Bishop of London, he
deceased 1521. and lies buried hard beneath the Northwest pillar of the Steple
in Paul's, under a fair Tomb of Marble, now removed, over the which was
builded a fair Chapel of timber, with stayres mounting thereunto: this
chapel was burned with fire from the Steple. 1561. Cuthbert Tunstal, doctor
of law, Master of the rowles, Lord Privy Seal, and bishop of London, was
thence translated to the bishopric of Durham in the year 1529. John Stokley
Bishop of London sat 13. years, deceased in the year 1539, and was buried in
the Lady chaple in Pau^es. Edmond Boner Doctor of the civil law, Archdeacon of
Leycester, was elected to London in the year 1539. being then Bishop of
Hereforde, whilst he was beyond the ^eas Ambassador for the King. On the
first of September. 1549. he preached at Paul's Cross, for y^ which sermon he
was charged before the kings council by William Latimer Pa^son of S. Lawrence
Poltney, and John Hoper, sometime a white Monk, and being conuented before
certain Commissioners at Lambith, was for his disobedienc^ to the kings order
on the 20. day of the same month ^ent to the Marshalsey and deprived from his
bishopric. Nicolas Ridley bishop of Rochester, was elected Bishop of London.
This man by his deed dated the xii.day after Christmas, in the 4. year of
Edward the 6. gave to ye king the Ma^nors of Branketrie and Southminster, and
the patronage of ye church of Cogshall in Essex, the Manors of Stebunheth,
otherwise called Stebinhith and Hackney, in the County of Middlesex, and the
Marshe of Stebunheth or Stebinhith: and the aduowson of the vi^^arage of the
Parish Church of Cogshall in Essex aforesaid: which grant was confirmed by
the Deane and Chapter of Paul's, y^ same day and year, with exception of such
lands in Southminster, Stebunheth and Hacknoy, as only pertained to them. The
said King Edward by his letters patents dated the 16. of April in the said 4.
year of his reign granted to Sir Thomas Wentworth, L. Wentworth L.
Cha^berlane of ye kings household, for his good service before done (a part of
the late received gift) to wit, the Lordships of Stebunheth and Hackney, and
the lands in Shorditch, Holiwel street. White chapel, Stratford at Bow,
Poplar, Northstreete, Lymehouses, Ratliffe, Cleuestreete, Brockestreete,
Myleend, Bletenehall green, Oldford, Westheth, Kingsland Shakelwel, Newinton
street, Clopton, Churchstreete, welstreete, Hu^barton, Grouestreete, Gu^ston
street, alias Morestreete in the cou^ty of Middlesex, together with the Marshe
of Stebinhith etc. the Manor of Hackney was valued at lxi.^.ix^^.i^.^.by
year; and the Manor of Stebunhith at cxl.^.viij,^ xi,^.ob. by year. This
Bishop Nicolas Ridley, for preaching a Sermon at Paul's Cross, on the 16. of
July in the year 1553. was committed to the Tower of London, where he remained
prisoner till the 10. of April in the year 1554. and was thence sent to
Oxford, there to dispute with the Divines and learned men of the contrary
opinion: and on the 16. of October 1555. he was burned at Oxford for opinions
against the Romish order of Sacraments etc. Edmond Boner aforesaid being
released out of the Marshalsey, was restored to ye bishopric of London, by
Queen Mary, on the 5. of August in the year 1553. and again deposed by Queen
Elizabeth, in the month of July An. 1559. and was ^ftsoones committed to the
Marshalsey, where he died on the 5. of September. 1569. and was at midnight
buried amongst other prisoners in S. Georges Churchyard. Edmond Grindal Bishop
of London, being consecrated the 21 of December 1559. was translated to York,
in the year 1570. and from thence removed to Canterbury, in the year 1574. he
died blind 1583. On the 6. of July, and was buried at Crodowne in Surrey.
Edwine Sands being translated from Worcester to the Bishopric of London in
the year 1570. was thence translated to York in the year 1576. and died in
the year 1588. John Elmere Bishop of London deceased in the year 1594. on the
3. of June, at Fulanham, and was buried in Paul's Church, before S. Georges
chapel. Richard Fletcher, Bishop of Worcester, was on the 30. of December in
Paul's Church elected Bishop of London, and deceased on the 15. of June 1596.
He was buried in Paul's Church, without any solemn funeral. Richard Bancroft
doctor of Divinity, now sits Bishop of London in this year 1598. being
en^taled there.
This much for the succession of the Bishops of London, whose Diocese
contains y^ city of London, y^ whole shyres in Middlesex and Essex, and a
part of Hartfordshyre. These Bishops have for Assistants in the cathedral
Church of S. Paul's, a Deane, a Chaunter, a Chauncelor, a Treasurer, 5.
Archdeacons, to wit, London, Middlesex, Essex, Colchester and S. Albons, and
30. prebendaries: there appertains also to the said Church for furniture of
the Quire in divine service, and ministration of the sacraments, a College of
xij.petychanens, 6. vickars, choral and Queristars. etc.

This Dyocesse is divided into Parishes, every Parish having his Parson, or
vicar at the least, learned men for the most part, and sufficient Preachers to
instruct the people. There were in this city and within the suburbs thereof in
the reign of Henry the 2. (as writes Fitz Stephens) 13. great conuentuall
Churches, besides the lesser sort called Parish Churches, to the number of 126.
all which conuentuall Churches, and some others since that time founded, are
now suppressed and gone, except the cathedral Church of S. Paul in London,
and the college of S. Peter at Westminster: of all which Parish Churches
though I have spoken, yet for more ease to the reader, I will here again set
them down in manner of a Table, not by order of Alphabete, but as they be
placed in the wards and suburbs.

Parish Churches.
In Portsoken ward Parish Churches 3. The Hospital of S. Katheren serves for
that liberty. Trinity in the Minories, for precinct thereof. S. Buttolph by
Aldgate, the only Parish church for that ward. 2 In Towrestreete ward. 4. In
the Tower S. Peter, for the Inhabitants there. Alhallowes Barking by the Tower.
S. Olaue, in Heart street. S. Dunstone, in the East. 3 In Aldgate ward. 3. S.
Katharene Christ's Church. S. Andrews vndershafte. S. Katheren Colman Churth. 4
In Lymestreete ward none. There was S. Mary at the Axe, and S. Augustine in the
wall, both suppressed and united, the one to Alhallowes in the Wall, in
Brodestreete ward, the other to S. Andrewe Undershafte in Lymestreete ward. 5
In Bishopsgate ward 3. S. Buttolphes without Bishopsgate. S. Ethelburge within
the Gate. S. Helens adioining to the Nuns Priory. 6 In Brodestreete ward 6.
Alhallowes by the Wall. S. Peter's, the Poor. S. Martins Oteswitche. S. Benet
Fynke, S. Bartilmew by the Exchange. S. Christopher by the stocks market. 7 In
Cornhill ward 2. S. Peter upon Cornhill. S. Michaell upon Cornhill. 8 In
Langborne ward 7. S. Gabriell Fenchurch. S. Dyones Backchurch. Alhallowes in
Lombardestreete. S. Edmond in Lombardestreete. Alhalowes Staning at Mart lane
end. S. Nicolas Acon in Lombardestreete. S. Mary Wolnoth in Lombardestreete. 9
In Billinsgate ward 5. S. Buttolphe by Billinsgate. S. Marie on the Hill. S.
Margaret Patens. S. Andrewe Hubert in Eastcheape. S. George in Buttolphe lane.
10 In Bridgewarde within 4. S. Magnus at the bridge foot. S. Margaret bridge
street. S. Leonard Milkechurch Fishstreet hill. S. Benet Grass church. 11 In
Candlewike street 5. S. Clements Eastchepe. S. Mary Abchurch. S. Michael in
crooked lane, sometime a College. S. Martins Orgars. S. Laurence Pountney,
sometime a College. 12 In Walbrooke ward 5. S. Swithen by London stone. S.
Mary Woolchurch. S. Stephen by Walbrooke. S. John upon Walbrooke. S. Mary
Bothaw. 13 In Downegate Ward 2. Alhallowes Hay wharfe, in the Roperie.
Alhallowes the less, in the Roperie. 14 In the Uintrie Ward 4. S. Michael
Pater noster in the Royal sometime a College. S. Thomas Apostles. S. Martin
in the Uintrie. S. James at Garlic Hith. 15 In Cordwainer street ward 3. S.
Anthony in Budge row. S. Mary Aldmary church. S. Mary Bow at the North corner
of Cordwayner street. 16 In Chepe Ward 7. S. Benet Shorhoge, or Sith. S.
Pancrate by Sopars lane. S. Mildred in the Poultrie. S. Mary Colchurch. S.
Martin Pomerie in Ironmonger lane. Alhallowes in Honey lane. S. Laurence in the
Jury. The Chapel at Guildhall, sometime a College. 17 In Colemanstreete
Ward. 4. S. Olaue in the old Jury. S. Margaret in Lothburie. S. Stephen in
Colemanstreet. 18 In Bassings hall ward 1. S. Michael at Bassings Hall. 19. In
Criplegate ward 6. S. Mary Aldermanburie. S. Alphage sometime an Hospital of
Elsing. S. Mary Magdalen in Milkestreete. S. Albons in Woodstreete. S. Michael
in Hugen lane. S. Gyles without Criplesgate. 20. In Aldersgate ward 6. S. Mary
Stayning S. John Zachary. S. Olaue in Siluerstreet. S. Leonard in Foster lane.
S. Anne by Aldersgate. S. Buttolph without Aldersgate. 21. In Faringdon ward
within. The Cathedral church of S. Paul, and parish churches 9. S. Peter's at
the cross in Cheap. S. Fauster in Foster lane. Christ Church made a parish
church of the Gray Friars church and of two parrish churches, Saint Nicholas
and Saint Ewin, and also an Hospital for poor children. S. Matthew in Friday
street. S. Augustine by Paul's gate. S. Faith under Paul's church. S. Martins
at Ludgate. S. Anne at the black Friars. S. Michael at corn by Paul's gate.
Chapel of S. James by Criplegate. 22 In Bredstreet ward 4. Alhallowes in
Bredstreete. S. Mildreds in Bredstreete. S. John Evangelist in Friday street.
S. Margaret Moses in Friday street. 23 In Queen Hith Ward 7. S. Trinity in
Trinity lane. S. Nicholas Cold Abbey. S. Nicholas Olaue. S. Mary Mounthaunt. S
Michael at Queenehith. S. Mary at Summers hith. S. Peter's at Paul's wharfe. 24.
In Castle Baynardes Ward 4. S. Benet Hude (or hith) by Paul's Wharfe. S.
Andrew by the Wardrobe. S. Mary Magdalen in old fishstreet S. Gregory by Paul's
church. 25. In Faringdon Ward without. 7. S. Sepulcher without Newgate. S.
Andrew in Oldborne. S. Dunstone in the West S. Bartlemew by the Priorie. S.
Bartlemew the Hospital. S. Briget or Brydes in Fleetstreet. S. Parnell in the
Temple for the students there. 26. In the Borough of Southwarke, and Bridge
Ward without 4.
S. Sauiors in Southwarke made of twain, viz. S. Mary Magdalen, and S.
Margaret. Diocese of Winchester. S. George the Marter. S. Thomas the
Hospital. S. Olaue in Southwarke. Thus have ye in the 26. Wards of London and
Borough of Southwarke, parish Churches to the number of 1/4.

And in the suburbs adjoining, parish Churches 9. as follows. S. Mary
Magdalen at Bermondsey in the Borough of Southwarke, Diocese Winton. S. Mary
Matfelon White chapel. S. Leonard Shorditch. John Baptist Clearkenwell. S.
Gyles in the field, sometime an Hospital, S. Clement Danes without Temple
bar. S. John Baptist Sauoy an Hospital
in the Duchy of Lancaster.
In the City of Westminster that liberty as follows. The College of S.
Peter called Westminster: parish churches twain. S. Margaret a parish church
by Westminster. S. Martin in the field by Charing cross.
Thus have ye in the Wards of London and in the suburbs of the same city,
the Borough of Southwarke, and the city of Westminster parish churches 123.

The Hospitalles in this City and suburbs thereof, that have been of old
time, and now presently are, I read of these as follows.

HOspital An hospital for frensy people in Tower street Ward.
of S. Mary in the parish of Barking church that was provided for poor
priests, and others, men and women, in the City of London, that were fallen
into frenzy or loss of their memory, until such time as they should
recover, was since suppressed and given to the Hospital of S. Katherine by the
Tower.

S. Anthonies, S. Anthonies in Brodestreet Ward.
an Hospital of 13. poor men and college, with a free school, for poor
men's children, founded by citizens of London, lately by John Tare, first a
Brewer and then a Mercer, in the Ward of Brodestreet, suppressed in the reign
of Edward the sixth the school in some sort remaining, but sore decayed.

S. Bart^lmew in Smithfield, S. Bartilmew in Smithfild.
an Hospital of great receipt, and relief for the poor, was suppressed by
Henry the eight, and again by him given to the city, and is endowed by the
citizens benevolence.

S. Gyles in the fields S. Giles in the fields.
was an Hospital for leprose people out of the city of London, and shire of
Middlesex, founded by Matilde the Queen, wife to Henry the 1. and suppressed by
K. Henry the 8.

S John of Jerusalem S. John of Jerusalem, for defense of the Rhodes.
by Westsmithfield, an Hospital of the knights of the Rhodes, for maintenance
of soldiers against the Turks and Infidels was suppressed by king Henry the
eight.

S. James S. James in the field.
in the field, was an Hospital for leprose virgins of the city of London,
founded by citizens for that purpose, and suppressed by king Henry the eight.

S. John at Sauoy, S. John's at Sauoy.
an Hospital for relief of one hundredth poor people, founded by Henry the
seventh, suppressed by Edward the sixth. Again new founded, endowed and
furnished by Queen Mary, and so remains.

S. Katherine by the Tower S. Katherin by the Tower.
of London, an Hospital with a Master, brethren and sisters and alms women,
founded by Matilde wife to king Stephen, not suppressed, but in force as before.

S. Mary within Criplesgate, an Hospital Hospital of Elsing or Elsing Spittle.
founded by William Elsing, for an hundred blind people of the city, was
suppressed by King Henry the eight.

S. Mary Bethelem S. Mary Bethlem.
without Bishopsgate was an Hospital founded by Simon Fitzmary a Citizen of
London to have been a Priorie: and remains for lunaticke people, being
suppressed, and given to Christ's Hospital.

S. Mary without Bishopsgate was an Hospital and Priorie called S. Mary
Spittle, S. Mary Spittle
founded by a citizen of London, for relief of the poor, with provision of
180. beds there for the poor, it was suppressed in the reign of king Henry
the eight.

S. Mary Rounciuall S. Mary Rounsiuall.
by Charing cross, was an Hospital, suppressed with the Priories Aliens, in
the reign of King Henry the 5. then was it made a brotherhood in the 15. of
Edward the fourth, and again suppressed by king Edward the sixth.

S. Thomas S. Thomas of Acon.
of Acres in Cheap, was an Hospital for a Master and brethren (in the
record called Militia) it was surrendered and sold to the Mercers.

S. Thomas in Southwarke S. Thomas in Southwarke.
being an Hospital of great receipt for the poor, was suppressed, but again
newly founded, and endowed by the benevolence and charity of the citizens of
London.

An Hospital there was without Aldersgate, Hospital without Aldersgate
a cell to the house of Cluny, of the French order, suppressed by K. Henry the
5.

An Hospital there was without Criplesgate, Hospital without Criple^ate.
also a like Cell to the said house of Cluny, suppressed by King Henry the 5.

A third Hospital was there in Oldborne, Hospital in Oldborne.
being also a Cell to the said house of Cluny, and was suppressed by king Henry
the 5.

The Hospital, (or Alms house, called Gods house Gods house at VVhittington
College.
) for 13. poor men, with a College called Whittington College, founded by
Richard Whittington Mercer, and suppressed, but the poor remain, and are paid
their allowance by Mercers.

Christ's Hospital Christ's hospital.
in Newgate market of a new foundation in the Greyfryers Church by King Henry
the eight: poor fatherless children be there brought up and nourished at the
charges of the citizens.

Bridewell now an Hospital Hospital of Bridewell.
(or house of correction) founded by king Edward the sixth to be a workehouse
for the poor and idle persons of the City, wherein a great number of vagrant
persons be now set a work, and relieved at the charges of the citizens. Of
all these Hospitals being twenty in number, you may read before, as also of
good and charitable provisions made for the poor, by sundry well disposed
citizens.

Now of Leprose people, and lazar houses.

IT is to be observed, that leprose persons were always for avoiding the
danger of infection, to be separated from the sound: God himself commanding
to put out of the host every leaper, etc. Numbers 5.
Whereupon I read in a provincial smode holden at Westminster by Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year of Christ 1200. the second of King John
it was decreed according to the institution of the Lateran counsel, that when
so many leprose people were assembled, that might be able to build a church
with a church yard for themselves, and to have one especial Priest of their
own, that they should be permitted to have the same without contradiction so
they be not injurious to the old churches, by that which was granted to them
for pitties sake: And further it was decreed, that they be not compelled to
give any tithes of their gardens or increase of cattle.

I have moreover heard that there is a writ in our Law, de leproso amouendo,
Leprose persons to be voided the City.
and I have read that King Edward the third in the 20. year of his reign,
gave commandment to the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, to make proclamation in
every Ward; of the City and suburbs, that all leprose persons inhabiting
there should avoid within fifteen days next, and that no man suffer any such
leprose person t^ abide within his house, upon pain to forfeite his said
house, and to incur the kings further displeasure: And that they should
cause the said Lepers to be removed into some out places of the fields, from
the ha^^t or Company of sound people, whereupon certain Lazar houses (as may
be supposed) were then builded without the City, some good distance, to wit,
the lock without Southwarke in Kent street, one other betwixt the Miles end,
and Stratforde Bow, one other at Kingesland, betwixt Shoreditch, and Stoke
Newington, and an other at Knights Bridge, west from Charing Cross. Lazar
house^ builded.
These four I have noted to be erected for the receipt of Leprouse people,
sent out of the City at that time. Finally I read that one William Pole Yeoman
of the Crown, being stricken with a Leaproste, was desirous to build an
Hospital, with a Chapel to the honor of S. Anthony for the relief and
harborow of such Leprouse persons, as were destitute in the kingdom, to the
end they should not be offensive to other in their passing to and fro, for the
which cause Edward the fourth did by his Charter dated in the 1^. of his reign
give unto the said William for ever a certain parcel of his land lying in his
high way of Highgate, and Holloway, within the County of Middlesex, containing
60. foot in length, and 34. in breadth.

The temporal government of this City, somewhat in brief manner.

THis City of London being under the government of the Britons, Romans, and
Saxons, Pattent.
the most ancient and famous city of the whole realm was at length destroyed
by the Danes, Aserius Meneuen.
and left desolate: Florencius Wigor.
as may appear by our histories. Marianus Scotus.
But Aelfred king of the west Saxons, having brought this whole realm (from
many parts) into one Monarchy, honorably repaired this City, and made it
again habitable, and then committed the custody thereof to his son in law
Adhered Earl of Mercia: after whose decease the City with all other
possessions, pertaining to the said Earl returned to king Edward surnamed the
elder^ etc. And so remained in the kings hands, being governed under him by
Portgraues (or Portreues Portgraues.
) which name is compounded of the two Saxon words, Port, and Gerefe or ^ Port
betokens a Town, and Gerefe signifies a Guardian, ruler, or keeper of the
town.

These Governors of old time (says Robert Fabian Robert Fabian.
) with the laws and customs then used within this city, were registered in a
book called the Doomes day, in the Saxon tongue: but of later days when the
said laws and customs were changed, and for that also the said book was of
a small hand, and sore defaced, it was less set by, so that it was imbeseled,
and lost. Thus far Fabian.

Notwithstanding I have found by fearth of diverse old Registers and other
records, namely in a book sometime appertayning to the Monastery o^ S.
Albons, Li. S. Albani.
of the Portgraues and other governors of this City as follows.

First, that in the reign of king Edward the last before the conquest,
Wolfegare was Portgraue: as may appear by the charter of the same king,
Citizens of London called Burgesses.
in these words^ Edward(...)Alfward (...)Wolf grave my(...)the Burgesses in
London. And afterward that in an other, king Edward greeteth William Bishop and
Leofstane, and Alffi Portgraues.

In the reign of William Conqueror, William Bishop of London, procure^ of the
said Conqueror his charter of liberties, to the same W. Bishop and Godfrey,
Portgraue, and to all the Burgesses of the city of London, in as large form
as they enjoyed the same in the time of K. Edward before the conquest: and then
in the reign of the said Conqueror, and of William Rufus, Godfrey de
Magnauille was Portgraue (or Sheriff) as may appear by their Charters, and
one Richard de Par was Provost. Prouostes.


In the reign of King Henry the first, Hugh Buche was Portgraue, and
Leofstanus Goldsmith Provost.

After them Aubery de Vere was Portgraue, and Robert Bar Querell Provost. It Is
Auberie de Vere was slain in the reign of K. Stephen. Sheriffs.
It is to be noted also that K. Henry the 1. granted to the citizens of London,
the Shriuewicke thereof, and of Middlesex, as in another place before is showed.

In the reign of King Stephen, Gilbet Becket was Portgraue, and Andrew
Bucheuet Provost.

After him, Godfrey Magnauile, the son of William, the son of Godrey
Magnavile, by the gift of Maulde the Empress, was Portgraue or Sheriff of
London and Middlesex, forth yearly farms of three hundredth pound, as
appears by the Charter.

In the time of King Henry the second, Peter Fitz Walter was Portgraue: after
him, John Fitz Nigel was Portgraue: after him, Ernulfus Buchel became
Portgraue: and after him, William Fitz Isabell. These Portgraues Portgraues,
since called Shriues and Judges of ^^ Kings Court and have therefore vr^der
shriuesm^^ learned in the law, to sit in their Courts. Domesmen or Judges of
the kings Court.
are also in diverse records called Uicecounties, Uicounties, or Sheriffs, as
being under an Earl, for that they then, as since, used that office as the
Sheriffs of London do till this day. Some authors do call them Domesmen,
Eldermen, or Judges of the Kings Court.

William Fitz Stephen noting the estate of this City, and government thereof,
in his time under the reign of King Stephen, and of Henry the second, has
these words.

This City (says he) even as Rome, is divided into words, it has yearly
Sheriffs in stead of Consuls, it has the dignity of Senators and Aldermen,
it has under Officers, and according to the quallitie of laws, it has
several Courts, and general assemblies upon appointed days. Thus much for
the antiquity of Sheriffs, and also of Aldermen, in several Wards of this
city, may suffice. And now for the name of Bailiffes, and after that, of
Mayor I find as follows.

In the first year of King Richard the first, the citizens of London obtained
to be governed by 2. Bailiffes, Bailiffes of London.
which balliffes are in diverse ancient deeds called Shriues, according to the
speech of the law, which called the Shire Balliua, for that they like as the
Portgraues, used the same office of Shriuewicke, for the which the city paid
to fee farm of three hundredth pounds yearly as before, since the reign of Henry
the first, which also is yet paid by the city into the Exchequer until this
day.

They also obtained to have a Mayor, to be their principal Governor and
Lieftenant of the city, as of the Kings chamber.

office at the feast of Saint Michael Th'archangell, in the year of Christ
1189. were named Henry Cornhill, and Richard Reynere, Bailiffes or Sheriffs.
Their 1. M. was H. Fitz Alwin, Fitz Liefstane Goldsmith, First Mayor of London,
appointed by the said king, and continued M. from the first of Richard the
first, until the fifteenth of king John, which was twenty four years and
more. R. the first, sheriffs John Herlion, Roger Duke. Mayor. Henry Fitz
Alwin. R. the first, sheriffs William Hauerill, John Bucknote. Mayor Henry
Fitz Alwin. R. sheriffs Nicholas Duke, Peter Newlay. Mayor Henry Fitz Alwin.
R. sheriffs Roger Duke, Richard Fitz Alwin. Mayor Henry Eitz Alwin. R.
sheriffs William Fitz Isabill, William Fitz Arnold. Mayor Henry Fitz Alwin. R.
sheriffs Robert Besaunt, Ioke de Iosue. M. Henry Fitz Alwin. R. sheriffs
Gerard de Anteloche, Robert Durant. Mayor Henry Fitz Alwin. R. sheriffs Roger
Blunt, Nicholas Ducket. Mayor Henry Fitz Alwin. R. sheriffs Constantine Fitz
Arnold, Richard de Beaco. Mayor Henry Fitz Alwin.
King John began his reign the sixth of April, 1199.
John, sheriffs Arnold Fitz Arnold, Richard Fitz Bartilmew. Mayor Henry Fitz
Alwin. King John granted the shrifforicke of London and Middlesex, to the
Citizens thereof, as king Henry the first before him had done, for the sum of
three hundredth pound yearly. Also he gave them authority to choose and
deprive their sheriffs at their pleasure. Roger Dorsit, James Bartilmew. M.
Henry Fitz Alwin. Walter Fitz Alis, Simon de Aldermanbury. Mayor Henry Fitz
Alwin. Norman Blundell, John de Glie. M. Henry Fitz Alwin. Walter Brown,
William Chamberlain. M. Henry Fitz Alwin. Thomas Hauarell, Hamond Brond. M.
Henry Fitx Alwin. John Walgraue, Richard Winchester. Mayor Henry Fitz Alwin.
John Holiland, Edmond Fitz Garrard. M. Henry Fitz Alwin. Roger Winchester,
Edmond Hardle. M. Henry Fitz Alwin. Peter Duke, Thomas Nele. M. Henry Fitz
Alwin. The King by his letters pattents, granted to the citizens of London,
liberty and authority yearly to choose to themselves a Mayor. Peter le Iosue,
William Blund. Mayor Henry Fitz Alwin. Adam Whetley, Stephen Grace. Mayor Henry
Fitz Alwin John Fitz Peter, John Garland. M. Henry Fitz Alwin. Randolfe Giland,
Constantin Iosue. Mayor Henry Fitz Alwin. This Henry Fitz Alwin deceased, and
was buried in the Priorie of the holy Trinity, near unto Aldgate. Martin Fitz
Alis, Peter Bate. M. Roger Fitz Alwin. This year the ditch about London was
begun to be made of two hundredth foot broad, by the Londoners. Salamon
Basing, Hugh Basing. Mayor Sorle Moroor. John Trauars, Andrew Neuland. M.
William Hardle.
King Henry the third, began his reign the 19. of October, 1216.
Benet Senturer, William Bluntiuars. M. James Alderman for part, and Solomon
Basing for part. Thomas Bokerell, Raphe Eiland. Mayor, Serle Mercer. John Viel,
John le Spicer. Mayor, Serle Mercer. The forest of Middlesex, and the waren of
Stanes, were this year disasorested. Richard Wimbledon, John Viel. Mayor, Sorle
Mercer. Richard Renger, John Viel. Mayor, Serle Mercer. Richard Renger, Thomas
Lambart. Mayor, Serle Mercer. Richard Rengar, Thomas Lambart. Mayor, Serle
Mercer Constantine Fitz Alulf raised great troubles in this city, and was
hanged with his Nephew and other. John Trauars, Andrew Bokerell. Mayor, Richard
Rengar. John Trauars, Andrew Bokerell. Mayor, Richard Rengar. The King granted
to the communaltie of London, to have a common seal. Roger Duke, Martin Fitz
William. Mayor Richard Rengar. Roger Duke, Martin Eitz William. M. Richard
Renger. This year the King confirmed to the citizens of London, free waren or
liberty to hunt a certain circuit about the city, in the waren of Stanes,
etc. And also that the citizens of London should pass tole-free throughout
all England, and that the keddles (or weres) in the river of Thames, and midway
should be plucked up and destroyed for ever, etc. Stephen Bokerell, Henry
Cocham. Mayor, Roger Duke. Stephen Bokerell, Henry Cocham. Mayor Roger Ducke.
William Winchester, Robert Fitz John. Mayor Roger Ducke. Richard Walter, John
de Woborne. Mayor Roger Ducke. Michael S. Helan. Walter de Buffell. Mayor.
Andrew Bokerell Peperar. Henry de Edmonton, Gerard Bat. M. Andrew Bokerell
Peperar. Simon Fitz Mary, Roger Blunt. M. Andrew Bokerell. Peperar. Raphe
Ashwye, John Norman. M. Andrew Bokerell Peperar. Gerard Bat, Richard Hardle. M.
Andrew Bokerell Peperar. This year Walter Brune citizen of London, and Rosia
his wife, founded S. Mary Spittle without Bishops gate. Henry Cocham, lordan of
Couentry. M. Andrew Bokerell Peperar John Toloson, Gerueis the Cordwaynar. M.
Andrew Bokerell Peperar John Codras, John Wilhall. M. Ri. Rengar. Roger Bongey,
Raphe Ashwy. M. William loyner. This Will. Ioyner, builded the quier of the Gray
Friars church in London, and became a lay brother of that house. John Gisors,
Michell Tony. M. Gerard Bat. This year, Aldermen of London were chosen, and
changed yearly, but that order lasted not long. Thomas Duresme, John Viel. M.
Roger Bongy. John Fitz John, Raphe Ashwy. M. Roger Longey. Hugh Blunt, Adam
Basing. M. Raphe Ashwy. Raphe Foster, Nicholas Bat. Mayor, Michael Tony. Robert
of Cornhil, Adam of Bomtley. Mayor, John Gisors Peperar. Simon Frowicke,
Lawrence Fitz Marie. M. John Gisors, Peperar. Simon Fitz Marie, founded the
Hospital of Marie, called Bethelem, without Bishopsgate. John Viel, Nicholas
Bat. Mayor, Peter Fitz Alwin. Nicholas Fitz losey, Geffrey Winchester. Mayor,
Michel Tonny. John Tholason, Richard Hardell. M. Roger Fitz Rengar. Humfrey
Bas, William Fitz Richard. Mayor, John Norman. The King granted that the Mayor
should be presented to the Barrons of the Exchecquer, and they should admit
him. Lawrence Frowicke, Nicholas Bas. Mayor, Adam Basing. William Durham,
Thomas Wimborne. M. John Tolason Draper. The liberties of this city were
seized, the Mayor charged that he looked not to the sise of bread. John
Northampton, Richard Pickard. Mayor, Richard Hardell Draper. Raphe Ashwie,
Robert of Limon. Mayor, Richard Hardell Draper. Stephen Do, Henry Walmond,
Richard Hardle Draper. The Mayor, diverse Aldermen, and the sheriffs of London,
were deprived, and other placed in their rooms. Michaell Bockerill, John the
Minor, Mayor, Richard Hardle Draper. Richard Owel, William Ashwie. Mayor,
Richard Hardle Draper. The King caused the walls of this city to be repaired
and made with bulwarks. Robert Cornhill, John Adrian. Mayor, Richard Hardle
Draper. John Adrian, Robert Cornhill. Mayor, John Gisors Peperar. Adam
Browning, Henry Couentrie. Mayor, William Fitz Richard. Iohon Northampton,
Richard Picard. M. William Fitz Richard. John Tailor, Richard Walbrooke. Mayor,
Thomas Fitz Richard. Robert de Mountpiler, Osbert de Suffolk. Mayor T. Fitz T.
Fitz Richard. The Citizens of London fortified the city with iron chains,
drawn thwart their streets. Gregory Rokesley, Thomas de Doford. M. Thomas
Fitz Thomas, Fitz Richard. Edward Blund, Peter Angar. Mayor, Thomas Fitz T.
Fitz Richard. The chains and posts in London were plucked up, the Mayor and
principal Citizens committed to ward, and Othen Constable of the Tower, was
made Custos of the City, etc. John Hind, John Walrauen. Mayor, William
Richards. The Earl of Gloucester entered the city with an army, and therein
builded bulwarks, cast trenches, etc. John Adrian, Lucas de Batencourte.
Mayor, Alen le Sonche. Thomas Fitz Theobalde, and Agnes his wife, founded the
Hospital of S. Thomas of Acon in Westcheape. Walter Haruy, William Duresme,.
T. Wimborn. M. Sir Stephen Edesworth. A varience fell in London between the
Goldsmiths and the Tailors, where through many men were slain. Thomas Basing,
Robert Cornhill. M. Hugh Fitz Thomas. Walter Potter, Philip Tailor. M. John
Adrian Uintoner. Gregory Roksley, Henry Waleys. M. John Adrian Uintoner. The
steeple of Bow Church in Cheap, fell down, and slew many people. Richard
Paris, John de Wodeley. M. S. Walter Haruy. Custus, H. Frowicke Peperar, for
part of that year.
King Edward the first, began his reign, the 16. of November. 1272.
John Horn, Walter Potter. M. Sir Walter Haruy Knight. Nicholas Winchester,
Henry Couentry. M. Henry Walls. Lucas Batecorte, Henry Frowicke. M. Gregory
Roksley: chief Say master of all the Kings Mints, throughout England: and
keeper of the Kings Exchange. John Horn, Raphe Blunt. Mayor, Gregory Roksley.
Robert de Arar, Raphe L. Fewre. M. Gregory Rocksley. John Adrian, Walter
Langley. M. Gregory Roksley. Robert Basing, William Maraliuer. M. Gregory
Roksley. Thomas Fox, Raphe Delamere. M. Gregory Roksley. William Farendon,
Nicholas Winchester. M. Gregory Roksley. This William Farindon Goldsmith, one
of the Sheriffs, was father to Nicholas Farindon: Of these two, Farindon Ward
took that name. William Maraliuer, Richard Chigwell. M. Henry Walleis. This
Henry Walleis builded the Tun upon Cornhill to be a prison, and the stocks
to be a market house. Raphe Blund, Anketrin de Betanil. M. Henry de Walleis.
Iordane Goodcheape, Martin Box. Mayor, Henry Walleis. Lawrence Ducket
Goldsmith, murdered in Bow church, and the murderers hanged. Stephen Cornhill,
Robert Roksley. Mayor, Gregory Roksley. Custus, Raphe Sandwitch, and John
Briton. It was ordained, that Millars should have but one half penney for a
quarter of Wheat grinding, and the great water conduit in Cheap, was begun to
be made. Walter Blunt, John Wade. C. Raphe Sandwitche. Wheat was sold at Lon.
for 16. pence, and for 12. pence the quarter. Thomas Cross. Walter Hawtoune. C.
Raphe Sandwitche. William Hereforde, Thomas Stanes. C. Raphe Sandwitch. William
Betaine, John Canterbury. C. Raphe Sandwitch, Raphe Barnauars, and sir John
Britain. This year a subsidy was granted, for the reparations of London
Bridge. Falke S. Edmond, Salamon le Sotell. C. Sir John Birton knight. Thomas
Roman, William de Lier. C. sir John Briton knight, Raphe Sandwitch. Raphe
Blunt, Hamo. Box. C. Raphe Sandwitch. Henry Bole, Elias Russell. C Raphe
Sandwitch. Three men had their right hands cut off, at the Standerd in Cheap,
for rescuing of a prisoner, arrested by a Sergeant of London. Robert Rokesley
the younger, Martin Amersbery. C. Raphe Sandwitch. Henry Box, Richard
Gloucester, C. Sir Raphe Sandwitch. John Dunstable, Adam de Halingbery. C. Sir
John Britton. This year all the liberties of the city were restored, the
maioraltie excepted. Thomas of Suffolk, Adam of Fulham. C. Sir John Briton.
Richard Refham, Thomas Sely. Mayor, Henry Walleis. Certain citizens of London
brake up the Tun upon Cornhill, and took out prisoners, for the which they
were grievously punished. John Armenter, Henry Fingene. Mayor, Elias Russell.
Lucas de Hauering, Richard Champs. Mayor, Elias Russell. Robert Callor, Peter
de Bosenho. Mayor, S. John Blunt Knight. Hugh Pourt, Simon Paris. Mayor, Sir
John Blunt. William Combmartin, John Bucford. C. Sir John Blunt. Roger Paris,
John de Lincoln. C. Sir John Blunt. Geffrey de Hertilepole Alderman, was
elected to be Recorder of London, and took his oath, and was appointed to
wear his apparel as an Alderman. William Cosine, Reginald Thunderley. C. Sir
John Blunt. Geffrey Cundute, Simon Bilet. C. John Blunt. Seacoale was forbidden
to be burned in London, Southwarke, etc.
Edward the second began his reign the 7. of July, the year of Christ 1307.
Nicholas Pigot, Nigellus Drury. Mayor, Sir John Blunt. William Basing, James
Botenar. Mayor, Nicholas Farindon Goldsmith. Roger le Paumer, James of S.
Edmond. Mayor, Thomas Roman. Simon de Corpe, Peter Blakney. Mayor, Richard
Reffam Mercer. The King commanded the Mayor and Communaltie, to make the wall
of London, from Ludgate to Fleetebridge, and from thence to the Thames. Simon
Merwod, Richard Wilford. Mayor, Sir John Gisors Peperar. Order was taken, that
Merchant strangers should sell their wares within forty days after their
arrival, or else the same to be forfeited. John Lambin, Adam Lutken. Mayor,
Sir John Gisors Peperar. Robert Gurden, Hugh Garton. Mayor, Nicholas Farindon
Goldsmith. Prices set on victuals, a fat stalled ox four and twenty
shillings, a fat mutton twenty pence, a fat goose two pence half penny, a fat
capon two pence, a fat hen one penny, two chickens one penny, three pigeons one
penny, twenty four eggs one penny, etc. Stephen Abingdon, Hamond Chigwell.
Mayor, Sir John Gisors Peperar. Famine and mortallitie of people, so that the
quick might uneath bury the dead. Horse flesh and dogs flesh was good
meat. Hamond Goodchape, William Bodelay. Mayor, Stephen Abendon. William
Canston, Raphe Balancer. Mayor, John Wingraue. An early Harvest, a buschell of
wheat that had been sold for ten shillings, was now sold for ten pence, etc.
John Prior, William Furneis. Mayor, John Wingraue. Such a murren of kine, that
dogs and ravens that fed on them were poisoned. John Pontell, John Dalling.
Mayor, John Wingraue. Simon Abindon, John Preston. M. Hamond Chickwell Peperar.
John Gisors late Mayor of London, and many other citizens fled the city, for
things laid to their charge. Renauld at Conduit, William Produn. M. Nicholas
Farendon Goldsmith. Richard Constantine, Richard Hackney. M. Hamond Chickwell,
Peperar. John Grantham, Richard Elie. M. Hamond Chickwell Peperar. Fish, and
flesh market, established at the stocks in ye midde of ye city. Adam of
Salisbury, John of Oxford. M. Nicholas Farindon Goldsmith. Of this Nicholas
Farindon, and of William Farindon his father, read more in Farindon Ward.
Benet of Fulham, John Cawson. M. Hamond Chickwell Peperar. Gilbert Mordon, John
Cotton. M. Hamond Chickwell Peperar. The Citizens of London took the Bishop of
Excester, and cut off his head, at the standert in Cheap. Richard Rothing,
Roger Chaunteclere. M. Richard Britain Goldsmith. This Richard Rothing, is
said, to new build the Parish church of S. James, at Garlike Hithe.
Edward the third, began his reign, the 25. of January, the year 1326.
This King Edward granted, that the Mayor should be Justice for the Gaile
delivery at Newgate, that the Citizens of London should not be constrained to
go out of the City of London to any war. More, he granted, that the
liberties and franchesies of the city, should not after this time, for any
cause, be taken into the kings hands, etc.

Henry Darcie, John Hauten. Mayor. Hamond Chickwell Peperar. This year, the
Walls of London were repaired. Simon Francis, Henry Combmartin. M. John
Grantham. Richard Lazar, William Gisors. Mayor, Richard Swandland. This year,
the King kept a great Iusting in Cheap, betwixt Sopers lane and the great
cross. Robert of Elie, Thomas Whorwode. M. Sir John Pultney Draper. John
Mocking, Andrew Auberie. Mayor. Sir John Pultney Draper. Nicholas Pike, John
Husbond. Mayor, John Preston Draper. This year was founded Elsings Spittle, by
William Elsing Mercer, that became first Prior of that Hospital. John Hamond,
William Hansard. Mayor, Sir John Pultney Draper. John Hingstone, Walter Turk.
Mayor, Reginald at Conduct Uintoner. Walter Motdon, Richard Vpton. Mayor,
Nicholas Woton. John Clarke, William Curtes. Mayor, Sir John Pultney Draper.
This Sir John Pultney founded a College in the Parish church of Saint Lawrence
by Candle week street. Walter Nele, Nicholas Crane. Mayor Henry Darcy. Walter
Nele Bladesmith, gave lands to the repairing of the highwaies about London.
William Pomfret, Hugh Marbeler. Mayor Henry Darcy. William Thorney, Roger
Frosham. M. Andrew Auburie Grocer. Adam Lucas, Bartilmew Maris. Mayor, Andrew
Aubery Grocer. Richard de Barking, John de Rokesley. Mayor, John of Oxenford
Uintoner. John Loueken, Richard Riflingbury. M. Simon Francis Mercer. The price
of Gascone wines at London, not to be sold above four pence the gallon, and
Reinish wine six pence the gallon. John Steward, John Aylesham. M. John
Hamond. Geffrey Wichingham, Thomas Leg. M. John Hamond. Edmond Homenhall, John
of Gloucester. M. Richard Leget. John Croyden, William Cloptun. M. Geffrey
Witchingham. Adam Brapsen, Richard Bas. M. Tho. Leggy Skinner. King Edward
won Callis from the French. Henry Picaid, Simon Dolseby. M. John Loueken
Fishmoonger. A great pest. Sir Walter Manny Knight, founded the Charterhouse by
smithfield, to be a burial for the dead. Adam of Bury. Raphe of Lym. M. Walter
Turk Fishmoonger. John Notte, William Worcester. M. Richard Killingbury. John
Wroth, Gilbert of Stenineshorp. M. Andrew Aubury Grocer. John Peche, John
Stotley. M. Adam Frauncis Mercer. This Mayor procured an act of Parliament,
that no known whore, should wear an hoode, or attire on her head, except
reied, or striped cloth of diverse colors, etc. William Wild, John Little. M.
Adam Francis, Mercer. This Adam Francis, was one of the founders of the
College in Guildhall chapel, etc. Henry Frauncis was the other. William
Totingham, Richard Smelt. Mayor Thomas Leggy Skinner. Aldermen of London, were
used to be changed yearly, but now it was ordained, that they should not be
removed, without some special cause. Walter Forster. Thomas Brandon. M. Simon
Francis mercer. Richard Notingham, Thomas Dossell. M. Henry Picard, Uintoner.
This Henry Picard, feasted the kings of England, of France, Cipres, and Scots,
with other great estates, all in one day. Stephen Candish, Bartilmew Frostling.
Mayor, sir John Stody Uintoner. This John Stody gave tenements to the Uintoners
in London, for relief of the poor of that company. John Barnes, John Buris.
Mayor John Louekin Stockfishmoonger. Simon of Benington, John of Chichister. M.
Simon Dolseby Grocer. John Denis, Walter Berny. M. John Wroth Fishmoonger.
William Holbech, James Tame. Mayor John Peche Fishmoonger. John of S. Albons,
James Andrew. M. Stephen Gondish Draper. Richard Croyden, John Litoft, M. John
Not Peperar. John de Mitford, Simon de Mordon. Mayor Adam of Bury Skinner. John
Bukulsworth, Thomas Ireland. Mayor, John Louekin Fishmoonger, and Adam of Bury
Skinner. John Ward, Thomas of Lee. M. John Lofkin, Fishmoonger. This John
Lofkin, builded the Parish church of S. Michaell in Crooked Lane. John
Turngold, William Dykeman. Mayor James Andrew Draper. Robert Cordeler, Adam
Wimondham. Mayor, Simon Mordon, Stockfishmoonger. This year, Wheat was sold
for 2. shillings 6. pence the bushel. John Piel, Hugh Holdich. M. Io.
Chichester Goldsmith. William Walworth, Robert Geyton. M. John Barnes, Mercer.
Adam Staple, Robert Hatfield. Mayor, John Barnes Mercer. This John Barnes gave
a chest with three locks, and one thousand Mark to be lent to poor young
men. John Philpot, Nicholas^ Brembar. Mayor, John Piel. Mercer. John Aubury,
John Fished, Mayor, Adam of Bury Skinner. Richard Lions, William Woodhouse.
Mayor, William Walworth Fishmonger. John Hadley, Wiliam Newport. Mayor, John
Ward Grocer. John Northampton, Robert Laund. Mayor, Adam Staple Mercer. The
Londoners meant to have slain John Duke of Lancaster: Adam Staple Mayor put
down, and Nicholas Bremban elected. Also the Aldermen were deposed, and other
set in their places.
Richard the second began his reign, the 21. of June, in the year 1377.
Nicholas Twiford, Andrew Pikeman. Mayor, Sir Nicholas Brembar. Grocer. John
Philpot a citizen of London, sent ships to the sea, and scoured it of
Pirates, taking many of them prisoners. John Boseham, Thomas Cornwalis. Mayor,
Sir John Philpot Grocer. This Sir John Philpot gave to the city, lands for
the finding of thirteen poor people for ever. John Helisdon, William Barrat.
Ma. John Hadley Grocer. Walter Doget, William Knightcoate. M. William Walworth
Fishmonger. This William Walworth arrested Wat Tiler the rebel, and was
knighted. He increased the Parish church of Saint Michaell in Crooked lane,
and founded there a college. Other Aldermen were also knighted for their
service in the field. John Rote, John Hend, M. John Northampton Draper. Adam
Bamme, John Sely. M. John Northampton Draper. Simon Winchcombe, John More. M.
sir Nicolas Brembar Grocer, John Northampton late Mayor of London, was
committed to perpetual prison, and his goods confiscated. Nicholas Expton,
John French: M. Sir Nicholas Brembar Grocer, knighted with William Walworth.
John Organ, John Churchman. M. sir Nicholas Brembar Grocer: the foresaid John
Churchman, now builded the Custom honse near to the Tower of London, and did
many other works for the commodity of this city. William Stondone, William
More, M. Nicholas Exton Fishmonger. This year the Citizens of London fearing
the French, pulled down houses near about their city, repaired their walls,
and cleansed their ditches etc. William Venor, Hugh Forstalfe, M. Nicholas Exton
Fishmonger, sir Nicholas Brember, late Mayor of London, was this year
beheaded. Thomas Austin, Adam Carlhul, M. Nicholas Tuiford Goldsmith, knighted
with William Walworth. John Walcot, John Louenay, M. William Venor Grocer. John
Francis, Thomas Viuent, M. Adam Bamme Goldsmith: this Adam Bammer provided from
beyond the seas Corn in great abundance, so that the City was able to serve
the country. John Shadworth, Henry Vamer, M. John Hend Draper: this Mayor was
for displeasure taken, sent to Windsor Castle, and the king made Wardens of the
city. etc. Gilbert Maghfield, Thomas Newington, M. William Stondon Grocer,
Drew Barentin, Richard Whitington, M. John Hadley Grocer: Farington ward was
by Parliament appointed to be divided into two wards, to wit, infra and
extra. William Brainston, Thomas Knoles, M. John Froshe Mercer. Roger Else,
William Seuenoke, M. William More Uintner. Thomas Wilford, William Parker, M.
Adam Bamme Goldsmith. John VVodcoke, William Askam, M. Richard VVhitington
Mercer. John VVade, John VVarnar, M. Drew Barentin Goldsmith.
Henry the fourth began his reign the 29. of September. the year 1399.
William VValdern, William Hende, M. Thomas Knoles Grocer. John Wakel,
William Ebot, M. John Francis Goldsmith. William Venor, John Fremingham, M.
John Shadworth, Mercer. The conduite upon Cornhill was this year made of an
old prison house called the Tun. Richard Marlow, Robert Chicheley, M. John
VValcote Draper. Thomas Falconer, Thomas Poole, M. William Ascham Fishmonger.
William Bouth, Stephen Spilman, M. John Hend Draper. This John Hend was a new
builder of the parish Church called S. Swithen by London stone. Henry Barton,
William Grome, M. John Wodcocke Mercer, this Mayor caused all the Weres in the
river of Thames, from Stanes to the river of Medway to be destroyed, and the
Trinkes to be burned etc. Nicholas Wooton, Gefferey Brook, M. Richard
Whitington, Mercer. This year a great pestilence in London took away more
then 30000. people. Henry Pontfrackt, Henry Halton, M. Wiliam Stondon Grocer.
Thomas Ducke, William Norton, M. Drew Barentine Goldsmith, This Drew Barentine
builded a part of the Goldsmithes hall, and gave them lands. John Law, William
Chichley, M. Richard Marlow Ironmonger, A great play at Skinners well, which
lasted eight days, and was of matter from the creation of the world: the most
part of all the great Estates of England were there to behold it. John Pen,
Thomas Pike, M, Thomas Knoles Grocer. This Thomas Knoles began a new to build
the Guild hall in London etc. John Raynwel, William Cotton. M. Robert Chicheley
Grocer, Ralph Louinhinde, William Seuenoke, M. William Waldren, Mercer.
Henry the fifth began his reign the 20. of March, the year 1412.
John Sutton, John Michel, M. William Gromar Draper, Sir John Oldcastle
assembled a great power, in Ficquetes field by London, which power was
overcome and taken by the king and his power. John Michel, Thomas Allen, M.
Thomas Falconer Mercer, this Mayor caused the Postern called More gate to be
builded, and he lent to the king 10000. marks upon Jewels, etc. William
Cambridge, Allin Euerard M. Nicholas Wotton Draper. Robert Whitington, John
Couentrie, M. Henry Barton Skinner. This Henry Barton ordained Lanthorns with
lights to be hanged out on the Winter eueninges. Henry Read, John Gidney, M.
Richard Marlow Ironmonger. John Brian, Ralph Barton, John Parnesse, M. William
Seuenoke. This William Seuenoke, founded in the town of Seuenoke a
freeschoole, and alms houses for the poor. Rob. Whitington, John Butler, M.
Richard whitington Mercer, this Mayor founded Whitington College. John
Butler, John Wels, M. William Cambridge Grocer. Richard Gosseline, William
Weston, M. Robert Chichley Grocer. This Mayor gave one plot of ground,
thereupon to build the parish church of S. Stephen upon Walbrooke.
Henry the sixth began his reign the 31. of August, the year 1422.
William Eastfielde, Robert Totarsall, M. William Waldern Mercer. This year
the west gate of London was begun to be new builded by the Executors of Richard
Whitington. Nicholas lames, Thomas VVindford M. William Cromer Draper. Simon
Seman, John Bywater, M. John Michell Fishmonger. William Milreth, John Brokell,
M. John Couentrie Mercer. John Arnolde, John Higham, M. John Reynwell,
Fishmonger. This Mayor gave Tenements to the City for the discharge of three
wards in London for fifteenes etc. Henry Frowicke, Robert Otley, M. John Gidney
Draper. Thomas Duffehouse, John Abbot. M. Henry Berton Skinner. William Russe,
Ralph Holland, M. William Eastfield Mercer. Ralph Holland gave to impotent
poor 120. l. to prisoners 80. l. to Hospitals 40. l. etc. Walter Chartesey,
Robert Large, M. Nicholas Wotton, Draper, Walter Chartesey Draper, gave to the
poor 100. l. besides 20. l. to the Hospitals. etc. John Aderley, Stephen
Brown M. John Wels Grocer. This John Wels a great benefactor to the new
building of the Chapel by the Guilde Hall, and of his goods the Standarde in
west Cheap was made. John Olney, John Paddesley, M. John Parneis Fishmonger.
Thomas Chalton, John Ling, M. John Brokle Draper. Thomas Barnewell, Simon Air,
M. Roger Oteley Grocer. Thomas Catworth, Robert Clopton, M. Henry Frowicke
Mercer. Thomas Morsted, William Gregory M. John Michell Fishmonger. William
Hales, William Chapman, M. sir William Eastfield Mercer this sir William
Eastfield knight of the Bath, a great benefactor to the water Eonduites. Hugh
Diker, Nicholas Yoo, M. Stephen Brown Grocer. Wheat sold for three
shillinges the Bushel: but this man sent into Prusia, and caused to be brought
from thence certain ships laden with Rye, which did great relief. Philip
Malpas, Robert Marshall, M. Robert Largo Mercer, Philip Malpas at his decease
gave 120. l. to poor prisoners, and every year for 5. years, 400. shirtes,
and smockes, 40. pair of sheets, and 150. gowns of frise, to the poor, to
poor maids marriages 100. marks, to high ways 100. marks, and to 500.
poor people in London every one six shillinges, eight pence etc. John Sutton,
William Wetinhall, M. John Paddesley Goldsmith, master of the Wirkes of money
in the Tower of London. William Combis, Richard, Rich, M. Robert Clopton
Draper. Thomas Beamont, Richard Morden, M. John Hatherley Ironmonger. Nicholas
Wilforde, John Norman, M. Thomas Catworth Grocer. Stephen Forstar, Hugh Which M.
Henry Frowicke Mercer, this year Powles steeple was fired with lightning; and
hardly quenched. John Darby, Godfrey Filding, M. Simon Air Draper, this Simon
Air builded the Leaden hall in London, to be a common garner for the city
etc. Robert Horn, Godfrey Bolaine, M. John Olney Mercer. William Abraham,
Thomas Scot. M. John Sidney Draper. William Catlow, William Marcow, M. Stephen
Brown Grocer. William Hulin, Thomas Canninges M. Thomas Chalton Mercer. This
year Jack Cade a Rebel of Kent, came to London, entered the city etc. John
Middleton, William Dear, Mayor, Nicholas Wilforde Grocer. Soldiers made a
fray against the Mayor, the same day he took his charge at Westminster. Matthew
Phillip, Christopher VVarton, M. William Gregory Skinner. Richard Lee,
Richard Alley, M. Godfrey Filding Mercer. This year was a great fray at the
Wrestling. John Waldron, Thomas Cook, M. John Norman Draper. This John Norman
was the first Mayor that was rowed to Westminster by water: for before that
time they rode on horse back. John Field, William Tailor, M. Stephen Forstar
Fishmonger. This Stephen Forstar enlarged Ludgate, for the case of prisoners
there. etc. John Young, Thomas Olgraue M. William Marrow, Grocer. The Mercers
servants in London, made a riote upon the Lombardes and other strangers. John
Steward, Ralph Verney, M. Thomas Caning Grocer. William Edwardes, Thomas
Reiner, M. Godfrey Boloine Mercer. This Godfrey Boline gave 1000. l. to poor
householders in London etc. Ralph Ioceline, Richard Medham, M. Thomas Scot
Draper. John Plommar, John Stockar, M. William Hulin Fishmonger. Richard
Fleming, John Lambarde, M. Richard Lee Grocer.
Edward the fourth began his reign the fourth of March, in the year 1460.
after the account of the church of England.
George, Ireland, John Lock, M. Hugh VVitch Mercer. William Hampton,
Bartlemew James, M Thomas Cook Draper made knight of the Bath in the fifth of
Edward the fourth, and had great troubles after. Robert Basser, Thomas
Muschampe, Mayor Matthew Phillip Goldsmith, made knight of the Bath, the fifth of
Edward the fourth, and after in the field the tenth of Edward the fourth. John
Tate, John Stone, M. Ralph Ioceline Draper, knight of the Bath, and also in the
field. Henry Waver, William Constantine, M. Ralph Verney Mercer, Henry Waver
one of the sheriffs, made knight of the Bath. John Brown, Henry Brice, M. John
Young Grocer, made knight in the field. This year began the trobles of Sir
Thomas Cook, and of other Alderman, as ye may read in my Summarie. Thomas
Stalbroke, Humphrey Heyford, M. Thomas Olgraue Skinner. Simon Smith, William
Hariote, M. William Tailor Grocer. This Mayor gave Tenementes to discharge
Cordwainer street ward of fifteenes. Richard Gardener, Robert Drope M.
Richard Lee Grocer. This year the Tower of London, being delivered to the
Mayor and his Brethren, they delivered king H. from thence. John Crosbie, John
Ward. Mayor, Sir John Stokton Mercer. Thomas the Bastard Fauconbridge with a
riotous company set upon this city, at Aldgate, Bishopsgate the Bridge etc.
and I2. Aldermen with the Recorder were knighted in the field by Edward the
fourth to wit John Stokton Mayor, Ralph Verney late Mayor, John Young late
Mayor, William Tailor late Mayor, Richard Lee late Mayor, Matthew Phillips late
Mayor, George Ireland, William Stoker, William Hampton since Mayor, Thomas
Stalbroke, John Crosbie, and Bartlemew James since Mayor, with Thomas Vrswicke
Recorder. John Allin John Shelley, M. William Edward Grocer. The water
Conduite at Aldermanbury, and the Standarde in Fleetestreete were finished.
John Brown, Thomas Bledlow, M. sir, William Hampton Fishmonger, this sir
Wiliima Hampton punished strumpetes, and caused stocks to be set in every
ward to punish vagabondes. William Stokar, Robert Belisdon, M. John Tate
Mercer. This year the sheriffs of London, were appointed each of them to have
xvi. Sargeantes, and six Clerks, to wit, a Secondarie, a Clarke of the papers,
and 4. other Clerks, besides the under Sheriffs Clerks. Edmond Shaw, Thomas
Hill, M. Robert Drope Draper. This Robert Drope increased the water condutie
upon Cornhill etc. Hugh Brice, Robert Celwich, M. Robert Basset Saltar. This
Robert Basset corrected the Bakers, and other Uictualers of this City. Richard
Rawson, William Horn M. sir Ralph Ioceline Draper, knight of the Bath, by the
diligence of this Mayor, the walls of the City were repaired. Henry Collet,
John Stokar, M. Humphrey Hayforde Goldsmith. Robert Harding, Robert Bifielde,
M. Richard Gardener Mercer, Robert Bifielde, Sheriff was fined by the Mayor
and paid 50, l. toward the water Conduites. Thomas Ilam, John Ward, M. sir
Bartlemew James Draper, made knight in the field, by E. the 4. T. Ilam newly
builded the great Conduite in West Cheap. Thomas Daniel, William Bacon. M.
John Brown Mercer. Robert Tate, William Wiking, M. William Hariot Draper.
William Whit. John Matthew, M. Edmond Sha Goldsmith. This Edmond Sha caused the
Posterne called Criplesgate to be new builded etc.
Edward the fifth began his reign the 9. of April in the year 1483. Richard
the third began his reign the 22. of June, in the year 1483.
Thomas Norland, William Martin M. Robert Bilisden Haberdasher. Richard
Chester, Thomas Britain, Raph Austrie, M. Thomas Hill, Grocer, sir William
Stoaker Draper, John Ward Grocer. three Sheriffs and three Mayors this year
by means of a sweating sickness etc. Thomas Hill appointed by his testament
the water Conduit in Grass street to be builded.
Henry the seventh began his reign the 22. of August, in the year 1485.
John Tatte, John Swan, M. Hugh Brise Goldsmith. This Hugh Brise was keeper of
the kings mintes at London. John Parciuall, Hugh Clopton. M. Henry Cellet
Mercer. The cross in Cheap was new builded in beautiful manner. John
Fenkell, William Remington, M. sir William Horn Salter. This William Horn
made knight in the field by Henry the seventh, gave to the repayring of high
ways betwixt London and Cambridge 500. marks, and to the preachers at Paul's
cross, etc. William Isaac, Raph Tilney, M. Robert Tate Mercer. William Caple,
John Brocke, M. William White Draper. Henry Cote, Robert Revel Hugh Pemberton
M. John Matthew Mercer. Thomas Wood, William Brown, M. Hugh Clopton Mercer.
Hugh Clopton builded the great stone bridge at Stratford upon haven in
Warwickshire. William Purchase, William Welbecke, M. William Martin Skinner. A
riot made upon the Esterlings, by the Mercers servants, and other. Robert
Fabiant John Winger M. Sir Raph Astrie Fishmonger, made knight by Henry the
seventh, Robert Fabian Alderman made Fabians Chronicle, a painful labor, to
the honor of the City, and the whole realm. Nicholas Alwine, John Warner, M.
Rychard Chawry Salter. Thomas Knesworth, Henry, Somer, M. Henry Colet Mercer.
John Sha, Sir Richard Haddon, M. John Tate the younger Mercer. Bartilmew Read,
Thomas Windoute M. William Purchase Mercer. All the gardens in the Morefielde
were destroyed, and made plain ground. Thomas Bradbury, Stephen Ienings M. Sir
John Perciuall Tailor, made knight in the field by Henry the seventh. James
Wilford, Thomas Brond, M. Nicholas Alwin Mercer. This Nicholas Alwin gave to
3000. poor people in London xij.^.the piece, and to 3000. in the town of
Spalding the like, etc. John Hawes, William Steed, M. William Remington
Fishmonger. Laurence Ailmer, Henry Head, M. Sir John Sha Goldsmith, made knight
in the field by Henry the seventh. This Sir John Shae caused his brethren the
Aldermen to ride from the Guildhall unto the waters side, where he took his
Barge to Westminster. Henry Kebell, Nicholas Nines, M. Bartlemew Read
Goldsmith. Christopher Hawes, Robert Wats, Thomas Granger M. Sir William Capell
Draper, made knight by Henry the seventh. This Sir William caused a Cage in
every Ward to be set for punishing of vagabondes. Roger Acheley, William
Brown, M. John Winger Grocer. Richard Shore, Roger Grove, M. Thomas Knesworth
Fishmonger. This T. Knesworth appointed the water Conduit at Bishopsgate to be
builded, etc. William Copenger, Thomas Johnson, William Fitzwilliams, M. Sir
Richard Haddon Mercer. William Butler, John Kyrkby, M. William Brown Mercer:
for part Laurence Ailmer Draper. Thomas Exmew, Richard Smith, Mayor Stephen
lenings Merchant tailor. This Stephen lenings builded the greatest part of
Saint Andrews Church called Undershaft. He builded a free school at
W^frunehampton in Staffordshire, etc.
Henry the eight began his reign the 22. of April the year 1509.
George Monoxe, John Doget^ M. Thomas Bradbury Mercer: for part Sir William
Caple Draper. John Milborne, John Rest. Mayor Henry Keble Grocer. This Henry
Keble gave 1000. pound toward the new building of his parish Church of
Aldermary. Nicholas Shelton, Thomas Mirfine, M. Roger Achiley Draper. This
Roger Achiley provided corn for service of this City in great plenty: He
caused the same to be stowed up in the common garner called Leaden Hall. Robert
Aldarnes, Robert Fenrother, M. Sir William Copinger Fishmonger, for part
Richard Haddon Mercer, for the rest. Sir W. Copinger gave half his goods to
his wife, and the other half to the poor that had most need. John Dawes,
John Bridges, Roger Bafford M. William Brown Mercer, and John Tate Mercer.
This John Tate new builded the church of S. Anthonies Hospital in London,
James Yarford, John Monday, M. George Monuoux Draper. Henry Warley, Richard
Gray, William Bailey, M. Sir William Butler Grocer. Thomas Seimer, John
Thurstone. M. John Rest Grocer. Thomas Baldrie Raph Simondes, M. Sir Thomas
Exmew Goldsmith. Sir Thomas Exmew made the water conduit in London wall by
Moregate etc. John Allen, lames Spencer, M. Thomas Mirfin Skinner. John
Wilkenson, Nicholas Partrich, M. Sir James Yarforde Mercer. From this time the
Mayors of London, for the most part have been knighted by courtesy of the
kings, and not otherwise. John Skeuington, John Kyme, M. Sir John Bruge
Draper. John Breton Thomas Pargetor, M. Sir John Milborne Draper. This Sir John
Milborne founded fourteen Alms houses by the Crossed Friars church etc. John
Rudstone, John Champneis M. Sir John Mundy Goldsmith. Michael English, Nicholas
Senins, M. Sir T. Baldry Mercer. Raph Dodmer, William Roch, M. Sir William
Bailey Draper. John Caunton, Christopher Askew, M. Sir John Allen Mercer.
Stephen Peacocke, Nicholas Lambart, M. Sir Thomas Seamer Mercer. John Hardy,
William Holles, M. Sir James Spencer Uintner. Raph Waten, John Long, M. Sir
John Rudstone Draper. Michel Dormer Walter Champion, M. Sir Raph Dodmer Mercer.
This year it was decreed that no man should be Mayor of London more then one
year. William Dauntsey, Richard Champion M. Sir T. Pargitor Saltar. Richard
Gresham, Edward Altham, M. Sir Nicholas Lambard Grocer. Richard Reynolds,
Nicholas Pinchon, John Martin John Prist, Mayor Sir Stephen Pecocke
Haberdasher. William Forman, Sir T. Kitson, M. Sir Christopher Askew Draper.
Nicholas Leuison, William Denham, M. Sir John Champneis Skinner. Humphrey
Munmouth, John Cootes, M. Sir John Allen Mercer, by the kings appointment he
was of his Council. A man of great wisdom, and also of great charity. Robert
Paget, William Boyer, M. Sir Raph Waren Mercer. John Gresham, Thomas Lewen, M.
Sir Richard Gresham Mercer. William Wilkenson, Nicholas Gibson, Mayor William
Forman Haberdasher. John Feiry, Thomas Huntlow, Mayor Sir William Holles
Mercer. William Laxton, Martin Bows, M. Sir William Roch, Draper. Rowland
Hill, Henry Suckley, Mayor Sir Michell Dormer Mercer. Henry Hubbarthorne, Henry
Amcotes, Mayor John Cootes Salter. John Toleus, Richard Dobbes, Mayor Sir
William Bowyer Draper: For part Sir Raph Waren Mercer. John Wilford, Andrew
lude, Mayor Sir William Laxton Grocer. George Barnes, Raph Alley, M. Sir Martin
Bows Goldsmith. Richard Iarueis, Thomas Curteis, M. Sir H. Hubbarthorne
Merchant tailor.
Edward the sixth began his reign the 28. of January, in the year 1546.
Thomas White Robert Charsey, M. Sir John Gresham Mercer. William Lock, Sir
John Ailife, M. Sir Henry Amcotes Fishmonger. Richard Turk, John York, M. Sir
Rowland Hill Mercer. Augustine Hind, John Lion, M. Sir Andrew Inde Skinner.
John Lamberd, John Cowper, M. Sir Richard Dobbes Skinner. William Gerard, John
Maynard, M. Sir George Barnes Haberdasher.
Queen Mary began her reign the 6. of July the year 1553.
Thomas Ofley, William Huet, M. Sir Thomas White Merchantaylor. This Sir Thomas
White founded S. John's College in Oxford. He gave to the City of Bristow
2000. pound, etc. David Woodrofe, William Chester, M. Sir John Lion Grocer.
Thomas Leigh, John Machil, M. Sir William Gerrard Haberdasher. William Harper
John White, M. Sir T. Ofley Marchantaylor. Richard Malorie James Aitham, M.
Sir Thomas Curteis Fishmonger. John Halse, Richard Champion, M. Sir T. Leigh
Mercer.
Queen Elizabeth began her reign the 17. of November, in the year of Christ
1558.
Thomas Lodge, Roger Martin, M. Sir William Huet Clothworker. Christopher
Draper, Thomas Row, M. Sir William Chester Draper. This year the Merchant
tailors of London founded their notable free school for poor men's children,
etc. Alexander Auenon, Humfrey Baskeruile, M. Sir VV. Harper Merchant tailor.
William Allin Richard Chamberlain, M. Sir T. Lodge Grocer. Edward Banks,
Rowland Heyward, M, Sir John White Grocer. Edward lackman, Lionell Ducket, M.
Sir Richard Malorie Mercer. John Rivers, James Hawes M. Sir Richard Champion
Draper. Richard Lambert, Ambrose Nicholas, John Langley, M. Sir Christopher
Draper Ironmonger. Thomas Ramsey, William Bond, M. Sir Roger Martin Mercer.
John Oleph, Robert Harding, lames Bacon, M. Sir Thoms Row Merchant tailor.
Henry Becher William Dane, M. Alexander Auenon Ironmonger. Francis Barnam
William Box M. Sir Rowland Heyward Clothworker. Henry Miles, John Branch, M.
Sir William Allin Mercer. Richard Pipe, Nicholas Woodrofe, M. Sir Lionel Ducket
Mercer. James Haruy, Thomas Pullison, M. Sir John Rivers Grocer. Thomas Blanke,
Anthony Gamage, M. James Hawes Clothworker. Edward Osborne, Wolstane Dixi,
Mayor Ambrose Nicholas Salter. William Kimpton, George Barn, M. Sir John
Langley Goldsmith. Nicholas Backhouse, Frauncis Bowyer M. Sir Thomas Ramsey
Grocer. George Bond, Thomas Starkie, M. Sir Richard Pipe Draper. Martin
Calthrope, John Heart, Mayor Sir Nicholas Woodrofe Haberdasher. Raph Woodcock,
John Alate, Mayor, Sir John Branch Draper. Richard Martin, William Web, M.
Sir James Haruie Ironmonger. William Roe, John Hayden, Cuthbert Buckle, Mayor
Sir T. Blancke Haberdasher. William Masham, John Spencer, M. Edward Osborne
Clothworker. Stephen Slany, Henry Billingsley, Mayor Sir Thomas Pullison
Draper. Anthony Radclife, Henry Pranell, M. Sir Wolstane Dixie Skinner. Robert
House, William Elkin, M. Sir George Barn Haberdasher. Thomas Skinner, John
Katcher, M. Sir George Bond Haberdasher. Hugh Ofley, Richard Saltenstall, M.
Sir Martin Calthrope Draper for part, and Richard Martin Goldsmith for the rest
of that year. Richard Gurney, Stephen Some, Mayor Sir John Heart Grocer.
Nicholas Mosley, Robert Broke, M. John Allot, Fishmonger for part Sir Rowland
Heyward Clothworker for the rest. William Ryder, Benet Barnham, M. Sir William
Web Salter. John Garrard, Robert Tailor, M. Sir William Roe Ironmonger. Paul
Banning, Peter Hauton, M. Sir Cuthbert Buckle Uintner for part: Sir Richard
Martin Goldsmith for the rest. Robert Lee, Thomas Benet, Mayor Sir John Spencer
Clothworker. Thomas Low, Leonard Holiday, Mayor Sir Stephen Slany Skinner. John
Wattes, Richard Godard, Mayor Thomas Skinner Clothworker: for part Sir Henry
Billingsley. Haberdasher. Henry Roe, John More Mayor Sir Richard Saltenstall
Skinner. Edward Holmeden, Robert Hampson, Mayor Stephen Some Grocer.
Thus much for the chief and principal Governors of this famous City, of
whose politic government, with the assistance of inferior officers, their
charges for keeping of the peace, service of the Prince, and honor of this
City, much might have been said, and I had thought to have touched, but being
informed that a learned Gentleman, a Citizen borne, minded such a labor, and
promised to perform it, I have forborne, and left the same to his good leisure.

NOw since that I have given you an outward view of this City, it shall not be
impertinent to let you take an insight also of the same, such as a Londoner
borne, discoursed above twenty years agone, for answer (as it seems) to
some objections, that then were made against the growing greatness thereof. The
Author gave it me, and therefore howsoever I conceal his name (which it self
pretends not) I think it may without his offense impart it to others, that
they may take pleasure in the reading, as I doubt not but he did in the
writing. Long may they (that list) envy, and long may we and our posterity
enjoy the good estate of this City.

A Discourse of the names and first causes of the institution of Cities, and
peopled towns. And of the commodities that do grow by the same: and namely
of the City of London. Written by way of an Apology (or defense) against the
opinion of some men, which think that the greatness of that City stands
not with the profit and security of this Realm.
CIties and well peopled places be called Oppida, in Latin, either ab open
danda, or ab opibus, or ab opponendo se hostibus. They be named also civitates
a coeundo, and ( vrbes) either of the word vrbare, because the first enclosure
of them was described with ye draught of a Plow. Or else ab orb, for the round
compass that they at the first had.

In the Greek a City is termed(...), either of the word (...), multus, or
of(...): id est, habitare, alere, gubernare.

In the Saxon (or old English) sometimes Tun, which we now call Town, derived
of the word Tynan, to enclose or tyne, as some yet speak. But for as much as
that word was proper to every village and enclosed dwelling, therefore our
ancestors called their walled towns,(...)or(...), and we now Bury and Borow,
of the Greek word(...)(as I think) which signifies a Tower or a high
building.

The walls of these towns had their name of vallum, because at the first they
were but of that earth which was cast out of the trench or ditch wherewith they
were environed.

But afterward, being made of matter more fit for defense, they were named a
muniendo maenia. By the Etimologie of these names, it may appear that commonweals, Cities and towns were at the first invented, to the end that men might
lead a civil life amongst themselves, and be saved harmeles against their
enemies: whereupon Plato says, Civitates ab initio vtilitatis causa
constitutae sunt. Aristotle 1. Politicorum 2. says, Ciuitas a natura profecta
est: homo enim animal aptum est ad coetus, and proinde ciuitatis origo ad
viuendum, institutio ad been viuendum refertur. And Cicero, (lib. primo de
inuentione) in the beginning says, Fuit quoddam tempus cum in agris homines
passim bestiarum more vagabantur, etc. quo quidem tempore, quida^ (magnus viz.
vir, and sapiens) dispersos homines in agris, and tectis siluestribus abditos,
ratione quadam compulit in vnum locum, atque eos in vnam quamque rem induxit
vtilem and honestam. Vrbibus vero constitutis, fidem colere, and institiam
retinere discebant, and alijs parere sua voluntate consuescebant, etc. The same
man discourses notably to the same effect, in his Oration pro Sestio, a
little after the midst thereof, showing that in the life of men dispersed vis
bears all the sway: but in the Civil life and society ius is better
maintained, etc. This thing well saw King William the Conqueror, who in his
laws ( fol.125.) says Burgi et Civitates fundata and edificata sunt, ad
tuitione^ gentium, and populorum Regni, and idcirco obseruari debent cum omni
liberate, integritate, and ratione. And his predecessors, king Ethelstane, and
King Canutus in their laws ( fol. 62. and 106.) had commanded thus: Oppida
instaurantur etc.

Seeing therefore that as Cicero 2. officior. says, proxime and secuudum Deos,
homines hominibus maxim vtiles esse possunt. And that men are congregated into
Cities and common wealths, for honesty and vtilities sake, these shortly be
the commodities that do come by cities, communalties, and corporations. First,
men (by this nearenesse of conversation) are wtdrawen from barbarous feritie
and force, to a certain mildnes of manners, and to humanity and justice:
whereby they are contented to give and take right, to and from their equalles
and inferiors, and to hear and obey their heads and superiors. Also the
doctrine of God is more fitly delivered, and the discipline thereof more aptly
to be executed, in peopled Towns then abroad, by reason of the facility of
common and often assembling. And consequently, such inhabitants be better
managed in order, and better instructed in wisdom: whereof it came to pass
that at the first, they that excelled others this way, were called astuti of
the Greek word ((...)) which signifies a City, although the term be now
declined to the worst part (and do betoken evil) even as Tyrannus, Sophista,
and some such other originally good words are fallen: And hereof also good
behavior is yet called Vrbanitas, because it is rather found in Cities, then
elsewhere. In sum, by often hearing men be better persuaded in religion, and
for that they live in the eye of others, they be by example the more easily
trained to justice, and by shamefastness restrained from injury.

And whereas common wealths and kingdoms cannot have (next after God) any
surer foundation, then the love and good will of one man toward an other, that
also is closely bred and maintained in Cities, where men by mutual society
and companying together, do grow to alliances, communalties and corporations.

The liberal sciences and learninges of all sorts, which be lumina
reipublicae, do flourish only in peopled towns, without the which a realm is
in no better case then a man that lacks both his eyes.

Manual arts, or handie crafts, as they have for the most part been invented
in towns and Cities, so they cannot any where else be either maintained or
amended. The like is to be said of Merchandise, under which name I
comprehend all manner of buying, selling, bartering, exchaunging,
communicating of things that men need, to and fro. Wealth and riches (which
are truly called Subsidia belli, and ornamenta pacis) are increased chiefly in
Towns and Cities, both to the prince and people.

The necessity of the poor and needy is in such places both sooner to be
espied, and has means to be more charitably relieved.

The places themselves be surer refuges in all extremities of foreign
invasion, and the inhabitants be a ready hand and strength of men with
munition to oppress intestine sedition.

Moreover, for as much as the force of the wars of our time consists
chiefly in sho^te (all other soldiers being either horsemen or footmen armed
on land, or Mariners at the Sea). It seems to me that Citizens and Townsmen
be as fit to be employed in any of these services (that on horseback only
excepted as the inhabitants that be drawn out of the Country.

Furthermore, even as these societies and assemblies of men in Cities and great
Towns, are a continual bridle against tyranny, which was the cause that
Tarquin, Nero, Dionisius, and such others have always sought to weaken them.
So (being well tempered) they are a strong forte and bulwark not only in the
Aristocratie, but also in the lawful kingdom, or just royalty.

At once the propagation of religion, the execution of good policy, the
exercise of charity, and the defense of the country, is best performed by
Towns and Cities: and this civil life approaches nearest to the shape of that
mystical body whereof Christ is the head, and men be the members: whereupon
both at the first, that man of God Moses, in the common wealth of the
Israelites, and the governors of all Countries in all ages sithence have
continually maintained the same. And to change it were nothing else but to
Metamorphose the world, and to make wild beasts of reasonable men. To stand
longer upon this it were in re non dubia, vti oratione non necessaria: and
therefore I will come to London.

The singularities of the City of London.
Whatsoever is said of Cities generally, makes also for London specially:
howbeit these things are particularly for our purpose to be considered in it.
The situation: the former estimation that it has had: the service that it has
done: the present estate and government of it, and such benefits as do grow
to the realm by the maintenance thereof.

This Realm has only three principal Rivers, whereon a royal City may
well be situated: Trent in the North, Seuerne, in the Southwest and Thames in
the South East: of the which Thames both for the straight course in length
reaches furthest into the belly of the land, and for the breadth and
stillness of the water is most nauigable up and down the stream: by reason
whereof London (standing almost in the middle of that course) is more
commodiously served with provision of necessaries, then any town standing upon
any of the other two rivers can be, and both also more easily communicate to
the rest of the realm the commodities of her own intercourse and traffic.
This River opens indifferently upon France and Flaunders, our mightiest
neighbors, to whose doings we ought to have a bent eye, and special regard:
and this City stands thereon in such convenient distance from the sea, as it
is not only near enough for intelligence of the a^^ayres of those princes,
and for the resistance of their attempts: but also sufficiently removed from
the fear of any sudden dangers that may be offered by them: whereas for
the Prince of this realm to dwell upon Trent, were to turn his back, or
blind side to his most dangerous borderers: and for him to rest and dwell
upon Seuerne, were to be shut ^ppe in a cumbersome corner: which opens but
upon Ireland only, a place of much less importance. Neither could London be
pitched so commodiously upon any other part of the same River of Thames, as
where it now stands. For if it were removed more to the west, it should lose
the benefit of the ebbing and flowing: and if it were seated more toward the
East, it should be nearer to danger of the enemy, and further both from the
good air, and from doing good to the inner parts of the Realm: Neither may I
omit that none other place is so plentifully watered with springs, as London is.

And whereas (amongst other things) Corn and Cattle, Hay and fuel be of
great necessity: of the which Cattle may be driven from a far, and corn
may easily be transported. But Hay and Fuel (being of greater bulk and
burden) must be had at hand: only London (by the benefit of this situation
and river) may be sufficiently served therewith. In which respect an Alderman
of London reasonably (as me thought) affirmed, that although London received
great nourishment by the residence of the Prince, the repair of the
parliament, and Courts of justice, yet it stood principally by the advantage
of the situation upon the river: for when as on a time it was told him by a
Courtier, that Queen Mary (in her displeasure against London) had appointed to
romoue with the Parliament and term to Oxford, this plain man demanded,
whether she meant also to divert the River of Thames from London, or no? and
when the Gentleman had answered no, then quoth the Alderman, by Gods grace we
shall do well enough at London, whatsoever become of the Term and
Parliament. I my self being then a young scholar at Oxford did see great
preparation made toward that Term and Parliament, and do well remember that
the common opinion and voice was, that they were not holden there, because
provision of Hay could not be made in all the Country to serve for ten whole
days together, and yet is that quarter plentifully stored with Hay for the
proportion of the shire it self.

For proof of the ancient estimation of London, I will not use the authority
of the British history, nor of such as follow it, (although some hold it
credible enough that London was first Trinobantum ciuitas, or Troia noua, that
famous City in our histories, and then Ludstoune, and by corruption London,
as they report) because they be not of sufficient force to draw the
gaynesayers. Neither will I stand much upon that honorable testimony which
Geruas. Tiberiens. gives to London in his book de otijs Imperialibus, saying
thus, concerning the blessing of God toward it.

In vibe London, exceptione habet diuulgatum id per omnes aeque gentes Lucani
prouerbium.
Inuida fatorum series summisque negatum
Stare diu:
Nam ea annis 354. ante Romam-conditam, nunquam amisit principatum nec bello
consumpta est.
But I will rather use the credit of one or two ancient foreign writers, and
then descend to latter histories, Cornel. Tacitus lib. 4. Annal says,
Londinum copia negociatorum, et comeatu maxim celebris, and Herodian in the
life of Seuerus the Emperor says, Londinum vrbs magna et opulenta, Beda lib.
Ecclesrastic. 10. Cha. 29. shows that Pope Gregory appointed two Archbishops
Seas in England, the one at London, the other at York, king Ethelstane in his
laws appointing how many Mint masters should be in each City, allotteth
eight to London, and not so many to any other city. The Penner of those laws
that are said to be made by Edward the Confessor and confirmed by William
the Conqueror says, London est caput Regni, et Legum, king Henry the first,
in the third chapter of his laws commands that no Citizen of London should
be amerced above 100. ^. for any pecuniarie pain. The great Charter of England
(that Helena,) for which there was so long and so great war, and contention,
in the 9. Chapter says, ciuitas London habeat omnes suas Libertates antiquas
etc. about the time of king John, London was reputed regna firmata Columna, as
Alexander Necham writes, and in the beginning of the reign of Richard the
second, it was called Camera regis, as Thomas Walsingham reports. I pass
over the recital of the Saxon Charter of king W. the Conqueror the latin
Charters of Henry the first, and second of Richard the first, of John, and of
Edward the first (all which gave unto the Citizens of London great Priueledges)
and of Edward the third, who reciting all the grants of his Predicessors, not
only confirmed but also increased the same, and of the latter kings who have
likewise added many things thereunto. Only I wish to be noted by them that
during all this time all those wise and politic Princes have thought it fit
not only to maintain London in such plight as they found it, but also to
adorn, increase and amplify it with singular tokens of their liberal favor
and good liking. And whether there be not now the same or greater causes to
draw the like or better estimation, and cherishing, let any man be judge, that
will take the pains to compare the present estate of London, (yet still
growing to better, with the former condition of the same.

It were too much to recite particularly the martial services, that this City
has done from time to time: neither do I think that they be all committed to
writing, only for a taste (as it were) I will note these few following.

Almost 60. years before the Conquest, a huge Army of the Danes (whereof king
Sweyne was the leader,) besieged king Etheldred in London, (then the which as
the story says then he had none other refuge) but they were manfully
repulsed, and a great number of them slain.

After the death of this Sweyn, his son Canutus (afterward king of England)
besieged London, both by Land and Water: but after much labor, finding it
impregnable, he departed: and in the same year repayring his forces, he girded
it with a new siege, in the which the Citizens so defended themselves, and
offended him that in the end he went away with shame.

In the dissension that arose between king Edward the Confessor, and his
father in law Earl Goodwin (which was the mightiest subject within this land
that ever I have read of.) The Earl with a great Army came to London, and was
for all that by the countenance of the Citizens resisted, till such time as the
Nobility made reconciliation between them. About 70. years after the
Conquest Maude the Empress made war upon king Stephen for the right of the
Crown, and had taken his person prisoner, but by the strength and assistance
of the Londoners and Kentishmen, Maude was put to flight at Winchester, and her
brother Robert then Earl of Gloucester, was taken in exchange for whom king
Stephen was delivered, I dispute not whose right was better, but I avouch the
service, seeing Stephen was in possession.

The History of William VValworth the Mayor of London, is well known, by
whose manhood and policy, the person of king Richard the second was rescued,
the City saved, Wat Tiler killed, After the common opinion of men of late
times.
and all his stranglers discomfited, in memory and reward of which service the
City had a Daggar added to their shield of Arms, and the Majors have been
most commonly since knighted.

Jack Cade also having discomfited the kings Army, that was sent against
him, came to London, and was there manfully and with long fight resisted,
until that by the good policy of the Citizens his company was dispersed.

Finally in the tenth year of the reign of king Edward the fourth, and not
many days before the death of Henry the sixth, Thomas Neuell, (commonly called
the Bastard of Fauconbridge,) armed a great Company against the king, and
being denied passage through London, he assaulted it on diverse parts: but he
was repulsed by the Citizens, and chased as far as Stratforde with the loss of
a great many.

Thus much of certain their principal, and personal services, in wa^ only,
for it were infinite to repeat the particular aides of men and money^ which
London has ministered: and I had rather to leave it to be coniectured at by
comparison to be made between it, and othercities, whereof I will give you
this one note for an example. In the 12. year of the reign of king Edward the
2. it was ordered by Parliament, that every City of the Realm should make
out soldiers against the Scots: at which time London was appointed to send
200. men, and Canterbury (being then one of our best Cities) 40. and no more.
And this proportion of five to one, is now in our age increased, at the least
five to one, both in soldiers and subsidy. As for the other services that
London has done in times of peace, they are to be measured by consideration of
the commodities whereof I will speak anon. In the mean season let the estate
and government of this City be considered to the end that it may appear that
it stands well with the policy of the Realm.

Caesar in his Commentaries is witness, that in his time the Cities of Britain
had large Teritories annexed unto them, and were several estates of them
selves governed by particular kings or Potentates, as in Italy and Germany,
et be: and that Mandubratius was king of the Trinobantes, whose chief City
London is taken to have been: And I find not that this and government was
altered either by Caesar, or his successors, notwithstanding that the Country
became tributorie unto them: but that it continued until at the length the
Britons themselves reduced all their peoples into one Monarchy, howbeit that
lasted not any long season: for upon Vortiger their king came the Saxons our
Ancestors, and they drove the Britons into Wales, Cornwall, and Britain, in
France, and in process of War divided the Country amongst themselves into an
Eptarchie, or seven kingdoms, of the which one was called the kingdom of the
East Saxons, which having in manner the same limmites that the Bishopric of
London now enjoys, contained Essex, Middlesex, and a part of Hertfordshire,
and so included London. Again it appears that in course of time, and about
^800. years after Christ, Egbert (then king of the West Saxons) Vt pisces
saepe minutos magnus come, overcame the rest of the kings, and once more
erected a Monarchy, the which till the coming in of the Normans, and from
thence even hitherto has continued.

Now I doubt not (whatsoever London was in the time of Caesar) but that under
the Eptarchie and Monarchy it has been a subject, and no free City, though
happily endowed with some large Privileges, for king William the Conqueror
found a Portreeue there whose name was Godfrey (by which name he greeteth him
in his Saxon Chre) and his office was none other then the charge of a Bayliffe,
or Reeue, as by the self same name continuing yet in Grauesend, and certain
other places may well appear. But the Frenchmen using their own language,
called him sometime a Provost, and sometime a Bayliffe, whatsoever his name and
office were, he was perpetuus Magistratus given by the Prince, and not chosen
by the Citizens, as it seems, for what time king Richard the first needed
money toward his expedition in the Holy Land, they first purchased of him the
Liberty to choose yearly from amongst themselves two Bayliffes: And king John
his successor, at their like suite changed their Bayliffes into a Mayor, and
two sheriffs. To these Henry the third added Aldermen, at the first elegible
yearly, but afterward by king E. the third made perpetual Magistrates, and
Justices of the peace within their wards, in which plight of government it
presently stands. This shortly as I could is the Historical and outward
estate of London: now come I to the inward pith and substance.

The estate of this City is to be examined by the quantity and by the
quality.

The quantity therefore consists in the number of the Citizens which is very
great and far exceeds the proportion of Hippodamus which appointed 10000.
and of others which have set down other numbers as meet styntes in their
opinions to be well governed, but yet seeing both reason and experience have
freed us from the law of any definite number, so that other things be ^serued,
let that be admitted: neither is London (I fear me) so great as populous:
for well says one^, non idem est magna ciuitas and frequens, magna est enim
quae multos habet qui arma far possunt, whatsoever the number be, the
breeds no fear of sedition: forasmuch as the same consists not in the
extremes, but in a very mediocrity of Wealth and riches, as it shall better
appear anon. And if the causes of English rebellions be searched out, they
shall be found in effect to be these twain, Ambition, and Covetousness, of
which the first reigns in the minds of high and noble personages, or of such
others, as seek to be gracious and popular, and have robbed the hearts of the
multitude, whereas in London if any where in the world, honos vere onus est,
and every man rather shunneth then seeks the Maioraltie which is the best
mark amongst them, neither has there been any strong faction, nor any man
more popular then the rest, forasmuch as the government is by a Pattern (as it
were) and always the fame, how often soever they change their Magistrate.
Covetousness, (that other Sire of sedition) possessth the miserable and needy
sort, and such as be naughty packes, unthrifts, (which although it cannot be
chosen, but ye in a frequent City as London is, there shall be found many) yet
bear they not any great sway, seeing the multitude and most part there is of a
competent wealth, and earnestly bent to honest labor, I confess that London is
a mighty arm and instrument to bring any great desire to effect, it it may be
won to a man's devotion: whereof also there want not examples in the English
History. But forasmuch as the same is by the like reason serviceable and meet
to impeach any disloyal attempt, let it rather be well governed then evil
liked therefore, for it shall appear anon that as London has adhered to some
rebellio^s, so has it resisted many and was never ye author of any one. The
quality of this city consists either in the law and government thereof: or in
the degrees and condition of the Citizens, or in their strength and riches.

It is besides the purpose, to dispute, whether the estate of the government
here be a Democratie, or Aristocratie, for whatsoever it be being considered
in it self, certain it is, that in respect of the whole Realm, London is but
a Citizen, and no city, a subject and no free estate, an obedienciarie, and
no place endowed, with any distinct or absolute power, for it is governed by
the same law, that the rest of the Realm is, both in causes Criminal and
Civil, a few customs only excepted, which also are to be adjudged, or
foriudged by the common law. And in the assembly of the estates of our Realm
(which we call Parliament) they are but a member of the Comminaltie, and send
two Burgesses, for their city, as every poor Borough does, and two knights
for their County as every other shire does, and are as straightly bound by
such laws as any part of the Realm is, for if contribution in subsidy of
money to the Prince be decreede, the Londoners have none exemption, no not so
much as to assesse themselves: for the Prince does appoint the commissioners.

If Soldiers must be mustered, Londoners have no law to keep themselves at
home, if provision for the Princes householde be to be made, their goods are
not Priueledged. In sum therefore the government of London differs not in
substance, but in ceremony from the rest of the Realm, as namely, in the
names and choice of their officers, and in their Guildes and Fraternities,
established for the maintenance of Handicraftes, and Laborers and for equity
and good order, to be kept in buying and selling. And yet in these also are
they to be controlled by the general law for by the statutes 28. E. 3. Chap.
10. and 1. H. 4. Cha. 15. the points of their misgouernment are inquirable by
the inhabitants of the Foreign shires adjoining and punishable by such
Iusticiars as the Prince shall thereunto depute, to conclude therefore the
estate of London for government is so agreeable a Symphony with the rest, that
there is no fear of dangerous discord to ensue thereby.

The multitude (or whole body) of this populous City is two ways to be
considered, generally, and specially, generally they be natural subjects, a
part of the commons of this Realm and are by birth for the most part a mixture
of all countries of the same, by blood Gentlemen, Yeomen, and of the basest
sort, without distinction: and by profession busy Bees, and travelers for
their living in the Hiue of this commonwealth, but specially considered, they
consist of these three parts, Marchantes, Handicrafts men, and Laborers.
Merchandise is also divided into these three sorts, Navigations, by the which
Marchandizes are brought, and carried in and out over the Seas, Inuection by
the which commodities are gathered into the City, and dispersed from thence
into the Country by land and negotiation, which I may call the keeping of a
retayling or standing shop. In common speech they of the first sort be called
Marchantes, and both the other Retaylers, Handicraftes men be those which do
exercise such arts as require both labor and cunning, as Goldsmithes, Tailors
and Habberdashers, Skinners etc. Laborers and Hirelinges, I call those quorum
operae non arts emuntur, as Tullie says, of which sort be Portars, Carmen,
Watermen etc. Again these three sorts may be considered either in respect of
their wealth, or number: in wealth Marchantes, and some of the chief Retaylers
have the first place, the most part of Retaylers, and all artificers: the
second or mean place, and Hyrelinges the lowest room: but in number they of
the middle place, be first, and do ^arre exceed both the rest: Hyrelinges be
next, and Marchantes be the last. Now, out of this, that the estate of London,
in the persons of the Citizens, is so friendly interlaced, and knit in league
with the rest of the realm, not only at their beginning by birth and blood
as I have showed, but also very commonly at their ending by life and
conversation (for that Marchantes and rich men being satisfied with gain do
for the most part) marry their children into the Country, and convey
themselves after Cicerors counsel, Veluti ex portu in agros et possessiones: I
do infer that there is not only no danger toward the common quiet
thereby, but also great occasion and cause of good love and amity: out of
this, that they be generally bent to travel and do fly poverty, per mare,
per saxa, per ignes, as the Poet says, I draw hope, that they shall escape
the note of many vices, which idle people do fall into And out of this, that
they be a great multitude, and that yet the greatest part of them be neither
too rich not too poor, but do live in the mediocritie, I conclude with
Aristotle that the Prince needs not to fear sedition by them, for thus
says he. Magnae vrbes, magis sunt a seditione liberae, quod in eis dominetur
mediocritas, nam in paruis nihil medium est, sunt enim omnes vel pauperes vel
opulenti. I am now to come to the strength and power of this City, which
consists partly in the number of the Citizens themselves, whereof I have
spoken before, partly in their riches, and in their warlike furniture, for as
touching the strength of the piece it self that is apparent to the eye, and
therefore is not to be treated of.

The wealth and warlicke furniture of London is either public of private, and
no doubt the common trasure cannot be much there, seeing that the reuenew which
they have, hardly suffices to maintain their Bridge and Conduites, and to pay
their officers and servants. Their Toll does not any more then pay their Fee
Ferme, that they pay to the Prince. Their Issues for default of Appearances be
never levied, and the profits of their courts of Justice, do go to particular
men's hands. Arguments hereof be these two: one that they can do nothing of
extraordinary charge, without a general contribution: an other that they have
suffered such, as have borne the chief office amongst them, and were become
Bankrupt, to depart the City, without relief: which I think they neither
would nor could have done, if the common treasure had sufficed to cover their
shame, hereof therefore we need not be afraid. The public armor and
munition of this City remains in the Halles of the Companies, as it does
throughout the whole Realm, for a great part in the parrish churches, neither
is that kept together, but only for obedience to the law, which commands it,
and therefore if that threaten danger to the estate, it may (by another law) be
taken from them, and committed to a more safe Armourie.

The Private riches of London rests chiefly in the hands of the Marchantes,
and Retaylers, for Artificers have not much to spare, and Laborers hau need
that it were given unto them. Now how necessary and serviceable the estate of
Merchandise is to this Realm, if may partly appear by the practice of that
peaceable, politic, and rich Prince king Henry the seventh, of whom Polidore
(writing his life) says thus, Mercatores ille saepenumero pecunia multa data
gratuito iuuabat, vt mercatura (ars vna omnium cunctis aeque mortalibus tum
co^moda, tum necessaria) in suo regno copiosior esset. But chiefly, by the
inestimable commodities that grow thereby: for who knows not that we have
extreme need of many things, whereof foreign countries have great store,
and that we may spare many things whereof they have need? or who is ignorant
of this that we have no mines of silver or gold within our Realm? so that
the increase of our coin, and Bulloine comes from else where, and yet
nevertheless we be both fed, clad, and otherwise served with foreign
commodities and delights, as plentiful as with our domestical: which thing
comes to pass by the mean of merchandise only, which imports necessaries
from other countries, and exporteth the superfluities of our own. For seeing we
have no way to increase our treasure by mines of gold or silver at home, and
can have nothing without money or Ware from other countries abroad, if
follows necessarily, that it we follow the council of that good old Husband
Marcus Cato, saying, oportet patrem familias vendacem esse, non emacem, and do
carry more commodities in value over the seas, then we bring hither from
thence: that then the Realm shall receive that overplus in money: but if we
bring from beyond the seas merchandise of more value, then that which we do
send over may counteruaile, then the Realm pays for the overplus in ready
money, and consequently is a looser by that ill husbandry: and therefore in
this part great and heedefull regard must be had that Symmetria, and due
proportion be kept, least otherwise, either the Realm be defrauded of her
treasure, or the subjects corrupted in vanity, by excessive importation of
superfluous and needelesse Merchandise, or else that we feel penury, even in
our greatest plenty and store by immoderate exportation of our own needful
commodities. Other the benefits that merchandise brings, shall hereafter
appear in the general recital of the commodities that come by London: and
therefore it rests that I speak a word of Retaylors, and finally show that
much good grows by them both. The chief part of retayling is but a handmaid
to merchandise, dispersing by peecemeale that which the merchant brings in
gross: of which trade be Mercers, Grocers, Uinteners, Haberdashers,
Ironmongers, Millayners, and all such as sell wares growing or made beyond the
seas: and therefore so long as Merchandise it self shall be profitable, and such
proportion kept as neither we loose our treasure thereby, nor be cloyed with
unnecessary foreign Wares, this kind of retayling is to be retained also.

Now that Marchantes and Retaylers of London be very rich and great, it is so
far from any harm, that it is a thing both praise worthy, and profitable:
for Mercatura (says Cicero) si tenuis est, fordida putanda est, sin magna est
and copiosa non est vituperanda. And truly Marchantes and Retaylers do not
altogether intus Canere, and profit themselves only, for the Prince, and
Realm both are enriched by their riches: the Realm wins treasure, if their
trade be so moderated by authority, that it break not proportion, and they
besides bear a good fleece which the Prince may sheare when she sees good,

But here before I conclude this part, I have shortly to answer the
accusation of those men, which charge London with the loss and decay of many
(or most) of the ancient Cities, Corporate Towns, and Marketes within this
Realm, by drawing from them to her self alone (say they) both all trade of
traffic by sea, and the retayling of wares, and exercise of manual arts
also. Touching Navigations, which (I must confess) is apparently decayed in
many port towns, and flourishes only^ or chiefly at London, I impute that,
partly to the fall of the Staple (the which being long since a great trade,
and bestowed sometimes at one town and sometimes at an other within the Realm,
did much enrich the place where it was: and being now not only diminished in
force, but also translated over the seas, cannot but bring some decay with it
(partly to the empayring of Havens, which in many places have empouerished
those Towns, whose estate does ebb and ^low with them, and partly to the
dissolution of Religious houses, by whose wealth and haunt, many of those places
were chiefly fed and nourished. I mean not to rehearse particular examples of
every sort: for the thing it self speaks, and I have to an end: As for
Retaylers therefore, and Handicraftes men, it is no marvel if they abandon
Country Towns, and resort to London: for of nonely the Court, (which is now a
days much greater and more gallant then in former times, and which was wont to
be contented to remain with a small company, sometimes at an Abbey or Priorie,
sometimes at a Bishops house, and sometimes at some mean Manor of the kings
own) is now for the most part either abiding at London, or else so near unto
it, that the provision of things most fit for it, may easily be fetched from
thence: but also by occasion thereof the Gentlemen of all shires do fly, and
flock to this City, the younger sort of them to see and show vanity, and the
elder to save the cost and charge of Hospitality, and house keeping. For hereby
it comes to pass that the Gentlemen being either for a good portion of the
year out of the Country, or playing the Fermours, Grasiars, Brewers or such
like, more then Gentlemen were wont to do within the Country, Retaylers and
Artificers, at the least of such things as pertain to the back or belly, do
leave the Country towns where there is no vent, and do fly to London, where
they be sure to find ready and quick market. And yet I wish, that even as
many towns in the Low Countries of king Phillips do stand some by one handy
art and some by an other: so also that it might be provided here, that the
making of some things might (by discrete dispensation) be allotted to some
special Towns, to the end, that although the dayntenesse of men cannot be
restrained, which will needs seek those things at London, yet other places
also might be relieved, at the least by the Workemanshippe of them.

Thus much then of the estate of London, in the government thereof, in the
condition of the Citizens, and in their power and riches. Now follow the
enumeration of such benefits as rebound to the Prince and this realm by this
City: In which doing I profess not to rehearse all, but only to recite and
run over the chief and principal of them.

Besides the commodities of the furtherance of Religion and Justice: The
propagation of Learning: The maintenance of arts: The increase of riches, and
the defense of Countries (all which are before showed to grow generally by
Cities, and be common to London with them) London brings singularly these
good things following.

By advantage of the situation it disperseth foreign Wares (as the stomach
does meat) to all the members most commodiously.

By the Benefit of the river of Thames, and great trade of Merchandise, it is
the chief maker of Mariners, and Nurse of our Navy: and ships (as men know)
be the wodden walls for defense of our Realm.

It maintayneth in flourishing estate, the Countries of Norfolk, Suffolk,
Essex, Kent, and Sussex, which as they lie in the face of our most puissant
neighbor, so ought they (above others) to be conserved in the greatest
strength and riches: and these (as it is well known) stand not so much by the
benefit of their own soil, as by the neighborhood and nearenes which they
have to London.

It releeueth plentifully, and with good policy, not only her own poor
people (a thing which scarcely any other Town or shire does) but also the
poor that from each quarter of the realm do flock unto it, and it imparteth
liberally to the necessity of the Uniuersities besides. It is an ornament to
the realm by the beauty thereof, and a terror to other countries by reason of
the great wealth and frequencie. It spreads the honor of our Country far
abroad by her long nauigations, and makes our power feared, even of barbarous
Princes. It only is stored with rich Marchantes which sort only is
tolerable: for beggarly Merchants, do byte too near, and will do more harm
then good to the realm. It only of any place in this realm is able to
furnish the sudden necessity with a strong Army. It avails the prince in
Tonnage, Poundage and other her customs, much more then all the rest of the
Realm.

It yields a greater Subsidy then any one part of the realm, I mean not
for the proportion of the value of the goods only, but also for the faithful
service there used, in making the assesse, for no where else be men taxed so
near to their just value as in London: yea many are found there, that for
their countenance and credit sake, refuse not to be rated above their
ability, which thing never happens abroad in the country. I omit that in
ancient time, the inhabitants of London and other cities, were accustomably
taxed after the tenth of their goods, when the Country was assessed at the
fifteenth, and rated at the viij.when the country was set at the xij.for that
were to awake a sleeping Dog, and I should be thought dicenda, tacenda,
locutus, as the Poet said.

It only does and is able to make the Prince a ready pressed or loan of money.

It only is found fit and able to entertain strangers honorably, and to
receive the Prince of the realm worthily.

Almighty God ( qui nisi custo diat ciuitatem, frustra vigilat custos) grant,
that her Majesty evermore rightly esteem and rule this City, and he give
grace, that the Citizens may answer duty, as well toward God and her Majesty,
as toward this whole realm and country, Amen.

An Appendix containing the examination of such causes as have heretofore moved
the Princes, either to fine and ransom the citizens of London, or to seize the
liberties of the City it self.
THese all may be reduced to these few heads: for either the citizens have
adheared (in aid or arms) to such as have warred upon the Prince: or they
have made tumult, and broken the common peace at home: or they have misbehaued
themselves in point of government and justice: or finally (and to speak the
plain truth) the princes have taken hold of small matters, and coined good
sums of money out of them.

To the first head I will refer whatsoever they have done either in those
wars that happened between king Stephen and Maude the Empress, being
competitors of the crown: or between king John and his nobles assisting Jews
the French kings son when he invaded the realm: for it is apparent by all
histories, that the Londoners were not the mouers of these wars, but were
only used as instruments to maintain them. The like is to be said of all the
offenses that king Henry the third (whose whole reign was a continual
warfare) conceived against this City, concerning the bearing of armor
against him; for the first part of his reign was spent in the continuation of
those wars that his father had begun with Jews. And the rest of his life he
bestowed in that contention, which was commonly called the Barons wars. In
which Tragedy London (as it could not be otherwise) had now and then a part,
and had many a snubbe at the kings hand for it. But in the end when he had
triumphed over Simon Mountford at Euesham, London felt it most tragical: for
then he both seysed their liberties, and sucked themselves dry: and yet
Edictum Kenelworth (made shortly after) has an honorable testimony for London,
saying, Te London laudamus etc. As for the other offenses that he took
against the Londoners, they pertain to the other parts of my division.

Next after this, against whom the Londoners did put on arms, follows king
Edward the second, who in the end was deprived of his kingdom, not by their
means, but by a general defection, both of his own wife and son, and
almost of the whole nobility and realm besides. In which trouble, that
furious assault, and slaughter committed by them upon the Bishop of Excester
(then Treasurer of the Realm) is to be imputed, partly to the sway of the time
wherewith they were carried, and partly to a private displeasure which they had
to the Bishop.

Finally comes to hand King Richard the second: for these three onley in all
the Catalogue of our kings, have been heavy Lords to London, who also had
much contention with his nobility, and was in the end deposed. But whatsoever
countenance and aid the City of London brought to the wars and vprores of
that time, it is notoriously true that London never led the dance, but ever
followed the pipe of the nobility. To close up this first part therefore I
affirm, that in all the troublesome actions during the reigns of these three
kings, as also in all that heauing in, and hurling out, that afterward
happened between K. Henry the 6. and king Edward the fourth, the city of
London was many times a friend and fautor, but never the first motive or
author of any intestine war or sedition.

In the second room I place a couple of tumultuous affraies that chanced in
the days of King Richard the first, the one upon the day of his coronation
against the Jews, which contrary to the Kings own proclamation, would needs
enter the Church to see him sacred, and were therefore cruelly handled by the
common people. The other was caused by William with the long beard, who after
that he had inflamed the poor people against the richer sort, and was called
to answer for his fault, took Bow Church for sanctuary, and kept it Castle
like, till he was fiered out.

Here is place also for the stoning to death of a Gentleman (servant to the
half brother of King Henry the third) which had before provoked the Citizens
to fury by wounding diverse of them without any cause 1257. for the riotous
fray between the servants of the Goldsmithes and the Tailors, 1268. for the
hurly burly and bloodshed between the Londoners and the men of Westminster,
moved by the youngmen upon an occasion of a wrestling on S. James day, 1221.
and made worse by one Constantine an ancient Citizen: for the braule and
business that arose about a Bakers loaf at Salisbury place 1391. for the
which and some other misdemeanors K. Richard the 2. was so incensed by evil
counsel against the Londoners, that he determined to destroy them, and raze
their City, and for the fight that was between the citizens and Sanctuary
men of S. Martins 1454. under K. Henry the sixth. And finally for the misrule on
evil May day 1519. and for such other like, if there have been any.

To the third head may be referred the seiser of their liberties, for a false
judgment given against a poor widow, called Margaret Viel 1246. The 2.
several seisers in one year 1258. for falls packing in collections of money and
other enormities: And finally the seiser made by King Edward the first for
taking bribes of the Bakers 1285. But all this severity in seizing and
resuming of the liberties (which was in old time the only ordinary punishment)
was at length mitigated by king Edward the third, and King Henry the fourth in
their statutes before remembered.

In the last place stand those offenses, which I repute rather taken then
given, and do fall within the measure of the adage, vt canem cedas, cito
inuenias baculum: for King John in the tenth of his reign deposed the
Bayliefes of London, because they had bought up the Wheat in the market, so
that there was not to serve his Purueyers. King Henry the third his son
compelled the Londoners to pay him 5000. ^. because they had lent to Jews the
French the like sum, of a good mind to dispatch him out of their City and
the realm, at such time as the Protector and the whole Nobility fell to
composition with him for his departure. And the same King fined them at three
thousand marks, for the escape of a prisoner out of Newgate, of whom they
took no charge: for he was a Clearke, prisoner to the Bishop of London under
the custody of his own servants, and as for the place, it was only borrowed
of the Londoners to serve that turn. Hitherto of these things to this end,
that whatsoever misdemeanor shall be objected out of history against London, the
same may herein appear, both in his true place^ and proper color.

BEcause amongst other mine Authors I have often times alleged Fitz-Stephens, as
one more choice then other, namely for the ancient estate of this City, more
then three hundred years since: And also the said Author being rare, (as to my
knowledge) not extant out of mine own custody, I have in this place thought
good by impression to imparte the same to my loving friends, the learned
Antiquaries as the Author wrote it in the Latin tongue. And first to note in
effect, what M. Bale in commendation of the said Author writes.

William Stephanides, or Fitzstephen, a Monk of Canterbury, Edit^o anni^ 1548.
borne of worshipful parents in the City of London, well brought up at the
first under good masters, did more and more increase in honest conditions and
learning: for ever in his young years there appeared in him a certain light of
a Gentlemanlike disposition, which promised many good things, afterward by him
performed. Such time as other spent in braules, and idle talk, he employed in
wholesome exercises for the honor of his country, following therein the
example of Plato: and was very studious both in humanity and divinity. The
City of London his birth place, the most noble of all other Cities of this
land, and the Princes seat, situated in the South part of this Island, he loved
above all the other: so that at length he wrote most elegantly in latin of the
site and rites of the same. Leland in diverse of his books commends him for
an excellent writer. He lived in the reign of king Stephen, wrote in the
reign of Henry the second, and deceased in the year of Christ 1191. in the
reign of Richard the first.

Descriptio Nobilissimae Ciuitatis Londoniae.
De Situ eiusdem.
INter nobiles vrbes orbis, quas fama celebrat, ciuitas Londonia regni Anglorum
seeds vna est, quae famam sui latius diffundit, opes and merces longius
transmittit, caput altius extollit. Foelix estaeris salubritate; Christiana
religione, firmitate munitionum, natura situs, honor ciuium, pudicitia
matronali, ludis etiam quam iucunda; and Nobilium faecunda virorum: quae
singula semotim libet inspicere.

De Clementia Aeris.
IBisiquidem emollit animos hominum clementia coeli, non vt sint in Venerem
putres, sed neferi sint, and bestiales; potius benigni and liberales.

De Religione.
ESt ibi in ecclesia beati Pauli episcopalis seeds, quonda^ fuit Metropolitana,
and adhuc futura creditur, siremeauerint ciues in Insula^: nisi forte Beati
Thomae Martyris titulus Archiepiscopalis, and praesentia corporalis, dignitate^
illam Cantuariae (vbi nunc est) conseruet perpetuam. Sed cum vtramque vrbium
harum Sanctus Thomas illustrauerit, Londoniam ortu, Cantuariam occasu: ipsius
sancti intuitu, cumiustitiae accessu, habet altera aduersus altera^, quod
amplius alleget. Sunt etia^ (quod ad Christianae fidei cultum pertinet) tum in
Londonia, tum in suburbano 13. maiores ecclesiae conuentuu^, praeter minores
parochianas. 126.

De Firmitate vrbis.
HAbet ab Orient arcem Palatinam, maximam and fortissimam, cuius and area, and
muri a fundamento profundissimo exurgunt: cemento cum sanguine animalium
^emperato. Ab occidente duo castella munitissima: muro vrbis alto and magno,
duplatis^ Heptapylae portis intercontinuante, turrito ab Aquilone per
intercapedines. Similiterque ab Austro Londonia murata and turtita fuit: sed
fluuius maximus piscosus Thamensis, mari influo refluoque qui illac allabitur,
maenia illa tractu temporis alluit, labefactauit, deiecit. Item sursum ab
occidente Palatium Regium eminet super fluuium eundem, aedificium
inco^parabile, cum auremurali and propugnaculis, duobus millibus ab vrbe,
suburbano frequenti continuante.

De Hortis.
VNdique extra domos suburbanorum Horti ciuium arboribus consiti, spatiosi, and
speciosi, contigui habentur.

De Pascuis and Sationalibus.
ITem a Borea sunt agri pascui, and pratorum grata planities, aquis fluuialibus
interfluis: ad quas molinorum versatiles rotae citantur cum murmr iocoso.
Proxime patet foresta ingens, saltus nemorosi ferarum, latebrae ceruorum,
damarum, aprorum, and taurorum syluestrium: Agri vrbis sationales non sunt
ieiunae glareae, sed pingues Asiae campi qui faciunt laetas segetes, and suorum
cultorum repleant horrea cerealis mergite culmi.

De Fontibus.
SVnt and circa Londoniam ab Aquilone suburbani fontes praecipui aqua dulci,
salubri, perspicua, and per claros riuo trepidante lapillos. Inter quos fons
Sacer, fons Clericorum, fons Sancti Clementis nominatiores habentur, and
adeuntur celebriori accessu, and maiori frequentia scholarum and vrbanae
iuuentutis in serotinis aestiuis ad auram exeuntis. Vrbs sane bona cum bonu^
habeat Dominum.

De honor Ciuium.
VRbs ista viris est honorata, armis decorata, multo habitatore populosa, vt
tempore bellicae cladis sub rege Stephano bello apti ex ea exeuntes ostentatui
haberentur 20000. armatoru^ equitum, 60. mill peditum estimarentur. Ciues
Londoniae vbicunque locorum prae omnibus alijs ciuibus ornatu morum, vestium
and mensae, locutione, spectabiles and noti habentur.

De Matronis.
Vrbis Matronae ipsae Sabinae sunt.

De Scholis.
IN Londonia tres principales ecclesiae scholas celebres habent de priuilegio
and antiqua dignitate. Plerunque tamen fauore personae alicuius, vel aliquorum
doctorum, qui secundum philosophia^ noti and praeclari habentur, and aliae ibi
sunt scholae de gratia and permissione. Diebus festis ad ecclesias festiuas
magistri conuentus celebrantur: Disputa^t scolares, quidam demonstratiue,
Dialectice alij: alij recitant enthymemata: hij melius perfectis vtuntur
Syllogismis. Quidam ad ostentationem exercentur disputat one, quae est inter
colluctantes. Alij ad veritate^, ea quae est perfectionis gratia: sophistae
simulatores agmine and inundatione verborum beati iudicantur. Alij
paralogizantur: Oratores aliqui quandoque orationibus Rhetoricis aliquid dicunt
apposite ad persuadendum, curantes artis praecepta seruare, and ex
contingentibus nihil omittere. Pueri diuersarum scholarum versibus inter se
conrixantur: and de principijs artis Grammaticae, regulis praeteritorum vel
futurorum contendunt: Sunt alij qui epigrammatibus, rithmis and metris vtuntur,
vetere illa triuiali dicacitate, licentia Fescennina socios, suppressis
nominibus liberius lacerant, Loedorias iaculantur and scommata, salibus
Socraticis socioru^, vel forte maiorum vitia tangunt, vel mordacius dente
rodunt Theonino audacibus *. Auditores multum ridere parati ingeminant tremulos
naso crispante cachinnos.

De dispositione vrbis.
SIngulorum officiorum exercitores, singularum reru^ venditores, singularum
operarum suarum locatores, quotidiano mane per se sunt locis distincti omnes vt
officijs. Preterea est in Londonia supra ripam fluminis inter vina in nauibus
and cellis vinarijs venalia, publica coquina: ibi cotidie pro tempore est
inuenire cibaria fercula, assa, frixa, elixa, pisces, pisciculos, carnes
grossiores pauperibus, delicatiores diuitibus, venationum, auium, auicularum.
Si subito veniant ad aliquem ciuium amici fatigati ex itinere, nec libeat
ieiunis expectare, vt noui cibi emantur, coquantur, dant famuli manibus limphas
panesque, interim ad ripam curritur, ibi presto sunt omnia desiderabilia.
Quantalibet militum vel peregrinorum infinitas intrat vrbem, qualibet diei vel
noctis hora, vel ab vrbe exitura, ne vel hi nimium ieiunent, vel alij impransi
exeant, illuc si placeat diuertunt, et se pro modo suo singuli ref^ciunt: qui
se curare volunt molliter, accipenserem vel aliam auem, vel attagen Ionicum non
quaerant, appositis quae ibi inueniuntur delicijs: Haec equidem publica coquina
est and ciuitati plurimum expediens, et ad ciuitatem pertinens: Hinc est quod
legitur in Gorgia Platonis, iuxta medicinam esse coquorum officium, simulantium
and adulatione^ quartae particulae ciuilitatis. Est ibi extra vnam portarum
statim in suburbio quidam planus campus re and nomine. Omni sexta feria, nisi
sit mayor festiuitas praeceptae solempnitatis, est ibi celebre spectaculum
nobilium equorum venalium. Spectaturi vel empturi veniunt qui in vrbe adsunt,
comites, barons, milites, ciues plurimi. ^uuat videre gradarios succussatura
nite^te suauiter ambula^tes: pedibus lateraliter simul erectis, quasi a
subalternis and demissis: Hinc equos, qui armigeris magis conueniunt, durius
incedentes, sed expedite tamen, qui quasi a contradictoribus pedes simul
eleua^t and deponunt: Hinc nobiles pullos iuniores, qui nondum fraeno been
assueti, altius incedunt, and mollia crura reponunt: Hinc summarios membris
validis and vegetis. Hinc dextrarios preciosos, elegantis formae, staturae
honestae, micantes auribus, ceruicibus arduis, clunibus obesis. In horum
incessu spectant emptores, primo passu^ suauiore^, postea motu^citatiore^, qui
est quasi a contrarijs pedibus anterioribus simul solo amotis and admotis, and
posterioribus similiter. Cum talium sonipedum cursus imminet, and aliorum forte
qui similiter sunt in genere suo ad vectura^ validi, ad cursuram vegeti: clamor
attollitur, vulgares equos in partem ire praecipitur: Sessores alipedum pueri
tres simul, aliquando bini ex condicto and bini certamini se praeparant, docti
equis imperitare, indomitorum lupatis temperant fraenis ora: hoc maxim
praecauent, ne alter alteri concursum praeripiat. Et qui similiter pro modo suo
ad certamen cursus illius attollunt; tremunt artus, morae impatientes, stare
loco nesciunt, facto signo membra extendunt, cursum rapiunt, agilitate
peruicaci feruntur: certant sessores laudis amore, spe victoriae, equis
admissis subdere calcaria, and nec minus vrgere eos virgis and ciere
clamoribus. Putares omnia in motu esse, secundum Heraclitum, and falsam omnino
Zenonis sententiam, dicentis, quoniam, non contingit moueri, neque stadium
pertran^ire. Part alia stant seorsim rusticoru^ peculia, agroru^ iustrumenta,
sues longis lateribus, vaccae distentis vberibus, corpora magna boum,
lanigeru^que pecus: stant ibi aptae aratris, trahis and bigis equae: quarundam
ventres foetibus tument: alias editi foetus obeunt pulli lasciuiores, sequela
inseparabilis. Ad hanc vrbe^ ex omni natione quae sub coelo est, naualia
gaudent institores habere commercia. Aurum mittit Arabs, species and thura
Sabaeus, Arma Scythes, oleum palmarum diuite silua. Pingue solum Babylon, Nilus
lapides preciosos. Seres purpureas vestes. Norwegi, Russi, varium, grisium,
sabelinas: Galli sua vina. Vrbe Roma secundum Chronicorum fidem satis antiquior
est. Ab eisdem quippe patribus Troianis haec prius a Bruto condita est, quam
illa a Remo et Romulo. Vnde et adhuc antiquis eisdem vtuntur legibus,
communibus institutis. Haec similiter illi regionibus est distincta: habet
annuos pro consulibus vicecomites: habet senatoriam dignitatem and magistratus
minores: E^uuiones et aquaeductus in vicis: Ad genera causaru^ deliberatiuae,
demonstratiuae, iudicialis loca sua, fora singula: habet sua diebus statutis
comitia. Non puto vrbem esse in qua sint probabiliores consuetudines, in
ecclesiis visitandis, ordinatis Dei honorandis, festis feriandis, eleemosinis
dandis, in hospitibus ^uscipiendis, in desponsationibus firmandis, matrimoniis
contrahendis, nuptiis celebrandis, conuiuijs ornandis, conuiuis hilarandis,
etiam in exequiis curandis and cadaueribus humandis. Solae pestes Londini sunt,
immoderata stultorum potatio, et frequens incendium. Ad haec omnes fere
Episcopi, Abbates, and Magnates Angliae, quasi ciues et municipes sunt vrbis
Londoniae: sua ibi habentes aedificia praeclara, vbi serecipiunt, vbi diuites
impensas faciunt, ad consilia, ad conuentus celebres in vrbem euocati, a Domino
rege, vel Metropolitano suo, seu propriis tracti negotiis.

De Ludis.
AMplius et ad ludos vrbis veniamus, quoma^ no^ expedit vtile^ tantum et seria^
vrbe^ esse, nisi dulcis etiam sit, and iucunda. Vnde et in sigillis summorum
Pontificum, vsque ad tempora Leonis Papae, ex altera part Bullae, sculpto per
impressionem piscatore Petro, et supra eum claue, quasi manu Dei de coelis ei
porrecta, et circa eum versu, Tu pro me nauem liquisti, suscipe clauem.

Ex altera part impressa erat vrb^^ et scriptura ista, Aurea Roma. Item ad
laude^ Gaesaris Augusti, et Romae dictu^ est. Nocte pluit tota, redeunt
spectaculamane,
Diuisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habes.


Lundonia pro spectaculis theatralibus, pro ludis scenicis, ludos habet
sanctiores, representationes miraculorum, quae sancti Confessores operati sunt,
feu repraesentationes passionum, quibus claruit constantia Martyrum. Praeterea
quotannis die, quae dicitur Carnivale vt a puerorum ludis incipiamus (omnes
enim puerifuimus) scholarum singuli pueri suos apportant magistro suo gallos
gallinaceos pugnatores, and totu^ illud antemeridianum datur ludo puerorum
vacantium spectare in scholis suorum pugnas gallorum. Post prandium exit in
campos omnis iuuentus vrbis ad lusum pilae celebrem. Singulorum studiorum
scolares suam habent pila^: singulorum officiorum vrbis exercitores suam
singuli pilam in manibus. Maiores natu patres and diuites vrbis, in equis
spectatum veniunt certamina iuniorum, and modo suo inueniuntur cum iuuenibus:
and excitari videtur in eis motus caloris naturalis, contemplatione tanti motus
and participatione gaudiorum adolescentiae liberioris. Singulis diebus
dominicis in Quadragesima post prandia exit in campos iuuenum recens examen in
equis bellicosis: in equls certamine primis: quorum quisque aptus and in gyros
currere doctus equus. Erumpunt a portis cateruatim filij ciuium laici,
instructi lanceis and scutis militaribus: iuniores hastilibus ferro dempto
praefurcatis, simulachra belli cient and agonisticam exercent militarem.
Adueniunt and plurimi Aulici rege in vicino posito, and de familijs consulum
and Baronum ephebi: non dum cingulo donati militiae, gratia concertandi.
Accendit singulos spes victoriae: equi feri adhinniunt, tremunt artus, fraenos
mandunt, impatientes morae stare loco nesciunt. Cum tandem Sonipedum rapit
vngula cursum, sessores adolescentes diui sis agminibus hij praecedentibus
instant, nec assequuntur, hij socios deijciunt and preteruolant. In feriis
paschalibus ludunt quasi praelia naualia: in arbore siquidem mediamna scuto
fortiter innexo, nauicula remo and raptu fluminis cita, in prora stantem habet
iuuenem scutum illud lancea percussuru^: qui si scuto illi lanceam illidens
frangat eam, and immotus persistat, habet propositum, voti compos est: si vero
lancea integra fortiter percusserit, in profluentem amnem deiicitur: Nauis motu
suo acta praeterit. Sunt tamen hinc inde secus scutum duae naues stationariae,
and in eis iuuenes plurimi, vt eripiant percussorem flumine absorptum cum primo
emersus comparet, vel su^ma rursus cum bullit in vnda. Supra pontem and in
solariis supra fluuium, sunt qui talia spectent, multum ridere parati. In
festis tota aestate iuuenes ludentes exercentur, in saliendo, in arcu, in
lucta, iactu lapidu^, amentatis missilibus vltra metam expediendis, parmis
duellionum. Puellarum Cytheraea ducit choros, and pede libera pulsatur tellus,
vsque imminente luna. In hyeme singulis fere festis ante prandium, vel apri
Spumantes pugnant pro capitibus, and verres^ fulmineis accincti dentibus
addendi Succidiae, velpingues tauri Cornupetae, seu vrsi immanes cum obiectis
depugnant canibus. Cum est congelata palus illa magna quae maenia vibis
aquilonalia alluit, exeunt lusum super glaciem densae inuenum turmae: Hi ex
cursu motu captato citatiore, distantia pedum posita, magnum spatium latere
altero praetenso perlabuntur. Alii quasi magnos lapides molares de glacie seeds
sibi faciunt: sessorem vnum trahunt plurimi praecurrentes, manibus se tenentes:
In tanta citatione motus aliquando pedibus lapsi cadunt omnes proni. Suntalii
super glaciem ludere doctiores, singuli pedibus suis aptantes, and sub
talaribus suis alligantes ossa, tibias scilicet animalium, and palos ferro
acuto superposito tenentes in manibus, quos aliquando glaciei allidunt: tanta
rapacitate feruntur, quanta auis volans, vel pilum balistae. Interdum autem
permagna procul distantia ex condicto, duo aliqui ita ab oppositis veniunt,
concurritur: palos erigunt, se inuicem percutiunt: vel alter, vel ambo cadunt,
non sine laesione corporali: cum post casum etiam vi motus feruntur ab inuicem
procul: and qua part glacies caput tangit, totum radit, totum decorticat.
Plerumque tibia cadentis, vel brachiu^, si super illud ceciderit, confringitur.
Sed aetas auida gloriae, iuuentus cupida victoriae, vt in veris praeliis
fortius se habeant, ita in simulatis exerce^tur. Plurimi ciuium delectantur,
ludentes in auibus coeli, Nisis, accipitribus and huiusmodi, and in canibus
militantibus in siluis. Habentque ciues suum ius venandi, in Middlesexia,
Hertfordscira, and tota Chiltra, and in Cantiavsque ad aquam Craiae.
Lundonienses tunc Trinouantes decti Gaium Iulium Cesare^, qui nullas nisi
sanguine fuso vias habere gaudebat, repulerunt. Vnde Lucanus.

Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis. Ciuitas Lundonia reperit aliquos,
qui regna plurima, et Romanum sibi subdiderunt imperium: et plurimos alios,
quos mundi Dominos virtus euexit ad Deos, vt fuerat in Apollinis oraculo Bruto
promissum: Brute sub occasu solis, trans Gallica regna,
Insula in Oceano est vndique clausa mari:
Hanc pete: namque tibi seeds erit illa perennis
Haec fiet natis altera Troia tuis.
Hic de stirpe tua reges nascentur; and ipsis
Totius terrae subditus orbis erit.


In temporibus Christianis nobilem illum edidit Imperatorem Constantinum, qui
vrbem Roman, et imperialia insignia omnia Deo donauit, and beato Petro et
Siluestro Papae, cui and stratoris exhibuit officium, and se non amplius
Imperatorem, sed sanctae ecclesiae Romanae defensorem gauisus est vocari: et ne
pax Domini Papae occasion praesentiae eius secularis strepitus tumultu
concuteretur, ipse ab vrbe Domino Papae collata discessit, and sibi ciuitatem
Bizantium edificauit. Lundonia and modernis temporibus, reges illustres
magnificosque peperit, Imperatricem Matildem, Henricum regem tertium, and
beatum Thomam Archiepiscopum Christi Martyrem gloriosum, quali non candidiorem
tulit, nec quo fuerit deuinctior alter omnibus bonis totius orbis Latini.

Faults escaped in this book.
Page. Line. Errat. Correction. 1. 19. for Themantius read Theomantius. 3. 9.
Cominus Comius. 4. 15. forfeyted fortified. 5. 21. come Rome. 7. 15. Cornwell
Cornwall. ibid. 27. Trinauant. Trinobant. 8. 3. Ethelrod Ethelred. 9. 20. the
same the same wall. 10. 13. Tedwell Todwell. 13. 7. writing written. 16. 23
Bulman Bulmar. 21. 5 15. 215. 23. 6 stage siege. 36. 6 weaklely new. 49. 22. 3.
16. ibid. 25. 7. 17. 52. 22 Efford Voffurd. 73. 24. bray Berie. 74. 25. Libnor
Licour. 79. 16. Picad Picard. ibid. 29 Henty Hugh. 100. 4.8.9 Troynage.
Tronage. 109. 35. Michel Nychell. 124. 10. Breadstreet Broad street. 154. 14.
1482. 1582. ibid. 17. Hudstone Rudstone. 155. 1. About at. 168. 34. of Mayor of
mayoraltie 1584. sir William Garrard Mayor. ^83. 9. this his 306. 20 Sir George
Saint George. 336. 17 lane place. 444. 26 Senins Ienins.

FINIS.

