SCOTLANDS WARNING, Or a Treatise of Fasting, Containing a Declaration of the
causes of the solemn Fast, Indyted to be kept in all the Churches of
Scotland, the third and fourth Sundays of this instant Month of May Anno
1628. and the Week days betwixt them, as they may be goodly kept in Towns.
Together with a Direction how to proceed in the Religious Observation of any
soleme Fast. Written at the appointment of Superiors, By Mr. W. STRVTHER,
Preacher of the Gospel at EDINBVRGH.

Printed at Edinburgh, by the Heirs of Andro Heart. Anno Dom. 1628.

Jeremiah. 36. 5. 6. 7. And Jeremiah said unto Baruch, I am shut up, I cannot
go into the house of the Lord. Therefore go thou, and read in the roll which
thou have written from my mouth, the words of the Lord, in the ears of the
people, in the Lords House upon the Fasting day, and also thou shall read them
in the ears of all Judah, that come out of their Cities.

It may be they present their Supplications before the Lord, and will return
every one from his evil way: For great is the anger and wrath that the Lord
has pronounced against this Place.

2. Chron. 34. 27. 28. Because thine heart was tender, and thou did humble
thy self before God, when thou heardest his words against this Place, and
against the Inhabitants thereof, and humblest thy self before me, and did
ren^ thy clothes and weep before me, I have even heard thee also, says the
Lord. Behold, I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and thou shall be put in thy
grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring
upon this Place, and upon the Inhabitants of the same: SCOTLANDS WARNING: Or a
Treatise of Fasting, Containing a Declaration of the causes of the solemn
Fast, indyted to be kept in all the Churches of Scotland.
IT is the duty of the LORDS 1.
Watchmen, whom he has set on the Walls of Jerusalem, Ezech. 3. 33. To
consider diligently both the estate of it within, and the dangers imminent
from without: And according as they see, to give faithful and tymous
advertisement to the people, Habac. 2. 1. Isa. 21. 8. That thereby they may
both deliver their own Souls and direct the people by speedy Repentance, to
prevent the approaching wrath.

This their Calling craves; for they stand betwixt God and his people, as the
Interpreters of his will to them. Job. 33. 23. And as their Remembrancers to
God, to present them and their necessities to him continually. Isa. 62. 6. 7.
He calls them up to the Mountain to see further than other, and (beside
their gifts and graces, as Christians) gives them a Pastoral eye to see, and
a pastoral heart to consider, and a pastoral mouth to declare what they see
and consider.

This also he commands them under a most heavy pain. Son of man, I have
set thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel, therefore thou shall hear the
word from my mouth, and warn them from me: When I say to the wicked, O wicked
man, thou shall surely die, if thou do not speak to warn the wicked from
his way, that wicked man shall die in his sin, but his blood will I require
at thine hand. Ezech. 3. 17. 33. 7. 8.

And God commnendeth this as wisdom in Pastors according to his heart, Who is
the wise man to understand this? and who is he to whom the mouth of the Lord
has spoken, that he may declare it? for what the Land perished. Ier. 9 12.

Upon these considerations, the Clergy of 2.
this ^and, taking to heart the Estate of the Church of God, both in this
Kingdom and other reformed Countries, have thought it necessa^, ( Suppreme
authority commanding also the same) That all the Congregations of this Land
keep a solemn and public Fast, the third and fourth Sundays of this
instant Month of May, and the week days betwixt these two Sabbaths: To
entreat GOD, in all humility, and repentance for pardon of our sins, and for
auerting of his just wrath, where it is already begun, and to hold it off
these who are threatened with it.

And for the better informing of every one in the equity and necessity of
that religious work of Fasting and Prayer, and their better stirring up
thereunto: The just and weighty causes thereof are to be considered, which
may be reduced to these heads. 4.


1. First the most lamentable estate of the reformed Churches of Germany, and
other Countries in Europe: Where the Gospel did shine, and Gods worship was
exercised fruitfullie to his glory: But now by the cruelty of the prevailing
Papists, fearful desolation is wrought in these places, GODS Saints bereft
of their lives, their blood spilt as water in the streets, their women
shamefullie abused, their goods taken from them: And the estate of them who
have escaped the rage of the sword, worse than the slain. Their liberties lost
and themselves either driven from their dwellings or compelled to forsake their
God and Religion, and take themselves to Romish Idolatry, or to banishment.
And under the name of an Imperial reformation, there is nothing but a Godless
deformation, setting up the abomination of ignorance, and error where the
light has been.

How many Prouences sometimes pleasant, in a peaceable professing of ye Truth,
as the Paradise of God, are now turned in a wilderness: And the Houses of God
prepared sometime on the top of the Mountains, and exalted above the Hills,
whereunto people did flow, are destroyed: And the Lords displayed banner,
under which many did merch in comely order, is cast down, and many mothers in
Israel, famous Colleges and Universities are scattered, and the abomination of
desolation erected in them.

So we may say with the Prophet, Come, and behold the works of the Lord, what
desolations he has wrought in the Earth. Psalm. 16. 8. The Heathen are come in
the inheritance of the Lord, his holy Temple have they defiled, and made
Jerusalem heaps of stones: The dead bodies of Gods Saints have they given to
be meat to the Fowls of heaven* and the flesh of thy Saints to the beasts
of the earth: Their blood have they shed as water about Jerusalem, and there
was none to bury them: They have devoured Jacob, and made his dwelling place
waste. Psalm 79. 1. 3. 4.

God has forsaken the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among
them: He delivered his strength in captivity, and his glory in the enemies
hand. Psalm. 78. 61.

And we may lament with Jeremy. How does the City remain solitary, that
was full of people? She is a widow: She that was great among the Nations, And
Princess among the Province is made tributarie. And we may wish with that
same Prophet, Oh, that mine head were waters, and mine eyes a Fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night, for the slain of the Daughter of my
people. Ierem. 9. 1 5.


This work is a part of Antichrists persecution, for now he is both breathing
threatenings and slaughter, against the reformed Churches, and executes his
cruelty against them, because of their obedience to Gods voice in coming out
of Babell, and that according to the bloody decrees of the Counsel of Trent.
For after that Satan had for a long space vented his first property of lying
by Antichrist his first borne involuing and holding these Western places of
Europe under the errors of a false Religion: And seeing that Manger his
malice, God in the appointed time brought in the Light of the Gospel, and
discovered that darkness: Then he took him to his other property and
practice of blood, to maintain by force his discovered Heresies: And he set
Antichrist and his supposts to work, to put out the Light of the Gospel, in
destroying the professors of it.

So the indyting of the Counsel of Trent bears: Ad reformandum Ecclesiam and
exstirpandas Haeresies, To reform the Kirk, and root out Heresies; That is
to say in the Roman sense, To confirm and establish the deformities and
corruptions of their Church, and root out the Truth, which God has brought
in again by the Gospel. And from that time, he has sent out his Emissaries,
Jesuits and other Locusts from the bottomless pit, to stir up the Kings of
the Earth to fight against the Lamb: This is the quarrel now debated in
Europe.

And albeit he has cast in the mixture of 6.
civil respects, in rights to Kingdoms and Dignities, and such like, to blind
the eyes of the simple, as to make them believe that all these wars are
only for civil and not for Sacred things: Yet sure it is, that all this
matter is directed and sweyed by the Pope: For his maine end is to root out
the Gospel, and reestablish his false Religion: His purpose serves to the end
of his associat Kings and Princes, and their power serves his end. As they
plotte and work joyntlie in the work, so they share in the end for their
several advantage: For the Countries subdued, fall as a prey and a reward to
the enlarging of Princes Dominions, and therein Idolatry is established, as
the Popes recompense.

Beside, what ever be the mixture of the cause, yet their maine intention is
manifest from themselves: For one of them in his alarm to this war,
stirs up the Emperor to destroy the Protestants, as Moses did the Moabits:
And if he did not so, his life should go for their life, as Achabs for the
King of Syria. Sciopp. Classicum belli Sacri. cap. 1. 2. 18.

Next, their Cardinals consulting, how to restore their Church to her ancient
integrity advised the Pope, that there was no better way to do it, than by
prosecuting this war, to the rooting out of Protestants. Aphorisml. Cardinal.
Anno 1623. And for this end, a new order is instituted called the sodalitie of
the Christian defense, that is to say, of Antichristian offense of the
Protestants, Cancel. Hispani. Consid. 1.

This course as others of the like stamp of the mystery of iniquity is
drawn deeply, for now Antichrist under the Name of Christ's Vicar persueth
Christ; under ye Colors and banners of the Cross of Christ he destroys the
doctrine of the Cross: Under name of the Church, he oppresses the true
Church: Under the name of ye pretended Verity, he rooteth out the Truth of
God, to establish his own heresy: And under the name of an old Religion, he
sets up a new vp-start Religion. This is Judas his betraying of Christ with
an Hail Master: When his pretended Vicar turns all his usurped power to the
destruction of his Kingdom: The Titles and Names that of old were the notes of
the Apostolic Church, are claimed now of the Antichristian Synagogue, and
made signs for the persecution of the Church of Christ.

God does so afflict his Church, not for her 7.
Religion, but for the abuse of it: He has called us out of Babell, and we
have obeyed his voice in coming out, and have undertaken to walk in the Light
of God; but we have contemned that Light, and in the midst of it brought out
the works of darkness: Sin is grievous in every person, time, and place,
but most grievous in the Church, in the time of so clear a Light: And where
ever men sin, they are in Gods sight, but his eye in a more particular manner
is over his Church.

A Father is angry at faults in his servant, but more angry at them in his
Son: The more liberal and bountiful God is to a people, the greater is
their sin, and heavier shall be their judgment Woe to thee Chorazin, woe to
thee Bethsaida, for if the great works which were done in you, had been done
in Tyrus and Sydon, they had repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes: But I
say to you it shall be more easy for Tyrus and Sydon at the last day than for
you. Matthew. 11. 21. 22. And it is a strange form of reasoning with Israel, You
only have I known of all the Families of the Earth says the Lord: Therefore
will I punish you for all your iniquities. Amos. 3. 2.

God may justly compleane of us, as he did of the Jews. He planted a
Vineyard in a fruitful Hill, and fencedit, and gathered out the stones of it,
and planted it with the choicest Vines, and built a Tower in the midst of it,
and a Winepresse in it: And he looked that it should bring forth Grapes, but
it brought forth wild grapes: And now, O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of
Judah, judge I pray you between me and my Vineyard: What could I do more to
my Vineyard, than I have done? And now I will tell you what I will do to my
Vineyard, I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up, and
break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down, and I will lay it
waste. Esa. 5. 1. 2. 3. 4.

As he threatened them, so he performed it. He brake down her hedges, so
that all that passed by plucked her The wild Boar out of the wood destroyed
it, and the wild beasts of the field did eat it up. Psalm. 80. 12. 13. For
after that he had chastened his people by Edomites, Moabites, Philistims, and
other bordering Nations, and they became incurable: In end he chased them out
of the Land: And that not at once, but by degrees, for he powered out that
wrath first upon the ten Tribes, reserving to himself the Tribe of Judah:
And when Judah was not made wise by the sin and punishment of Ephraim, but
Jerusalem did justify Samaria by her greater sins, God sent Judah also away
in captivity to Babylon: And after he had brought them again, and settled
them in the pleasant Land, they returned to their old sins, till in end God
cast them off altogether.

Thus God dealt with the Jews, and after 8.
the like manner he is now dealing with the Churches reformed, to bring them
to amendment in time, that they may eschew a final destruction: Their heavy
calamities who are now under that bloody persecution of Antichrist, are clear
documents to us in this Land, commanding us in time to turn to God, lest the
like or a worse befall us.

We can no ways compare with these worthy Churches, neither in Grace nor in
the fruits of the Gospel: And yet God has begun at them. If he have done
so to the green tree, what will he do to us, who are a dry and a barren tree.

God in our sight and hearing these eight years, has smitten severely, though
justly these Churches, and that to teach us Repentance: But we are as Judah,
who mended not at the captivity of Israel* When I had put away backslyding
Israel for all her iniquities, and given her a bill of diuorcement, then
treacherous Judah seared not, nor turned not to me with all her heart, but
fainedlie. Ierem. 3, 8. 9.

Though every report of their calamity be Gods calling us to sackcloth and
mourning, yet for all the news of their trouble, we are not turned to
Repentance.

They were not the greatest sinners in Jerusalem, on whom the Tower of Siloh
fell, neither were they the worst Galileans whose blood Pilate mingled with
their sacrifices: They are not the worst Protestants whose blood is shed by
this Roman Tyranny and persecution, but except we repent we shall all likewise
perish. Luke 13.

Their trial is our lesson, and their chastisement is our document: We shall
learn it, and tak it out wisely, if their example turn us to God: But if we
do not so, the heavier judgment abides us: They have drunken the brimme of
the Cup of wrath, ^^t the dregs of the bottom are reserved for (...) except
in time we repent. 9.


Neither let v^ ^^inke, that their affliction does not concern us, because
they are far distant from us: For the communion of Saints knows no
distance of place, and the Church of Christ which is his Body, as it has him
for the Head, so his Spirit for the life, and that Spirit quickening all the
Body, indueth it with a fellow-feeling of others miseries: If we have
fellowship with them in Christ, we must feel their troubles, and mourn with
them: If we do not so, we prove we have no fellowshippe with them.

Let such hard-hearted and sensles Christians read their Doom and dittay in
the Prophet Amos, Woe to them that are at ease in Sion, they put the evil day
far from them: They lie on their beds of Yvorie, and stretch themselves on
their beds, and eat the Lambs of the Flock, and the Calves out of the
midst of the stall: They drink wine in bowls, but no man is sorry for the
affliction of Joseph: Therefore now shall they go into Captivity with the
first that go captive, and the sorrow of them that strech out themselves, is
at hand. Amos 6. 1. 3. 4. 6. 7.

These are twinne branches of a senseless and careless heart, in the day of
the Churches affliction: First they put the evil day far from themselves and
maka covenant with Death, as though it never should, nor would come near to
them: Next, they put the affliction of their Breth^e^ far from their feeling
and affection, as a thing that concerns them not, The first is a fleshly
dream of their own immunitie: The other, a senseless mis-regarde of their
Brethren* and both of them a just cause, and certain presage of a grievous
ruin to come upon them, who are so graceleslie disposed.

But the godly are otherwise affected with the troubles of Syon: For they
take pleasure in the stones, and delight in the dust thereof. Psalm. 102. Though
Nehemiah was in the favor of his King and great prosperity, yet when he heard
that the Jews were in great affliction and reproach, and the wall of Jerusalem
broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire, he sat down and weeped,
and mourned certain days, and fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven.
Neither could all his courtly happiness smoother the grief of his heart: But
when the King perceived the sadness of his countenance, and asked the cause of
it, he said, Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City, and
House of the Sepulcher of my Fathers lies waste. Nehemia. 1. If he was so
grieved for the violation of the Sepulchers of the dead: Shall not the cruel
murder of the living Temples of ye holy Ghost, move us more?

And Jeremiah, though he was at liberty among the people, and well looked to
by Nebuzaradan, yet when he saw Ierusalems desolations: For these things I
weep, mine eyes casts out water, because the Comforter that should refresh
my Soul is far from me, my Children are desolate, because the enemy
prevails. Lame. 1. 16.

Beside, the respect of their persons, their 10
cause should also move us to this holy grief: The Gospel of Christ and true
Religion in them, is persecuted and oppressed: And if we have found grace and
comfort in that Gospel, should we not be grieved when so glorious a means of
grace is obscured, and the cause of our good God borne down by his enemies.
God has lighted that candle, to discover the darkness of Satan, and destroy
his work: And when the prince of darkness prevails so far as to put out
that Candle, and to cast down the Candle-stickes on which it shined, if we
be the Children of Light, we must sorrow for that change: Therefore if we
feel not their sorrows, we declare we have no communion with them in the
Body of Christ, and no part in the grace of the Gospel, which in their hands
is persecute. No feeling, no Communion, and no Communion, no union with them,
and Christ: If we have no grief for the Light put out, we have no part in
the Life and Grace, that the Light carries.

We ought then a brotherly compassion to 10
them, under their trouble, because they are Brethren, and fellow members of
Jesus Christ, and the more, because their affliction, is not for civil or
common causes, but for Religion: As we are commanded to mourn, with them that
mourn, so much more, with them that suffer for the Gospel: Be partaker of the
suffering of the Gospel, according to the power of God. 2. Tim. 1. 8.

Shall Satan make error and heresy, so forcible in his Supposts, as to join
their hearts and hands, to give their power to the Beast, to fight against
the Lamb? And shall not Truth and Charity, in the Children of God, procure
at least, a brotherly compassion of the griefs of other? The first is a
wonder, to see the Spirit of division make such an union among his adherents:
But it is a greater wonder, not to see that compassion in them who are one
Spirit in Christ Jesus. 12


But though we would in the hardness of our heart cut our selves off from
all feeling of their miseries, that would not secure us from punishment but
rather double our sin, and hasten a double punishment upon us: We stand in
that same case with them: In a true Religion, in the abuse of it, and so under
Gods process for our sins: And it is a great mercy of God, that he has
spared us so long, and given us so large a time of Repentance: When he might
have begun his Judgment at us, he has begun at other, that by their
example we might turn in time, and prevent his heavy strok: If foreign
miseries beyond Sea, will not move us to sorrow, let our own home sins and
dangers move us to repentance. 13


And for this end, we have to consider, our own state in this Land, as the
second cause of our Humiliation: God has blessed us with his Law and Gospel,
but we have sinned against them both: There is no precept of the Law, whose
breach is not shamelessly practiced and avowed 1. Every one makes himself
his own god, and seeks themselves, their own glory, and gain, directing
all their ways from their own heart, and turning all to themselves. 2.
Idolatry (once alluterlie banished) is cropen in, and sets up the head in
this Land, and many who professed the Truth, are gone back to Popery: They
close their eyes from the shining light, that is ready to resolve and reform
them: And are so possessed by errors and darkness, that they abhor the light,
which would pull them out of their fleshly delights. Their case is to be pitied.
who so wilfully loss themselves, refusing Salvation, and running headlong to
Hell. 3. The abuse of the glorious Name of the Lord our God, is grown a
popular disease, and reigns in all Estats, and the better sort outrun the
common people in so grievous a sin. And the rifenesse of it has put it out
of the respect of a sin, and has turned it in the flower of their language,
as though all speech were but wersh, and could neither fill the mouth of the
speaker, not the ear of the hearer, except the Name of GOD be profaned, and
God himself thereby thrust through. If the flying Book of the curse of God,
light upon the house of every swearer, to destroy the Timber and stone. Zach.
5. How few houses shall escape the curse of God in this Land, which groaneth
under the multitude of oaths. 4. The profanation of the Lords Day is
universal, and no difference made betwixt the observation of it, and other
days: But rather more liberty is taken in vaging, in drinking, and
chalmering, and wantonness, in idle and profane speaking in it, than in other
days: As if God had set it a part, not for his own honor, but for the works
of the flesh* Though we be not bound to judaize in the Sabbath, yet are we
bound Christianlie to spend the Lords day in abstaining from evil, and busying
our self in the works of Piety and Charity, as the Sabbaths proper Exercise:
as a memorial of the Resurrection of Christ, and our Redemption perfected
thereby: and a token of our eternal Sabbath, and rest in heaven.

5 Disobedience to Superiors, is a reigning sin: Though God for their
further honoring has placed the Precept that commands their obedience, Next
to the Precepts of Piety, and calls the duties of it by the Name of Piety,
yet it is least respected. Parents natural are misregarded: Pastors who beget
and feed people in Christ, are contemned* And supreme Authority disobeyed of
the most part. 6. Innocent blood is shed in many places, as water, and the
Earth groaneth under it, and the cry of it ascends to Heaven to bring down a
judgment upon us all. 7. Filthiness, has laid off the former veil of
shame, and is now impudent: Fornication, Adulteries and Incests, outface the
Light and multiply out of number: And the covenant of God in marriage is less
respected and kept then light promises amongst men: Whereby though their were
none other sins, a way is made to overthrow families, for God cannot bless
Inheritance in the hands of wrongous Heirs. 8. Secret and open hurting of the
lots of men, is a common practice, and no man stands in awe, to make his
Neighbors ruin a stepping stone to his own exalting. The most part without
regard of God, Conscience, or humanity lose their Soul, and quite the Heaven
for the baggage of this life.

9. And Calumnies are now so frequent, that their is no godly man who finds
not the scourge of the Tongue. And no man almost, who lends not to Satan,
his ear to hear and his heart to believe lies, and his tongue to be a
scourge to his Neighbor.

10. As for the abominations of the heart, though they be hid from us, yet
they are manifest to God, and by these and the like fruits, the world may see,
that the hearts of the most part are void of God, and are vile puddles to
defile themselves, and ouerflow this Land with sin: These filthy fountains
are not seasoned with the salt of Grace, but send out the deadly waters of
filthienes, to burden this Land, and make it spew us out.

These and the like grievous sins against the Law, do swarm in this Land:
But the 15
sins against the Gospel, are more grievous, both because of their kind, and
because they are sins against the remeede of sin.

Faith, a special part of our Evangelical 16
duty, is rare to be found: God day lie is offering Grace and Salvation in
the Gospel, yet few do receive it by Faith: And so his greatest mercy in
offering Christ, is met with greatest wickedness on our part, in not
believing: We count Fornication or Thift, or Murder, to be sins, but
Infidelity worse than any of them, is counted no sin, and yet it is among
the greatest pardonable sins. 17


This Infidelity brings out all sorts of Disobedience: When the heart by
Faith is not purified, and joined to God, it is casten loose to all kind of
iniquity, without any restraint of evil, or constraint to good: Our hearing,
and reading, is not mixed with Faith, and so brings not out the obedience of
faith, if we neither believe the promised reward, nor threatened punishment,
we cannot obey the directing Precept.

With these sins, is a fearful Apostasy to Popery in many parts of this
Land: Many and these of the better sort, are seduced and drawn away to Romish
superstition, and that because they were void of the Truth of God, and being
led with their own lusts, they have rendered themselves to that fleshly
Religion which gives them liberty to sin.

I speak of you, and to you, O seduced 19
Papists, how long will it be, ere ye open your eyes to see how your blind
Guides are leading you to damnation? If ye will not try this matter by
Conscience try it at the least by common sense, and see what sort of Guides
these are, who take you by the hand, with this condition, to close your eyes,
that ye neither inquire, nor care whether they lead you: Tell me if you would
commit your self in a dark Night to such a Guide, as would close your eyes,
put out the Lantern in your hand and not suffer you to know how and what way
he leads you: Ye might think he were a Ruffian, to mislead you to a
Bordell, or to rob you and yet ye hazard your Salvation upon such cousening:
Ye know your Jesuits and seducing Seminaries, strictly discharge you the
reading of Scriptures, and hold you hood-winked under the veil of implicit
Faith, or rather explicit Ignorance. They propone to you worse conditions,
than Nahash the Ammonite did to the men of labesh Gilead: he craved that one
of their eyes should be put out: But they crave, and ye agree, to have both
your eyes pulled out of you: It was Isreal's privilege* to have light in
Goshen, in the midst of Egypts darkness, but your delight is to have darkness
in the midst of Goshen, and to wink in the clear Noonday of the Gospel,
shining in this Land.

You know, they have drawn your Houses within the compass of Treason, and are
a Moth and canker-worme to eat up your State: And how evil they recompense
your good entreating them in secret, by defiling your Houses, in joining
bodily whoredom with spiritual? For the married Women, they keep their old
direction, Si non cast, tamen caute, If not cleanelie, yet Cannalie. But with
Maids they cannot so conuoy it: The professed Chastity of these Ghostly
Fathers, makes Virginity fruitful: And their Auricular confession is found
to be a carnal pollution.

These things, and worse, you know of your seducers, yet you will not see
them: But choose to cover your errors by a selfe-deceate, and least you should
let men see, that ye know your abuse, ye remain still under that your
willing and wilful Captivity.

This is none other, than that strong delusion, making you believe lies,
because you will not receive the love of the Truth.

They abuse you as their Slaves under blind Credulity* to believe their lies,
and base Obsequiousness to do all their direction.

It is time for you to avenge your selves on these Philistines for your two
eyes by pulling down the house of their Dagon, and to vendicate your Goods,
Children, Wives, and Conscience from their Tyranny. Though it be a benefit
to the Church, that you separate your selves from it, as the body is relieved,
when noisome and excrementitious humors draw themselves to byles and
Apostemes, yet your Apostacy brings guiltiness on the Land.

Further more, who sees not Atheism an 20
uniuersall disease in this Land: Many profess the true Religion, and some are
fallen to Popery. But Atheists are more than true Protestants, and
superstitious Papists. The most part do live, as though there were not a God,
or an Heaven for the godly, or an Hell for the wicked: Some more openly
express in words and actions, their gross Atheism, other more closely
cover it with a civil life, and a moral honesty: But all of them say in
their heart, That there is no God. So the Lord may say to us as by Jeremiah,
Run to and fro in the streets of Jerusalem, and inquire in the open places of
it, if there be any that executes judgment, and seeks the Truth, and I
will spare it Jeremiah. 5. 1.

As Impiety has spread it self over all, so God has punished it with the
breach of Charity. 21
All Estates of this Land, are rent from other, and every one of them divided
in it self. It was an vntimous strife between the servants of Abraham and
Lot, when the Canaanites (enemies to them both) were in the Land: Genesis 13. 7.
Peaceable Abraham reproved and amended it, saying, Why do we strive, since we
are Brethren. And Moses took that ^essoun of him, and reproved the two
Israelites for their strife, Why strive ye together, ye are Brethren, Our
renting is like the divisions of Reuben, strong thoughts of heart. Judge. 5. 1^.

Weakness of judgment cannot discern things, but breadeth scruples, and the
scrupling weak mind is strong to hold fast the apprehension, and refuse
better information and for to intertaine Schism.

They are sinful of themselves, and dangerous to us ^ll: When the Papist
takes occasion of our divisions, to strengthen himself, and waits
opportunity for our ruin. If we can reconceale our selves to God, he will
soon bind up our divisions with brotherly love, in the bond of Peace. It is
oftimes an ominous presage of ruin, if ye byte and devour one another take
heed ye be not devoured one of another Galat. 5. 15.

And among all the sins against the Gospel, the contempt of the Gospel, and
the Ministry 22
of it, is a great one, and so universal, that few can cleanse themselves of
it.

1. Papists abhor them, because the light of their doctrine discovers their
abominable errors, as Thieves in their thift abhor a Torch-bearer. 2.
Atheists hate them deadly* because their Doctrine suffers them not to sleep
peaceably in Satan's arms but suggesteth to them the thoughts of God, of the
Souls immortality, of the last judgment, and eternal rewards in heaven and
hell: These, things make their Conscience check them, and so troubles their
false peace. 3. Deboshed and dissolute men pursue them for their Discipline,
because they suffer them not to run on in the works of the flesh without
censure.

4 And Politickes care not for their message, but serve themselves of them, for
gaining a name of good professors, they cannot abide faithful and free
Pastors, but labor for a Trencher Ministry, and to have them as baselie
obsequious, as their foote-boyes: If they with Michah can find a Leuite for
ten shickles of silver, and a suit of apparel, they care not for the Gospel,
nor the Ministry of it.

5. And other who possibly do neither mislike their Doctrine, nor Discipline,
nor sincerity, do grudge at them for Church Patrimony. This is counted a
great degree of Iulians persecution (though they be not of his mind) by
withdrawing the maintenance of the Professors, to vnderminde the Profession
and Religion it self. This has been since the Reformation, and yet it is a
great sin in this Land: Men of the greatest sort pulling Gods portion from
his Church, and turning it to the increase of their own estat. Whereby the
Gospel is spoiled, and many thousand Souls perish: Where there is no vision,
the people perish. And where there is no maintenance, how can there be
prophecy or vision?

It is now a question greatly debated, how it comes to pass, that more great
Houses are decayed within these few years, than in some three Ages before? But
it is easily answered, 1. In the general: Sin is the ruin of all Estates.
2. In the particular the abuse of the Gospel: For as one hot day'rypneth the
corns more, than twenty cold days: So one year under the clear Light of
the Gospel, fills more the cup of the sins of an House, than twenty
years under idolatry. 3. And Sacrilege is a consuming moth, to destroy a
State, other ways well acquired and guided.

It falls to them as to the Eagle: She was not content of her free booting
abroad, but pulled a collop from the Altar wherein was fastened an hot fiery
coal, and when she brought it to her nest, and filled her birds with that
sacrilegious morsel, the coal fired her nest and burnt her birds in ashes: It
is manifest to the world, that Houses most ladened with Church Patrimony,
have gone most to ruin. If one Achan stealing a part of things consecrate to
God, and not as then converted to the use of the Tabernacle, brought wrath on
all Israel: What shall we look for, where so many pull from God, these
things, which beside their devoting, may plead prescription, for many ages*
And if in the beginning of the Gospel, God gave an exempler punishment, on
Ananias and Saphira, for interuerting a part of that which was once their own,
and was not sacred by that primarie separation of God, but by a secondarie
mortification in their own voluntary offering, what shall be their
punishment, who draw that to themselves, which was never theirs but has long
stood both under a sacred separation and a religious use.

God compleaneth of the Jews. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me.
But ye say. Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and offerings. Ye ar^
^ursed with a curse: For ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Bring ye
all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine House,
and prove me now heerewith* says the LORD of Hosts, if I will not open to
you the windows of Heaven, and power you out a blessing, that there shall not
be room enough to receive it. Malach. 3. 8. 9. 10.

Such is the state of the Gospel, concerning the maintenance of it* in this
Land, that had not God in mercy stirred up the Heart of King JAMES, of happy
memory, and made now our gracious King CHARLES to succeed Him, in that
Religious affection, as well as in the Thrones of these Kingdoms, to prove a
Nurse-Father to the Church, and maintain her maintenance. Poverty would
banish the Gospel out of this Land.

And with these sins is joined Impenitencie: 23
All men sins, but no man repents, or mourns either for his own sins,
or the sin of his time. God has given us a time of Repentance, but we let it
pass without turning, And though he hewed us by his Prophets, by denouncing
judgments, yet we fear not. Hos. 6. 5. And though he have smitten us with
Famine, Pest, and Mortality, yet we have not turned. The Lord has stricken,
but we have not sorrowed, thou have consumed us, but we have not received
Correction, we have made our face harder than a stone, and refused to return.
Neither know we the time of our merciful visitation, and the things that
concern our peace, neither our just Correction to amend.

And with all, this wicked disposition, a worse is joined, that the most part*
will neither forsake sin, nor repent, nor suffer it to be called sin* or
themselves to be reproved and censured for it. It is not now sin, to commit
sin, but to call sin sin, and in an holy zeal, for the wakening of men's
Conscience to reprove it, that is now called sin, and an intolerable thing.
And so to fill up the cup of our sins, many are come to this degree of
vncurablenesse, as to quarrel the reprouers of their sin, as God notes it
in Israel. Let no man reprove another, for my people are as they that strive
with the Priest. Hos. 4. 4.

This is a great policy and prevailing of Satan, he desires nothing more,
than to hold men sleeping to death in sin: And he knows no means more
able to waken them, than faithful Pastors: Therefore he labors to
discredit them by contempt, that their warning may be fruitless: And thus
he does by secret and close degrees: He makes not men at the first to
contemn Pastors, and their Callings, but to mislike their reproves and
taxing of sin, as vndis^reet: From that he leads them to hate their
Person, and then their Calling: And so to contemn the Gospel, and make it
fruitless to themselves. When he has thus far prevailed, he can lead them
further, as to make the^ think that hating and abhorring of them, is a mark of
true zeal: And to persecute them, is good service to GOD: As Christ
foretells, Whosoever kills you, will think he does God service. Ioh. 16.
2.

It is a forerunner of a grievous judgment: Amos was evil handled of Israel,
immediately before their Captivity: And Jeremy was foullie entreated, and
Uriah slain, immediately before the Captivity of Judah: And CHRIST Himself,
and his Apostles persecuted to death, before their last destruction. It cannot
fall otherwise to them, for contemning the means of Grace: They are left to
themselves, and so fill up the measure of their sin to the hight.

There is some hope, so long as God holds Pastors in a land: But when the
people contemn that his merciful ordinance, it is just with him, to send them
harder Messengers of wrath.

So long as Gods Ambassadors are welcome, there is appearance that GOD is
working Peace: But when they are contemned, and reproached for their fidelity,
GOD is no more to negotiate peace, but to proceed to destruction.

If David revenged so severely the indignity done to his Ambassadors by the
Ammonites, What shall GOD do, when his Messengers of peace are so spitefully
entreated of men?

The signs of a desparate and incurable disease in man, are four special
which are all 24
to be found in this Land.

1. The first is, senslesnesse of all pain: Sickness after a long strife with
nature, prevails so far against her, that as it has expelled health, so it
takes away the feeling of that loss. 2. Next conceate of Health under that
state: That notwithstanding of the great disease, yet they conceate of strength
and integrity* the mind affected with the body, mistaketh the true estate of
it. 3. A carlesnesse to be cured: Conceated health expels all care of help
against sickness. 4. A neglect of the wholesome Counsel of the Physician,
with a reproaching and iniuring, his person.

All these are spirituallie in this Land. 1. An uniuersall senslesnesse, of our
spiritual State: All Doctrine of the sickness of the Soul by sin: Of the
nature of Conscience: The sense of God of his mercy and wrath, and such like,
are to the most part but as free discourses, without truth or use: There is
not so much of the life of God in them, as to know or feel that there is such
a thing: All are closed up in the fatnes of a hard and senseless heart. This is
senseless Atheism. 2. And notwithstanding of this, there is a strong conceate
of perfection in some: They judge themselves in their own light, and ponder
them in their own balance, and think all that is spoken in Scripture against
sinners pertains not to them, but others, and all that is spoken of grace,
and promises, is laid in their lap alone: This is proud Pharisaisme. 3. Many
smoothing themselves under this sweet sleep, ly still in sin, and never
think of a Physician* This is fleshly Security. 4. And the last are worse,
they tak not the information of Pastors, neither can they abide their
Admonitions, when they are rebuked for sin. Then they cry out as against
Jeremy. The Earth dow not bear this man's words and railings. And take upon
them to prescriue to their Pastors, both matter and manner of Doctrine, They
say to the Seers, See not, and to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right
things: But speak unto us pleasant words, prophecy deceites. Isa. 30. 10.

They will gladly hear the sweet Doctrine of the Gospel, but not of the Law:
Theorie but not practice; discoursing of Doctrine and Controversies, but not
useful application: And will hear the sins of other men, other callings,
other Countries* and Superiors, but not their own sins reproved.

This is a desparate resolution, not to be cured at all.

This is the pitiful state of this Land, in all 25
Callings and Persons: From the crown of the Head, to the sole of the Foot,
there is nothing whole therein, but wounds and swelling, and sores. Isa. 1. 4.
5. 6. etc. He may justly pronounce against us, as he did against the Jews,
Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord, and shall not my Soul
be avenged on such a Nation as this. Ierem. 5. 9. Therefore the Lord has that
same plea with us, that he had with rebellious Israel. Hear the Word of the
LORD, ye Children of Israel: For the Lord has a controversy with the
Inhabitants of the Land, because there is no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge
of GOD in the Land: By swearing, and lying, and killing, and steeling, and
Whoring, they break out and blood touches blood. Therefore shall the Land
mourn, and every one that dwells in it, shall languish. Hos. 4. 1. 2. 3.

He sees us lying in our sins, and is going to his Place, to see if we
will seek him. I will return, and go to my Place, till they acknowledge
their offense, and seek me, in their affliction they will seek me early.
Hos. 5. 15.

The third cause of our Humiliation, is for an happy success to our Kings
Majesty's weighty 26
Affairs, at Home and abroad, both in Peace and War. To pray to God, who
has the hearts of Kings in his hand, to multiply more and more on his Ma. all
Princely Gifts and Graces, that He may walk before GOD in the Uprightness
of David, the Sincerity of Hezekiah, and Tenderness of heart, like Josiah.
That He would enlarge his heart more and more like Solomon, to go out and in
before his people.

And because His MAJESTY is engaged in a necessary and dangerous War, for
the defense of Truth, and His Royal Alliance, whereby great Princes are
become His Enemies, and His Kingdoms are threatened with a bloody invasion: It
is the duty of all, to entreat the LORD, for preservation to his Ma. and His
Dominions. When Iehoshaphat was beset by the Moabites and Ammonites: He set
himself to seek the Lord, with Fasting and Prayer: And all his people
gathered themselves together to ask help of God, and all Judah with their
Wives; and little Ones, stood before him, who commanded them to stand still,
and see the Salvation of the Lord, and gave them a glorious delivery. 2.
Chron. 20.

And when Hezekiah received the blasphemous and boasting Letter of Senacherib,
he went up to the Temple* and sprede it before the Lord, and prayed for
saftie, and the Lord sent away his enemies, with slaughter and shame. We have
at these times, to pray to God, that he would bow down his ear, and hear
the blasphemy and boasting of the Enemies, and open his eye, and behold their
bloody decrees, and the plotting of Princes to execute them, and their
insulting for prevailing against us.

And since God has put it in our Kings Ma. Heart, both to appoint to all His
Subjects, and to keep in His Royal Person, a solemn Fast* we may the more
confidentlie pray, that the Lord of Hosts, to whom pertains the issues of
Death, would merche before our Armies. Psalm. 68. 20. That he would wound the
head of our Kings Enemies, and thrust them through the thigh: And give to Him
their necks and backs always: That he would cloth them with shame, and
make his Crown to flourish on His Head. Psalm. 132.

Two punishments are most to be feared at 27
this time, the removing of the Gospel, and the Sword of man: The one to
destroy the Soul, the other the Body. 1. God is threatening the removing of
the Word, because it has been long among us without fruit: We have not
received it as the word of God, to believe and obey it, and to delight and
walk in the light of it: Though God have his own amongst us, yet the most
part do contemn it, and the Preachers of it: It is counted an intolerable
burden, because it curbes their lusts, and reproves their sins so
plainly: they would be glad to want it, that they might sin freely.

God brought it wonderfully amongst us, few Martyrs sealing it with their
blood, and yet great opposition made to it: But God by his own good means,
lighted that Candle amongst v^: At that time this Nation was as a new labored
ground, with little labor it rendered great increase: Light was then pleasant
to men coming out of darkness, and the taste of Grace was sweet at the first
hearing of the Gospel: But now, after long hearing of it: We have lost our
first zeal, and are become as an out-worne and barren ground.

We are as the Earth, which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it,
but brings out nothing, but thorns and briers, which is near unto cursing,
and whose end is to be burnt. Heb. 6. 7 8. The Lord has patiently waited on
our fruits, and has spared us, like that fig tree, not for three, but three
score and seven years, and yet neither is there fruit, nor Repentance, for
want of fruit: What remains in his Justice, but that he cut us down,
and cast us in the fire?

Let us not feed our selves with idle and groundless conceates, as that the
Gospel is 28
pure amongst us, and we have a true Religion and a glorious Profession, etc.
The lik conceat possessed the Jews in their greatest guiltines and danger:
They cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, this is the Temple*
of the Lord, Ierem. 7. 4.

But ye trust, says the Lord, in lying words, which cannot profit: Will ye
steal murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and come and stand
before me in this House, which is called by my Name, and say, We are
delivered, though we have done all these abominations: But go ye now into my
Place, which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first, and see what I
did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel. Ier. 7. 8. 9. 10.

They thought they were secure under their profession, and God would not
forsake them, but he told them plainly he would cast them off, as he did
Shiloh.

The Jews had his presence, and now they are casten off, The Greek Church in
Asia, Afric, and the Eastern parts of Europpe, had the Gospel, but abused
it, and now are given over to Mahumets carnal, and absurd delusions. And the
Western places of Europ, and Rome at the first did shine as a glorious Church,
It was then an hammer of Heretics, and an harbor of distressed and
persecuted Saints, and yet falling from that Truth, is now for many Ages,
the nest of Antichrist.

And this Nation at the first enlightened with the Gospel, enjoyed Peace (when
other Nations were overrun with War, and had almost lost both learning and
Religion.) Then this Church proved a Mother Church* and sent out her Scholars
as Apostles to convert the most part of England, and other Nations beyond Sea:
But when she was thereafter first compelled, and then willingly yielded to
Roman superstition, God put out that candle of the Gospel, which had shined
some seven or eight Ages: And now since many Ignorants relapse to Popery, and
the most part fall in Atheism, who are we after so many fearful examples* to
think that God will still dwell amongst us, not withstanding of all our
rebellions, This fleshly conceat is an high degree of fleshly 29
security, and as odious to God, as our other sins, for it would blemish him,
whose eyes are purer, than that they can behold iniquity, as a favorer of sin:
As though he were tied to dwell with obstinate and impenitent sinners, whom his
Soul abhors: and to keep his covenant with them who proudly break it,
which is all one, as to make GOD and Beliall dwell together.

The discovery of the New found Land, reserved till the last times, offers
a remarkable consideration for this purpose: Some do rest upon natural
causes* as the perfection of sailing, and the invention of the Sailers
compass, and other natural reasons: But Divinity leads us a step
further, in the cause of this divine providence: That as Light came out from
Sion at the first, and spread it self through all parts: and error and heresy
came after treacing the steps of truth, to the out most-parts of the earth,
yet many Nations either remaining in, or returning to Paganism, other falling
in Mahumetisme, and other were carried in that horrible Apostasy within ye
Church to anti-christianisme. The Kirk groaning under these abuses, and heresies
within it self, did lute for Reformation. In this mean time God discovered
another world to tell this old one, that if they would not reform themselves, he
had provided him a soil and dwelling place, and set up a people that were not
of our knowledge, to prouocke us to Jealousy.

God has indeed taken us by the hand, but when nothing can move us to our
duty, what can he but give us a bill of deuorcement, and put us from him?
God this day, and we in his Name* are speaking as he did to the Church of
Ephesus. I have something against thee, that thou have forgotten thy first
Love. Remember therefore, from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first works, or else I will come against thee shortly, and remove the
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. Rev. 2. 4.

The Jews promised continuance of all happiness to themselves, because they
were Abraham's seed: But Christ tells them that God will not want a people,
though they were destroyed; For he could raise up Children unto Abraham out of
the stones of the field: And he lets them see (if they would see it) to
the grief of their heart, that he is better served of the Gentiles, than
ever he was of them: If we join to our other sins, this fleshly conceat
also, that he will want a people, if he cast us off: He can make either
Barbarians or Jews (or th^se who now are the enemies of the Gospel, turning
them to the Gospel) better servants to him than we are: And will teach us to
our by eternal sorrow, that he can have a people, though we be not his
people: But where shall we find a God, if in his Justice he cast us off for
our sin: He will ever provide himself a Church, But woe to us when he
departs from us. Hos. 9. 12.

The second plague to be feared, is the 30
Sword of Man: God has shaken many rods on us, and smitten us with them, but
we mend not: He has broken the staff of bread, and given us cleanness of
teeth in our Cities, and multitudes in the streets dying for famine: He has
stricken us with Pestilence, and made that flying arrow rage fearfullie: And
great Mortality on men and beasts, has almost lately taken the tith of this
Land, and yet we have not amended: The Sword only remains as the last and
most fearful plague, which God then uses, when all other chastisements have
not wrought his end to bring us to repentance.

We are as Israel, whom God did smite with plague after plague: And yet for
all this, they returned not to me, says the Lord. Amos. 4. And therefore, why
should I smite them any more? Isa. 1. 4. And thou have forsaken me, says the
LORD, thou art gone backward: Therefore will I stretch out mine hand against
thee, and destroy thee, I am weary with repenting. Ierem. 15. 6. When he had
taken pains on them, and they were not mended he cast them a way. The
bellows are burnt, the Leede is consumed in the fire, the Founder melts in
vain, for the wicked are not plucked away: Retrobate silver shall men call
them, because the Lord has rejected them. Ier. 6. ^9. 30.

It is now dangerous to sleep in Security, 31
as though our enemies were far off, and we compassed with ye walls of a
great Sea: We have our enemies within; so long as sin increases, and is not
repented, we want not enemies to destroy us: God wants never instruments,
when he will punish a Land, He can hiss on the Flee at the River of Egypt, and
on the Be in the Land of Ashur. Isa. 7. 18. And though there were but men
half wounded and half dead, they shall rise up every man in his tent, and
burn Jerusalem with fire, when God is angry with her. Ierem. 37. Grasshoppers
are but weak Creatures, yet when God sent them on Israel, they could not be
resisted, because the Lord utters his voice before his Army* for his camp is
very great, for he is strong that executes his word. Joel. 2. 10. As for our
walls of Water, if our sins remain, they will be Ships and bridges for
our Enemies, to bring over the wrath of God, upon us: Though we would build
our nest into the top of Rocks, yet the hand of God can pull us down, where
ever a man dwells, he is a black mark for God to shoot at, and the
arrows of his wrath to light on, so long as guiltines abides in him.

We should not indeed neglect or contemn 32
lawful means of our defense, for that were to tempt God. Though the Apostle
had an express promise, that none of his company should perish in the Storm,
yet when the Mariners minded to conuoy themselves away, he said, Except these
men abide, we can not be saved. Act: 27. Neither ought we on the other part
with Asa, to put our trust in means, as to rely on the reed of Egypt, or the
Arm of flesh, for that is to prouocke God to Jealousy.

Both extremes, make God our Enemy, either in tempting him by neglect of
means, or prouocking him, by trusting on them: The midst is his ordinance,
which he will ever bless, to wit, the use of them, in holy wisdom and
confidence in God. Our maine care should be to be at peace with him, that so
the Lord of Hosts may be with us, and the God of Jacob may be our refuge.
Psalm. 46.

In this case we are enclosed in Gods pannall, 33
and he is set on his Throne to Judgment, and the decreete will come forth in
the sentence, and bring forth the own execution, except in time we agree with
our God. Long has he spoken by his Prophets, in his reforming, directing, and
exhorting Word: But we have neglected all that fair proceeding: He is gone to
an harder Word, even the word of Judgment, and Process: And let us assure
our selves, he will not leave off, till he bring it to some end: When I
begin, I will also make an end: 1. Sam. 3. 12.

And there is none end, but one of two, either 34
our just destruction, or merciful preservation. If we dispute with him, he
is righteous, for we cannot answer to one of a thousand: And we cannot flee
from him, Whether shall we go from his Spirit? Neither can we resist him, for
he is Almighty. Since then we can neither answer to him, nor flee from him,
nor resist him, our only best is to flee to him with the forlorn Son and
cast our selves in the Arms of his fatherly mercy.

Thus, God who knows best how to be entreated, commands us. Come, let us
reason 35
together. Isa. 1. 18. Call a solemn Assembly, sanctify a Fast. Joel. 2.
Only acknowledge your iniquity. Ierem. 3. 13. And as he commands, so he
promises a blessing. Though your sins were as the Skarlet, they shall be as the
Snow: Though they were as the Crimson, they shall be as wool, If ye return and
repent. Isa. 1. 18. And he will leave a blessing behind him. Joel. 2. Call upon
me in the day of thy trouble, I will deliver thee. Psalm. 50. And I will be
with him in trouble, I will deliver him, I will glorify him. Psalm. 91. 15.

And as he promised a blessing, so in all time he has performed it, for his
people did never sincerely humble themselves before him, but he gave them a
visible blessing. The Book of Judges is full of this practice. 1. Israel sinned
against him, 2. And he gave them over in the hand of some Enemy. 3. And when
they felt their misery, they cried unto God, by Prayer and Fasting.

4. The Lord raised up a Judge or Savior, who delivered them. When Niniuie was
threatened with destruction, and humbled themselves in Fasting and praying, the
Lord spared them, Jonah. 3. 4. And though Ahab was a wicked Hypocrite, yet when
he put on Sacke-cloath and fasted, the Lord said to Eliah, See thou how Ahab
is humbled before me? Because he has submitted himself to me, Therefore I
will not bring this evil in his days. 1. Kings. 21.

Prayers, and Tears, are the kindly weapons of Gods Church, which they use in
all their necessities 36
and dangers: And that never without an evident blessing. They overcome God,
and bow him to mercy, because he has bound himself to accept the Sacrifice
of a contrite heart: A contrite and a broken Spirit, he can not refuse. Psalm.
51. 17. And when he is reconcealed to us in Christ, and our sins pardoned,
he becomes our Friend, and Protector. So long as sin remains, he is
our Adversary, and our sins bind his hand, that he cannot help, and
stops his ear, that he cannot hear. Isa. 59. 1 But when God is appeased,
then he becomes our deliverer from all our dangers. And though they seem but
vveake weapons to the Natural man, who would have his eyes filled with
bodily means, yet they are most forcible against our enemies.

And Satan himself is affraied of nothing 37
more, than solemn humiliation and Repentance. He knows so long as God is
angry with his people, he will find both great permissions, and large
commissions against them, to their hurt: But when God and his people reason
together, and his mercy pardons their sin, then Satan's permissions are
restrained, and his commissions end, and a certain shame and disapointment is
concluded against him.

There is never a solemn humiliation in the Church, but it brings a notable
ruin to his kingdom: Our groans and tears are as great Ordinances to batter
and beat down his building of iniquity: All the Armories in the world* have
not so terrible Canouns to Satan, as faithful hearts grieved for sin:
Neither so fearful Bullets, as fervent prayer and supplications sent up with
strong cries and groans to God: Though such hearts be broken, in sending them
up, yet they batter Satan's Kingdom, and bring health to themselves.

To these Prayers and Tears, we have now a clear calling: As God in his word
commands, 38
so he is by his work applying that command to us. 1. By the observation of
all his Servants, the Prophets who with a pastoral heart and eye, sees the
present iniquities of this Land, and wrath hanging above our head.

This burden is laid on us, who are Watchmen, to stand on our Watch, and sit
upon our Tower, and see what God will say to us, Son of man, if the
Watchman, when he sees the Sword coming, blow the Trumpet, and warn the
people: Then whosoever hears the sound of the Trumpet, and takes not
warning, if the Sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own
head. He heard the sound of the Trumpet, and took no warning, his blood shall
be upon him. But he that takes warning* shall deliver his Soul.

So thou, O Son of man, I have set thee a Watchman unto the house of
Israel: Therefore, thou shall hear the Word at my mouth, and warn them from
me. Ezech. 33. 2. 3, 4. 5. 7.

Upon this heavy charge laid on us, and the care to save our self, and our
people, we cry a loud, and spare not, we lift up our voice as a Trumpet, to
show to Israel his sin, and to the house of Iaacob their transgression. Isa.
58. 1.

Therefore, gather your selves, O Nation not worthy to be loved, before the
decree come forth, and ye be as chafe that passes in a day, and before the
fierce wrath of the Lord come upon you, and before the day of the Lords anger
come upon you* Seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the Earth: It may be ye shall
be hid in the day of the Lords anger. Zeph. 2. 1. 2. 3 2. The observation of
good people of every sort, falls upon this necessity and cries for a
public humiliation.

The causes are so manifest and weighty, that any who is not blinded may
perceive them, and what is this else, than a mutual exhorting one of another.
Come, let us return to the Lord: For he has spoiled, and he will heal us,
He has wounded us, and he will bind us up Hos. 3. 6. 1.

Gods providence is a real calling and a commanding of us to this Fast. He
has begun his Judgments in other places, and we are under the same sins,
and he is shaking that rod upon us. It was time for David to pray for
Jerusalem, when he saw the Angel stretch his Sword over it: He prayed, and
God made the Angel stay his hand, 2. Sam. 24.

Seeing then we are ladened with so many sins, and compassed with so many
troubles, 39
and God by his word and works, and our Conscience calls us to Repentance
and Fasting, we may not neglect this Fast. For he who will not afflict his
Soul in the day of expiation, that Soul shall be cut off from his people.
Leuit. 23. 29.

And in that day, says the Lord, I called to weeping and mourning and to
baldnes, and girding with sackcloth: And behold joy and gladness, slaying
Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: Let us eat and
drink, for tomorrow we shall die: And it was revealed to me, by the Lord of
Hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you, till you die,
says the Lord. Isa. 22. 12. 13. 14.

Neither let us keep the Fast of Hypocrites 40
who disfigure their faces, and look sowrlie, that they may be known of men
to fast. Matthew. 6. 16. They afflict their Souls for a day, and hing their
heads as a bulrush, and yet they find pleasure, and oppress their Neighbor
in the day of their Fast. Isa. 58. 5.

Neither let us keep the Papists Fast, who are Hypocrites in their external
show* and Epicures 41
in the diet of their Fasting: There can be no afflicting of their body,
where for quality, they have liberty to eat bread, Confections, Conserues,
Fruits, and to drink all sorts of Wine: and for quantity, to tak their
satietie, and fill of them, and yet in so doing, they break not their
Ecclesiastical Fast. This is a mocking of the Christian Fast, a scorning of
the World, the feeding of the flesh, and a deceate of themselves in that
will worship a Feasting for Fasting.

But let us keep the Christian Fast, in a simple abstinence from all that may
comfort the body, 42
in true and unfeigned Repentance, and forsaking of our evil ways, turning to
the Lord our God with all our hearts that he may have mercy on us. If we
seek the Lord when he may be found, then we shall cry, and he will
answer, we shall call, and he shall say, Behold, here I am if thou take
away from the midst of thee the yocke of sin, Isa. 58. 9.

And for this end, we must first inquire 43
where these sins are, that so grieuouslie offend God, and that not by prying
in our Neighbors, to lay all the blame on them, and transfer it from our
selves, and so to foster a conceate of our own innocence in this common
guiltiness.

It is a deep policy of Satan, to cosen 44
men in this case, to cleanse themselves, and blame their Neighbors. This is
one old lesson, we have of our first Parents. Adam laid the sin upon the
Woman, and the woman on the Serpent: We are forward to commit sin, but are
ashamed of it, when it is committed, and would father it on another: We defile
our selves reallie by the guiltiness of it, and labor to cleanse us by a
conceate: But God will not be so put off, and that shifting is a doubling of
our guiltiness.

So, after that Core, and his accomplices were punished, the people murmured
against Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the Lord. Nu.
16. 41. The cause of Corahs punishment, was not in Moses and Aaron, but in
Corahs sins, who inuying their credit, ambitiouslie affected the like, and
seditiouslie made a faction, and drew the people after him, against them whom
God had set over them: But the foolish people, not considering his sin, nor
their own factious following of him, laid all the blame upon Moses and Aaron.

This is to harden our self in our sin and impenitencie, 45
and to freeze on our dregs. Zeph. 1. 12. But every one of us ought to
examine first and most our selves, and we shall find seven abominations in
our hearts: If we look in the glass of Gods Law, we shall see our leprosy,
and be forced with the Lepers to cry out, I am unclean* I am unclean.

So David (albeit GOD being angry at Israel suffered him to number the
people) said to the Lord, I have sinned, and I have done wickedlie, but these
sheep what have they done? 2. Sam, 24. 1. And Jeremy puts himself in with
the rest, we have sinned, and thou have not spared. Lament. 3. And Daniel,
We and our Fathers have sinned. Dan. 9. It is a token of true Grace, in the
censure of our self, with the Apostle, to count our selves the first of all
sinners: and a token of true Repentance. 1. Tim. 1. 5. In the appearance of sin
with Jonah, to say, I know, that for my sake, this storm is come upon you.
Jonah. 1. 12. Every one of us, has brought his coal to this great fire of
Gods wrath, so, let every man come and take out the coal, he has cast in it,
and draw waters out of his broken heart and power out the tears of true
Repentance to quench it withal: Let us search and try our vvayes, and turn
again to the LORD. Lament. 3. 40.

As on the one part we ought not Pharisaicallie 46
to lay all the fault on others, so neither should weelazelie wait upon the
Repentance of other: Every one ought indeed to stir 47
up another to this holy Exercise: But if other remain in their hardness,
and will not be stirred up to seek the Lord, we ought not to delay
Repentance by their evil example.

Every one is bound to keep his own Soul: If ye will not repent, my Soul
shall mourn in secret for your pride. Ierem. 13. 17. As the multitude of the
godly cannot secure an evil man from Gods justice, he found out Achan among
the thousands of Israel, and punished him: So the multitude of impenitent
Sinners, shall not hyde one mourning Sinner from his mercy: He sends not out
his wrath, till first he mark them, that sigh and cry for the abomination of
Jerusalem Ezch. 9. And promises to Baruch his life for a prey. He had the
Arc ready to save Noah, and a Zoar to receive Lot.

2. Next, for this holy Exercise, let us rent 48
our hearts, and that by a true and godly sorrow for our bygone and present
offenses, afflicting our Souls by a true contrition, Joel. 2. As wheat or
corn, is brayed between the nether and upper milstones, so is the penitent
Soul, bruised between the grief for sin, and fear of wrath, with an holy
indignation at our selves, for offending so good a God, and taking an holy
revenge or sythment, on our selves for that vylnesse. 2. Cor. 7. That when we
remember our ways, and all our doings, wherein we have been defiled, we may
loath our selves in our own sight, for all the evils that we have committed.

The reasons of this renting are, 1. Our heart 49
is the fountain, from which all proceeds, that defiles the man, and ought
to be stopped. 2. It is the forge-house, wherein Satan forgeth all iniquity,
and must be ruined. 3. And the place of the conception of all our miseries,
therefore by an heartbreaking godly sorrow, it must be so disabled, as it
loss the power of conceiving, or bringing forth of sin as of before. 4 It
is the belly of the Viper for conceiving, but it is not rent in the delivery
of that venomous brood: Therefore it ought to be rent in remorse for it, and
with that renting, we must bring out the birth of a sincer confession of our
sin, Let us lift up our hearts and our hands to heaven, and say, We have
sinned and have rebelled, and thou have not spared. Lament. 3. 41. 42.

3. Thirdly, for the time to come, we must 50
purpose with our self, and vow to God amendment of our life, and ye study
and practice of new obedience: These holy vows, will both bind our
corruption, that it break not out at all occasions, and stir up the grace of
God to a life worthy of God.

True Repentance will so press our corruption, that it may find for the
present a weight to bow it down, and a knyfe to cut the throat of it: And
it will strengthen Gods grace by removing sin, which is the bane of it. It is
a repeating of our first conversion, and a notable promouing of Sanctification,
by so solemn a work, adding a sensible degree of killing the old Man, and the
quickening the new.

This is the fruit of our wrestling with God, even to halt with Jacob: Though
we have prevailed, our corruption will be so disjoynted, as it be not so
strong thereafter. So, God in mercy to his own, by true Repentance, slays
sin, which Satan augmented by our falling and disappointing him of his end,
turns his work of sin in us, to a destruction of our sin.

Fourthlie, we must strengthen our hearts 51
with confidence on God, that he will have mercy on us: We can never go to
him with boldness, without this confidence in Jesus Christ, but we run from
him as a consuming fire.

For this end, we ought first to fix our mind 52
upon him, as he has discryued himself. 1. A God full of goodness, for he
is gracious, freely to pity us not looking to our deserving, but beside,
above, and contrare to it, to help us, bringing all the reasons of his
goodness to us from himself, and respecting none other thing in us, than our
misery to cure it.

2. He is Merciful, to pardon our sins, and remove all evil from us, whom
graciously he accepts, and gives us every good thing that we need.

3. And slow to anger, because the best men are often falling in sin, and so
give matter of his provocation, yet he is not soon moved at their sins, but
waits on their Repentance.

4. And of great Kindness, that even in the time of his just anger, keeps
ever his Fatherly love and benignity to them: His anger can stand well with
his love, though we do not well consider it: He does not afflict us
willingly. Lament. 3. 33. But in the midst of his wrath, he remembers
mercy, in the change of his work and action, from blessing to crossing, his
heart and affection is not changed upon us He is not hasty to anger, and long
in it, but slow to it, and soon from it.

Anger is in men according to their several disposition: It is in the
Melancholian, a virtue, that he is slow to anger, but a vice, that he abides
long in it: And it is the Cholerians fault, that he is soon angry, but a
virtue that he is as soon from it. Our good God, speaking of himself
according to man, expresses his anger by the virtues of them both: With the
first, he is slow to anger, and with the second he is soon appeased: And
this is to our great comfort.

5. And he repents him of evil: Although our sins force strokes out of his
hand, yet he is grieved for us under them, and by his sudden relieuing of us,
so soon as we repent, does testify, that he has neither pleasure in the
death of sinners, nor in the troubles of his own: In all their afflictions he
is afflicted. Isa. 63. 9. And these divine properties and their work is not as
his strange work, and strange Act, but in those things, he delighted,
because mercy pleases him. Isa. 28. 21. Ierem. 9. 24. Micah. 7.

And for our fuller confidence, we have not simply to consider this his
goodness in himself, 53
but as it is presented and offered to us in a Covenant, which is confirmed by
Christ.

His goodness is in himself as a Fountain superabounding, but the Covenant
is as a Chariot, or Conduit, conuoying it to us. His goodness assumed our
Nature in Christ, to a personal vnioun with the Son; to assure us both of
the grounds of that communication of his goodness, and of our right to it; and
of the way how it is: That being and believing in Christ our Brother, we may
have boldness and access by that way, which his blood has consecrate toward
the Throne of Grace. Heb. 10. When in our mourning for sin, our Faith looks
to Christ, whom our sins have pierced, and entreat God, to look on the
Son of his love, in whom he is well pleased, we have confidence to be
heard in that we pray for: Zachar. 13. No man can tryst and meet with God in
Christ the great Peacemaker, who is both the Prince and price of our peace, but
he shall find reconciliation in him.

Thirdly, our own Experience may give us confidence: When this Yland was
invaded 54
by that great Navy, that was called, Invineible: God made the Seas to bury
our Enemies, as it did the Egyptians: Anno 1588.

Next, when Satan saw, that our GOD was God of the Seas, he took him to
fire, and put it in the hearts of cruel Papists, to attempt the blowing up by
Powder, of the King, the Parliament, the Flower of all Estates of England: But
God discovered that hellish plot, and brake their bow at the lowsing of their
Arrow. Anno 1605. When Mortality passed through all this Land, and removed
many, God was entreated by our Prayers, and stayed it. Anno. 1623. When he
brak in with a fearful Pest among us, and we humbled our selves before him,
he commanded the destroying Angel to depart from us. An. 1625.

When he threatened extreme Famine, in the rotting of all our Corns, we
called on him by Fasting and Praying, and immediately thereafter for seven
weeks gave such serenitie as scarcely any man does remember the like. Anno
1626.

He is that same God, that he was then* And if we will run to him in true
Repentance, he both can and will deliver us as of before.

In a word, we must process our selves severely before God. 1. In presenting
our selves before his fearful Tribunal, and standing there, compare our
self to that righteousness of the Law, and our God, and we shall find that
our sins are more, than the hairs of our head.

2. When we have found it so, we must cry in the bitterness of our heart,
with the Publican, 55
knocking on our breast, The Lord be merciful to me, a sinner* Luke. 18. 3.
This sight of our vileness, and sorrow for it, must chase us to God, to beg
remission of sin, and to be covered with the righteousness of Christ* Wash
me thoroughly from my sin, and cleanse me from mine iniquity. Psa. 51. 4.
We must strive to find remission sealed up in the peace of conscience. All this
process before God, must be formed in our conscience, and led in a spiritual
feeling: Many a time we do the work of God negligently, and content our
selves with a light thought and motion of these things: But we must labor to
bring our conscience to a sight and our hearts to a feeling of them, without
which God cannot be pleased, nor we blessed in this work.

And this processing is a great blessing of God, because it brings us back to
the first process, that God formed in us, at the time of our conversion; and
acquainteth us with that Process, which we shall see at the last day; and
shall secure us from the terror of it.

We shall then count our selves happy, for tymous processing our selves, when
we shall see others condemned, who now neglect to do it.

Further, we must remember our ordinary measure of Devotion will not serve
our turn in Fasting: But as the solemnity is more than customable occasions:
So our Devotion in it must as far exceed our ordinary, as it is above
ordinary occasions: The Sabbaths service had the own measure above the daily
Sacrifice: So our Grief, Zeal, Faith, and softness of heart, must be seven
fold more, than at other times: Therefore, is it compared to the greatest sorrow
as the sorrow of a woman mourning for her first borne, and for the Husband of
her Youth, and that as the mourning of Judah in the Vallay of Megiddo for the
slaughter of Josiah. Zach: 12.

When our Souls by the Grace of GOD, are brought to this holy Disposition, we
must also take order for our Body, that it may know in the own kind this
Exercise; that defrauding it of the own desires, we may bring it to some
feeling of that work, that is within it even of the reasoning between God and
our Soul; that pinching of it, is both the chastining and amending of it.

We must abstain from mirth and solace: When Gods Sword is forbished, shall
we then make mirth, and contemn his rod. ^zech. 21. 10.

Let the Bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the Bride out of her
Chamber. When God is angry, it is not timous, nor comely for us to sport, or
give ourselves to any delight.

If Nehemiah forbade the people to weep at the reading of the Law, because
that day was a festiuitie to God, Nehem. 8. Shall it not be more unseemly to
laugh, and rejoice in the days, wherein God calls us to mourning and tears?
It is not a day of liberty or loosing our mind and body to delights, but
enclosing and shooting up our self in secret. That we retrinch, and call in
all our thoughts, that at other times, may go out to our business, and keep
them all, as a mourning widow* clothed with du^e, in tokens of the affliction
of our Soul.

The maine thing indeed, that God requires in public humiliation is true
Repentance, in 59
godly sorrow for our sins, and earnest imploring of his mercy in Jesus
Christ. Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and yet with all, he
requires also a bodily Fasting, that our bodies be defrauded, not only of
their superfluous and unlawful desires, but also of their due and lawful
necessities in nourishment and rest, and that for these special reasons.

1. That the body by that abstinence, may be afflicted and punished, as one
instrument of evil to the Soul: Though strength and health of the body be a
blessing of God, yet ofttimes it affects the Soul, and either stirs it up
to evil, or else is a ready weapon of unrighteousness, to execute the evil
desires of it.

2. That it may be taught by that defrauding and punishing, what is the
punishment of sin. 3. That since it is a great impediment to our Soul in
good, when it is satisfied in all the desires: it may not hinder, but rather
further the Soul in so holy an exercise, but the felt necessities of it, make
it to spur our Soul to be earnest in the service of God, who is only able
to save both Soul and body.

4. Lastly, for the compleete Humiliation of the whole Man: that as both Soul
and body have sinned, and every one of them have had their own part in that
wickedness, they may now suffer conjunctlie, and be humbled for it before God.

With prayer and Fasting other things must 57
be joined: First course and base Apparel, that none come before God in
their best clothing, but in their course and common garments: Costly raiment
does no more agree with Fasting and Repentance, than laughing and surfette: An
heart sopped with sorrow and bitterness for sin, can neither desire, nor
take pains upon the busking of the body. Remorsfull thoughts can neither
breed nor dwell under a painted face, and a husked body: Contrition in the
heart commands a neglect of the flesh: As our flesh ought to be taught by
defrauding of nurishment, so also in bafnesse and neglect of apparel.

In most of our former Fastes, this has been a blotte, that people have come
to the Lords House in their best garments, when he has cried for sacke-cloth
and ashes: They make no difference betwixt Fasting and Feasting: Betwixt
Repentance and other joyful solemnities, as Communion and Thanksgiving.
Naomie thought her name (which signifies beautiful) not fitting for her
pittiefull estate, and the bitterness of her heart, and desired not to be
called Naomie, but Marah or bitterness.

When our Parents sinned in Paradise, their nakedness made them ashamed, and
that shame made them cover there nakedness with any thing that come first to
hand. Busking at Fasting is not of shamefastness, but a shameless out-facing
of the world, their own Conscience and the Justice of God. That devotion will
never pierce heaven, where the rattling of silks and Veluets out-cryeth the
groans of their Spirits.

The sorrowful Jews: rent their garments, and cast dust on their heads:
Dolor in the heart bids the body hing out sorrowful ensigns, and these
in black or base clothing: But in a busked body, there is not no such
dulefull ensign, and therefore, no sorrow in the heart. These painted Puppies
seem to be sent of Satan to Congregations* to be blots in them, and
scoffers of God in his Face.

The Primitive Church enjoined their Penitents to come before the Congregation
in sackcloth, and cast themselves on the ground, so that ofttimes their tears
moystening the dust, defiled their faces with clay: A face so ouerlaide, is
more beautiful in the sight of God, than Iezabells fairding. They seem to
read Silk for Sack in the Prophets exhortations to Fasting; at least they put
on Silk in stead of Sack.

To hear Doctrine of Humiliation, and to be richly ^led, do not agree: To
pretend grief in heart, and be sumptuously arrayed, is abomination in the
sight of God, and a uisible Solecisme, in the eyes of Man.

2. The second thing to be joined with Fasting, Is a large offering for the
support of the 58
Poor: It is our time of supplication to God for his grace, whereof we both
desire and expect a large measure: Why should we not the^ be liberal to the
Poor? As we would have him open handed to fill our hearts with grace, We
should be free to help their necessities: Beside the measure of our daily
offering to them, we are bound to convert the charges of our house to their
comfort, that what we spare on our selves in Fasting, may be lent to God,
and given to the poor.

Unless this way we help them, we offer to God but a lame sacrifice, and
turn his service to our own worldly gain, because that which we spare on
our selves, remains with us To be large in Devotion, and niggard in our
contributio^ to the poor, is to prove, that we count more of our moneys than
of Devotion: And to move God to respect it as little, as we do

This has also been a great fault in our former* Fastings.

We ought therefore to give our dinner to them that are hungry, that Christ
hungring in the poor, may receive that which the fasting Christian does abate:
And so our Fastes may be filled and fatted with Almous deeds, and we may
rejoice that our Fasting has made another to eat.

3. Thirdly we must also join heerewith all requisite godly Exercises, to
bring our hearts 59
to that holy Disposition, that God, requires, as, 1. The reading and hearing
of the Law of GOD, that we may see our dittay in the Commands that we have
broken, and our Doom* in the threatened wrath, whereunto we are liable by
these breaks: So Iosiahs heart melted, when he heard it read, because he saw
great sin in Judah, and heavy wrath hinging over their heads.

2. The hearing of Pastors, apply that Law to us, and lance our Conscience by
their Doctrine: So Peter's Sermon pierced ye Jews hearts when their sins were
laid to their charge, and they were forced to seek ease to their wounded
Conscience: Act. 2. And when the Leuits did expound the Law, the people mourned
before the Lord. Nehem. 8. That piercing sharpness of the word, chaseth them
that are wounded to God: The heart pierced with conscience of sin, can find
no rest, but in him.

3. The reading of Books of devotion, which among other good ends, are
written by godly men to stir up the heart to a tenderness, and
affectuousnesse in the worship of God.

4. Conference with Pastors, and other well affected Christians, For the
mutual stirring up of our hearts to that holy Exercife: As coals joined to
coals, augment the heat, so godly conference increases both zeal and
affection.

5. Heerewith must be joined holy Meditation: All worldly thoughts must be
put out of our Soul, and the thoughts of God only kept in it: Our hearts
are hard; and not soon moved we must labor on them painefullie, and hold
them on the ben^sell of spiritual disposition: Hard stones are dissolved by
strong waters and Vinegar, and the hardest heart will be softened by laying it
in the strong water of Contrition, and that piercing Vinegar of bitter remorse,
all which things are furdered by constant meditation.

6. And above all, fervent prayers to God, and singing Psalms of Repentance,
that our desires be not a sound and multitude of words, but a pouring out of
our very hearts, as water before him: We must wrestle with him as Jacob in
power of his own grace, and not suffer him to depart, till he bliss us with
the remission of our sins.

It is not enough that one sort of people fast, but all of every sort and
state; For all have sinned, 60
and are impannelled at the bar of Gods Justice: Gather the people, sanctify
the Congregation, assemble the Elders, gather the Children, and these that
suck the breasts. Joel. 2. 16. And the King of Ninivie did fast, and made all
his servants to fast also. Jonah. 3.

1. Pastors have their part in this work. 61
To inform the people of their sin and danger of wrath, and waken up their
conscience by the terrors of the Law, that being priked in their hearts, they
may cry out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do. Act. 2.

2. And not that only but also in example to go before them: Let the
Priests the Lords Ministers weep between the Porch and the Altar. Joel. 2.
That thereby, they may show to the people, that they themselves believe the
things which they speak of sin and death, and that the work of Humiliation
is good when they practice it affectuouslie.

3. To interceede with God for their people, that he would pardoun and spare
them: Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine Inheritance to reproach.
Joel. 2. Moses was so zealouslie careful of the peoples safety. that he
wished his name to be rased out of the Book of Life, rather than they were
destroyed: And Phineas seeing the plague, break into the Camp, made atonement
for them. This is to stand in the gappe, and make up the breach from staying
the proceeding of Gods anger. Ezech. 22. 30.

And the bearing of the names of the Tribes of Israel, on the Breast Plate of
our heart, in a Pastoral love, and on the two Shoulders of an earnest care and
assiduous labor: Presenting them and their necessities daily to God.

Our time is like the time of Jeremiah and Ezechiel. God has now presented the
roll of his Book unto us, and it is all written within and without,
Lamentation, mourning, and woe. Ezech. 2. 10.

Our duty is as Noah, to fore-warne the world of the Floode: As Jonah to
denounce destruction against Niniuie: And as men that stand in the counsel of
God, to discover the iniquity of the people, to turn them from their sin,
and turn away their captivity. Ierem. 23.

Now the Ship of Gods Church, is tossed and beaten with the stormy Seas of
calamities, and the multitude, like Jonah in the sides of the Ship, and are
fast asleep in their sin: We ought to rouse them up, and cry, What meanest
thou, O sleeper? Arise, and call upon thy God: If so be, God will think upon
us, that we perish not. Jonah. 1. 6. Why will ye die in your sins, O house
of Israel. Ezech, 18. 31.

The people also ought to consider their duties 2
heere^n. 1. To count it a blessing of God to have Pastors that will waken
them, for none of themselves, can awak out of the sleep of sin: David a
Prophet, and tender hearted, had need of a Nathan to waken his sleeping
Conscience. 2. Therefore they should hear and receive information from their
Pastors, whom God has set over them: As he has bound Pastors under
heauiest pain to inform them, so are they bound in Conscience to hear them,
and receive their instruction. 3. To deal with their pastors, to interceed for
them with the Lord: Cease not to cry to the Lord for us, that he would deliver
us from the Philistmes, said Israel to Samuel. 1. Sam. 7. 8. And pray to the
Lord, for thy servants, that we die not ibid. 1.

4. To join their prayers with the prayers of their Pastors: If they lie still
in senslesnesse, the prayers sent up to God for them will not avail. Pharaoh
desired Moses to pray for him, but prayed not for himself. Though Moses and
Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this people. Ier. 15.
1. But when Pastors and people join their prayers together, then God suffers
himself to be bound with the bonds of his own making, even his mercy and
truth in the promise laid upon him by faith, in fervent prayers.

A clear proof of all these duties, in Pastors and people, is in Samuel the
Prophet, and the Israelites: When he reproved them for their sin the people
drew out water (not out of wells, but out of their broken hearts) and powered it
out at their eyes, and fasted, and weeped that day, and said, We have sinned
against the Lord, and besought the Prophet to pray to God for them. Then he
offered a sacrifice* and cried to the Lord for them, and the Lord heard him,
and delivered in their hands the Host of the Philistimes, which was come up
against them. 1. Sam. 7.

If we mind sincerely to approve our selves to God in Fasting, it must be
both public and private,. Public humiliation at such solemn times, is both
first and most required, for sindrie reasons. 1. To justify God, who has
arrested us, and threatened or begun judgementes, by public confession of
our sins, proclaiming that he has just cause of wrath against us; and so by
that public homage done to him, to acknowledge our obligement to him, for a
new holding of the life that he spares to us.

2. Secondly, to make a more forcible onset on him, by all our prayers joined
together. For he who has promised to hear us in secret apart, and to be in
the midst of two or three, that are met in his Name, will not he be in the
midst of some hundreths, and thousands when they are come before him. Matthew. 6.
6. And he who said* Moses, Let me alone (as though Moses prayers did bind him)
shall he not suffer himself to be stayed from executing his wrath, when many
thousands fervent and faithful prayers lay hold upon him at once.

3. For our mutual and greater incitation: Many who in Congregations meet
together, possibly have gone before other in evil example, and some have
offended and stumbled at the fall of other.

It is therefore most expedient, that these see one another in that solemn
Devotion: That they who have given evil example in sin may give good example
by their Repentance: and they who have conceived just offense of other, may lay
aside their offense, when they see them rise from their sin. David offended
many by his sins, but doubtless his Repentance satisfied them, and
converted more people to God.

4. For Satan's greater conviction, he intends no less in drawing us to
sin, than to yock God and us together, and so to set us before him as guilty
persons to be destroyed, both in this life, and at the day of our last
reckoning: But in these public Assemblies he sees the case altered, that
God has prevented the term, and in place of a wrathful meeting, to come to a
friendly commoning, and to end in a gracious reconciliation. When God comes
down in these meetings, and melts the hearts of his people, and reconcealeth
them to him, such a sight is an heart-breake to Satan.

We ought also to join private Humiliation 64
in our Houses, with that public Exercise. And they shall mourn every
Family apart. The Family of the house of David apart, and their wiises apart:
The Family of the house of Nathan apart, etc. Zech. 12. And that for sindrie
causes. 1. We pollute our houses by sin, and therefore ought to sanctify
them to God particularly, in the time of a solemn Fast. David sanctified his
House after Absoloms sin, and shall not we much more consecrate our houses for
our own sin?

2. For Preparation to the public worship: If we come out of our own houses
to Gods House, without any preparation, we cannot look for a great blessing
in the Sanctuary: Private worship before we come out, is as a seed for the
greater and public work.

3. And when we have been in the Sanctuary, and returned to our houses, we
ought to turn it in an Harvest in them in reaping the fruit that we have found
in public: Our Houses then are both the Barn and the Garner: wherein we
provide the seed that we take out to the Sanctuary, and to the which we
bring in the Harvest, and increase that we have found in it.

4. Private worship is a seal of the sincerity of Grace, for many do
counterfeate Devotion and Repentance in public, who have none exercise of it
in their houses, all their care is to be seen of men, and so they are holy in
the Church, and profane at home: But to exercise Gods worship fervently in
private, is a token of a true and vigorous grace of God.

5. For greater liberty, to utter groaning, weeping, humbling, and prostrating
of our body in private, than we can in public, there we do many things
which would find an vncheritable censure, if they were seen of men:
Affections once loosed, will break out in sindrie actions, which in public
we must suppress; but in private we give them liberty. Hannah uttered
grief of heart in the Temple, and was misconstrued by Eli, but her private
devotion at home, though with greater liberty was not offensive, but a cause
of her husbands more tender affection to her. 1. Sam. 1. David in private,
watered his bed with tears. Psalm. 6. And filled his house with roaring,
which in public he did moderate. Psalm. 32. And by this private worship, is
not only to be understood, when the whole Family meets together in their
Hall, or other convenient room, but beside that, when the Master of the house
having discharged that duty with his Family, goes a part to some reteered
corner of the house, and there is yet more free in his devotion than he can
be in the sight of his Family: And so other of the house, who are come to
understanding or any measure of Grace: This is, the Family aparte and their
wives aparte.

In end, we have three things to consider in 65
all his work 1. First our preparation for it: The work is transcendent to the
natural man, and craves preparation to lift him above Nature, in so heavenly
an exercise. Though sudden ejaculations wait not on preparation, because in
them we are set to work upon an instant, by some urging occasion, yet in the
set diet of his worship, we are bound to an holy preparation: And in this
solemnity we have need to double the measure of our devotion, being called
to the highest extent both of afflicting Nature, and stirring up the grace of
God in us.

It is therefore needful, to try if God prepare us for the work. This we
shall know. 2. If he open our eyes, to see how needful this humiliation is for
us, by seeing our sin and his just wrath, that we may be driven to that
resolution that we must either break off our sin by Repentance, or else be
consumed in his anger 3. And by this sight, if he wake^ our sleeping conscience
and make it to set us to work, that we give God no rest, till he give rest to
his beloved. 4. This is some proof of that which God tells I have been
sought of them that answered not, and found of them that sought me not: And
before they call I will answer. Isa. 65. 1. Where our miserable State hid from
our self, is seen of him, so as he pittieth it to help it, that our misery
unwitting of us, calls for mercy: As the sores of a sleeping Child move the
Father to compassion: And though we neither seek him, nor call on him, in
any known or sensible incalling, yet his Fatherly pity answers the cry
of that our necessity, when we know not: This is a preventing Grace in this
point: Whereby God finding us in the pit of misery, sets down Jacobs
Ladder to us, before we know of our estate, or think of a delivery.

Next, we should try our disposition in the 66
work it self, if Gods preventing Grace in preparation be seconded by an
assisting Grace, which stands in those points. 1. If he soften our heart, to
power out it self as water before him, and bruise it, so as to be an
acceptable Sacrifice.

2. If he power upon us the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, his Spirit
making intercession for us, to help our infirmities, in teaching us both what
to ask, and how to pray, with groans that cannot be expressed.

3. If he give us Boldness to draw near to the Throne of Grace, and to find
access to him in the blood of Christ, and liberty of Spirit in all our
devotion.

4. If he give us the desire of our heart, in disposing it as we desire, to be
both casten down for his offense, and raised up in hope and confidence of his
mercy: To feel our hearts melting in a godly sorrow, is matter of
unspeakable joy; while that sorrow is melting the heart, the sense and
conscience of that disposition, comforts our heart when we find Gods Spirit
has given us our will over our hard heart, to sacrifice it to God.

5. If we see his beauty in the Sanctuary, when he holds the golden
Scepter of Peace, like Assuerus, and comes down, and moves people to tears
and groans. When the Angel of the Lord, or the Prophet charged the people of
their sins, they did mourn, so that the place was called Bochim or mourners.
And assisteth every one according to their necessity and place, making the
Pastors as Trumpets, to speak and not spare, his words in their mouth is as
the Hammer, that breaks the Rock in pieces. Ierem. 23. 23.

When he casts down, and raises up, wounds, and heals us again, and
works so in the Congregation, that it may be seen he has appointed that
meeting, and keeps it to reconceale his people to himself.

6. If as he works a godly sorrow in our hearts, so be puts words in
our mouth for his entreaty: Take to you words, and turn to the LORD, and say
to him, Take away all our iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we
render the calves of our lips. Hos. 14. 2.

And again, Let them say, Spare thy people, Lord, and save thine Inheritance.
Joel. 2. 17.

It is a token, God will hear us, when he gives us his Spirit to help our
infirmities, and dytteth our bill: He cannot refuse that supplication, which
he forms himself.

He heard Daniel, and send him comfort while he prayed: While I was speaking,
and praying, and confessing my sin, the Man Gabriel being caused to flee to
me swiftly touched me, and said, At the beginning of the supplication, the
Commandment came forth. Dan. 9. 20. So son as we are humbled on Earth, and
send up our supplications to God, he is ready to answer us to our heart.

Thirdly, how we close that Exercise: If 67
as it begins in sorrow for our felt miseries, so it end in joy, because our
sacrifice is turned in ashes. We have sufficient grounds of good success
upon his promises: But beside these promises in his word, his work in
preparing us for it, and disposing us in it, are a good inducement to our hope:
When he powers out the Spirit of Supplication on Jerusalem, then assuredly
he will break up a Fountain to the house of David for sin, and for
uncleanness, Zac. 13. 1.

We know not his purpose and thoughts concerning us, but his Spirit who
knows his mind, reuealeth them, and this is an sort of revelation by his
working: For as he knows the mind of God, so he works the godly to that
disposition which he knows is most requisite, for obtaining the purposed
blessing. Therefore that holy and heavenly, liberty, is ^ome sort of
evidence to us, that God has both purposed for us, and will give us the
blessing, which we crave after that manner. When he strengthens us to
wrestle with him, like Jacob, he will not depart, till he bless us, and of
wrestling Jacobs, make us his prevailing Israel on whom is his peace.

But, let none deceive himself by a voluntar 68
apprehension of Peace, or fainzie to himself a joy where he has none: God
has given us the infalible mark of good success of Fasting in new obedience:
Who so after Fasting walks not in a newness of life, is deceived by his
seduced heart.

This is clear, both by the Nature of Repentance, and remission: True
Repentance is not only in a sorrowing for sin, and refraining from it, for
a day or two, but for all our lifetime thereafter. The purposes and vows of
obedience, which we make in our Repentance, must be practiced and performed:
Though the act of Repentance endure not ever in it self, yet the virtue of it
remains constantly in the godly.

In Baptism we are Sacramentallie changed, and at the time of our effectual
calling, we feel that Sacramental grace in justification, and
sanctification, and all our following days we are bound to go forward in
them: Since Repentance then is nothing but Sanctification contracted: And
sanctification all our life is nothing, but Repentance enlarged and continued,
it will follow that if sanctification do not kyth constant after our Fasting,
there has been no true Repentance in it.

Remission of sin proves the same: For though Justification, and
Sanctification be two several graces in themselves, and bring several
respects and dispositions in us, yet they are inseparable, for God never
pardons the guilt of sin, but iontlie therewith he slays sin original: As
he washes away the blot of all sin, so he wounds deadly the root of
sinning sin in us: And the conscience of our washing in the blood of Christ,
does ever beget in us a care to keep these garments clean which God has
cleansed.

Therefore, if there be not after our Fastings a visible amendment of life,
neither have we repented, nor God pardoned our sin, but we have added
greater and worse sins to the former, and brought upon us a degree of
judicial induration and hardness of heart: When Christ had healed the sick
man at the Poole of Bethesda, he commanded him, Sin no more, lest a worse
thing befall thee. Ioh. 5. So when we are washed in the house of the Lords
abundantly powered out mercy, let us keep our self from sin thereafter.

If God be with us, and accept our Prayers, then 69
we may be sure of these following fruits. 1. Of Remission of sins, in Jesus
Christ: So when David confessed his sins, and said, I have sinned against the
Lord: he was answered by Nathan: The Lord has also put away thine iniquity:
he had a warra^d more speedily to absolve him, tha^ he had to accuse him. ^.
Sa. 12. And when the Publicane knocked on his breast, and said, The Lord have
mercy on me, a sinner, he went home justified: Lu. 18. And when the forlorn
Son came in Repentance to his Father, he received him in his favor and house
again. Luke 15 He sees no sin in Jacob, nor transgressio^ in Israel: Our God
pardeneth iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
Inheritance; he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy.

He will turn again, he will have compassion on us, he will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins in the bottom of the Sea.
Mica. 7. 18.

2. He will accept of our persons, under his shadow, nothing holds us out of
that secret 70
refuge, but our sin, because he is of purer Eyes, than he can behold
sine, and he pursues sin in all, and can no more protect an impenitent
sinner, than he can deny, his justice. But when the heart is purged from
every evil conscience, the^ his refuge is open to us.

3. As for our Enemies. we should consider 71
their estate, better than themselves, they are in Gods work for our
punishment, but neither in his favor, nor of his disposition.

They are more foolish than Satan, he durst not hurt Job, without a
Commission of God, but they think all possible and lawful to them: And when he
set on to execute that Commission, though malice blinded his desire, yet not
his mind, for he did fore* see a disappointing, because he knew Gods love to
Job, by so many pledges and testimonies of his sincerity in Grace: But our
enemies are not so wise as he: They go on without Commission, sought and
obtained they expound their prevailing, as Gods sentence approving their cause,
and see not that all their business is a prouyding of a Coffine, and
beare-trees, to carry them out of this combat with shame and confusion. God
will plead his cause against them. He has given them a hard, but a just
commission against us for our sins. Assure is the rod of mine anger, I will
send him against an hypocritical Nation, against the people of mine anger will
I give him a charge to take the spoil: But they passed the bounds of their
commission, and satisfied their own wicked heart upon the people of God. For
Assure means not as God does, but his heart is to destroy and cut off
Nations, Isa. 10.

They say, Let us defile Sion, but they know not the thoughts of the Lord,
neither understand his Counsel. Micah. 4 12. And when God suffers them to
prevail, for the humiliation of his own, they sacrifice to their own net,
and impute all this success to their own Idols. Habak. 2. 11.

When God has humbled us* and pardoned our sins, then their Commission
expyreth* and God will plague them in his fury for their own wickedness in
doing his work peruerslie. And therefore, he will turn him against them, and
plead his cause saying, I am very sore displeased with the Heathen, that are
at ease: For I was but a little displeased with my people, and the Enemies
helped forward the affliction: I was angry with my people, and polluted mine
Inheritance* and given them in thine hand: But thou have showed them no mercy,
thou have laid upon the Ancient a very heavy yocke. Zach. 2. 16. Is. 47. 6.

And in his due time, he will turn the rage of the enemy to his praise, the
remnant of their rage he will restrain. Psalm. 76. He will stretch out his
hand against the wrath of our enemies, and his right hand shall save us. Psalm.
138. 7.

So that we may justly say to them, Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy,
when I fall, I shall rise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a
light unto me: I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him, until he plead my cause, and execute Judgment for me. He
will bring me forth to the Light, and I shall behold his Righteousness: Then
she that is mine Enemies shall see, and shame shall cover her, which said unto
me, Where is the Lord thy God? Mine eyes shall behold her, now she shall be
trodden down as mire in the street. Mica. 7. 8. 9. 10. They are now an
instrument in his hand, to execute his anger on us, but they shall be the Bute
and mark of his greater anger.

4. As for the Churches now desolate, God will return to them in mercy, in
his own time: 72
And this time is, when they are purged from sin, and the sins and
insolency of the Enemy are come to an hight: Then God will rise* and have
mercy upon Sion: For the time to save her, even the set time is come. Psalm.
102. 13.

It is time for the Lord to work when they have made void his Law. Psalm. 119.
126. So long as sin remains in the Church, the commission given to our
enemies* is in force.

If we move the question, O thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere
thou be quiet? Put up thy self in thy Scabbard and be still: It will be
answered, How can it be quyete, seeing the Lord has given it a charge. And
the charge will lest till sin be repented. When sin is pardoned, the Lord will
speak to his reconcealed people, Fear not, thou worm, Jacob, I will help
thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer the holy One of Israel: Fear not, for
I am with thee, I will uphold thee, with the right hand of my Righteousness.
Behold, all they which were incensed against thee shall be ashamed and
confounded, and they that strive with thee, shall perish. Isa. 41. 10. 11. For
I know the thoughts that I think toward thee, says the Lord, even thoughts
of peace, and not of evil, to give you the exspected end Ier. 29. 11.

He will build up the Tabernacles of David that are fallen down, and make up
the breaches thereof, and repair the ruins thereof, as of old: Amos. 9. 11.
And will say, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercy, mine House shall be
built in it, says the Lord of Hosts, and a line shall be stretched out upon
it. Zach. 1. 5.

As for us, whom as yet in mercy, he has 73
spared from cruel persecution, he is now crying to us, Come my people, enter
into thy Chambers, and shute thy doors about thee, Hide thy self, as it were
for a little moment, until the indignation be ouerpassed: The Lord will
ordain peace for us, when he has wrought all our works, even the works of
true Repentance and Conversion in us. Isa. 26. 12. 20.

If we repent truly* the River of his Grace will flow among us, and the
Streams of it will make us glad: He will dwell in the midst of us, and help
us tymouslie. Psalm. 46. He will be a fiery wall round about us, and a glory
in the midst of us. Zachar. 2. 5.

This is the sum of all: That we return 74
to the LORD our GOD, and seek him when he may be found, even in this
acceptable time when he is seeking us: That we afflict our Souls for sin,
and call for remission of them, without which we cannot be saved: That every
one of us forsake our evil ways, and renew our Covenant with him: And among
the rest, let us mourn for this madness that we offended such a GOD, who as
he has power to destroy us, so also he has that Grace in his hand,
without the which we cannot repent; our sins at once both pulling down
destruction, and closing the door of his Grace upon us, except his unspeakable
mercy open it unto us again.

The LORD our GOD, the Father of 75
Lights, from whom every good Gift and perfect Donation comes down: And who
has the hearts of all men in his hand, work in us all, in this and all other
Humiliations, that which may be acceptable to him: That by his Grace we may
be enabled to offer the sacrifice of a contrite and a broken heart, and
obtain at his hand full pardon and remission of all our sins.

And the good LORD pardon all our sins, and the very infirmities of that our
Repentance for sin: And be merciful to every one that prepares his heart
to seek the LORD GOD of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to
the purifications of the Sanctuary: 2. Chr. 30. 18. 19. Through JESUS CHRIST
our LORD,

AMEN.
FINIS.
The sum of the former TREATISE.
THe duty of Watchmen. Numb. 1 Scotlands Pastors give warning. 2 A Fast
appointed. 3 1. Cause. The Churches affliction. 4 It is Antichrists
persecution. 5 But he colloureth it with civil respects. 6 Why God afflicts
his Church. 7 Their trouble is our lesson. 8 We should mourn with them. 9
For their Persons. 10 And for the Gospel. 11 And for our home dangers. 12 2.
Cause. The sins of this Land. 13 Sins against the Law. 14 Sins against
the Gospel. 15 1. Infidelity. 16 2. Universal Disobedience. 17 3. Apostasy.
18
Papists admonished. 19 4. Atheism. 20 5. Breach of Brotherly Love. 21 6.
Contempt of the Word and Preachers. 22 7. Sacrilege. 8. Impenitencie* 23
Four signs of a deadly Disease in this Land. 24 Gods controversy with this
Land. 25 3. Cause. Our Kings Ma. Royal affairs. 26 Remouall of the Gospel to
be feared. 27 An idle conceate refuted. 28 Use of discovery of the new World.
29 The Sword to be feared. 30 God our best defense. 31 Right use of lawful
means. 32 God has impannelled this Land. 33 None escape but by Repentance. 34
God commands it. 35 Prayers and Tears our kindly weapons. 36 Satan is most
affrayd of them. 37 How we are called to them. 38 We must fast. 39 Not the
Hypocrets Fast. 40 Nor the Papists Fast, In 41 But the Christians Fast which
stands in 42 1. Inquiry where sin is. 43
And that not laying it on another. 44 But taking it to our selves. 45 Not to
wait on others Rep^ntance. 46 But repent our selves. 47 2. Next in renting our
hearts* 48
The reasons of that renting. 49 3. In amendment of life. 50 4. In confidence
of mercy* 51
Fine Grounds of it from God. 52 From his Covenant. 53 From Experience. 54 How
to process our selves. 55 Four reasons of bodily Fasting. 56 Base Apparel
to be used* 57 Large Alms to the Poor, 58 Six godly Exercises joined. 59
All must repent. 60 Pastors duty in Fasting. 61 Peoples duty in Fasting.
62 4. Reasons for public Humiliation. 63 5. Reasons of private Humiliation.
64 1. Preparation for Fasting, 65 2. Disposition in it. 66 3. How we close
it. 67
New obedience, a proof of Repentance. 68 True Repentance finds. 1.
Remission. 69 2. Accepting of our persons. 70 3. Punishment of our Enemies. 71
4. Releauing of his distressed Church. 72 5. Continuance of our Peace. 73
A Prayer for Repentance and Remission. 74 And for pardon of the faults of our
Repentance. 75
FINIS.

