A LOOKING GLASS*

For Princes and People.

Delivered in a Sermon of Thankesgiving for the Birth of the hopeful Prince
CHARLES.

And since augmented with Allegations and Historical Remarkes.

Together with a Vindication of Princes, etc.

By M. WILLIAM STRVTHER Preacher at Edinburgh.

Psalm. 2. Be wise, O Kings* Printed at Edinburgh, by the Heirs of Andro Heart.
1632.

TO THE MOST HIGH, AND MIGHTY KING: CHARLES OF GREAT Britain, Defender of the
Faith, etc.
Most Dread Sovereign,
BOth these Arguments crave your Ma. kyndlie patrocinie: as Father of that
Prince, whose birth occasioned the Thanksgiving: And Son of that King, who
went before all Kings, in vindicating royal Authority*

Gods Providence over Man ( his last Creature in time, but first in Love) is so
great; that his care of other Creatures comparatively seems a Neglect: He
has distinguished him in Order and Degrees: Romans 13. 1. Proverb. ^. ^6.
Gathered him in Societies: And perfited these Societies with an supereminent
power. That Head gives a native influence to its Body, and the Body
subiecteth it self to that Head.

We bring this Law from the Womb written in our Hearts; and Christ confirmed
it by Word and Example: He disposed so his Birth at Bethlehem, that at once
he fulfilled his Fathers promise, and obeyed Micah. 5. 2* Luc. 2. ^.
Augustus Edict being taxed in his Mother: The Church for ten Ages followed
her Head in that Obedience. Though her Work be Heavenly by the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, to win Matthew. 16. John. 10 ^^bros *de dig. Sacerd, cap.
^. Ibid. cap. 2.
Souls ^o Go^t; and her Reward be to sit on Thrones, and judge the Tribes of
Israel: Yet she gave to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. And though Ambrose
say, that Sublimitas Episcopalis nullis potest comparationibus aequari And
nihil esse in hoc s^c^do sublimiius sacerdote; yet he both practiced and
persuaded obedience to Princes.

But Bab^l confounded all: And Antichrist (in a more fearful Collision of the
Civil and Ecclesiastic Powers, then the two Hills in Marius and Sylaes Vtrum
mai^r dignitas pradia dividendi an peccata di^ ^ittendi. Co^ ^^d. lib. 1.
August. Cavit 2^. 6. Vni^u^ in orb I^p. Rex. ^^^ niumque Princip^^^ s^^
pr^^um. etc. Marta. I^ris. Epist dedi^. Paul. 5. Suarez defen. 6. 6. ^ellar.
Apol.
time) trod the honor of Princes in the dust: he thought it greater to divide
Lands, than remit sins; and thurst himself in their Thrones: He exposed their
Kingdoms to violence; and their sacred Persons and Authority to contempt::
These insolences might seem tolerable in times of blindness, as S. Austine
speaks of Romulus Apotheosing: But now after so long contest, they maintain
them. Their Advocate affirms, and Paul the fifth approved it, That he is the
only Emperor and King; the Superior of all Kings, from whom all
Jurisdiction flows. What ever in danger they deny; or in necesitie they
mitigate, this is the just Model of their Pope, and the prime Article of their
faith.

That Luciferian pride was so eminent in Popes, that it is hard to know,
whether to wonder more at the Impudency of Christ's Vicar usurping, or the
patience of Princes suffering. Popery was never further from the Truth, and
meekness of Jesus, then since it was Iesuited: That name is not a denomination
of a new Zeal or goodness, but the mask of exquisite craft and cruelty; and
the tincture of impenitencie: And Cypr. de Ie^u^.
as the Apostle makes the opposition of Christus and Antichristus; and Cyprian
of Spiritus and Antispiritus, somay we of Jesus and Anti-Iesus.

But God by Reformation has mended that confusion: The light of the Gospel
has at once revealed his heresy in Doctrine, and tyranny in Usurpation.
Revel 17.
This is a trial of Princes; for they are free and happy Princes who have
shaken off his Yoke; and reformed themselves, and their Kingdoms to the Gospel
of Christ: But thrice miserable are they who lie still drunk in her
fornications.

God in mercy has put your Ma. in the first rank: The Titles of Defender of
the Church from King William of Scotland, Innocen 3
and of Defender of the Faith from Henry 8. Leo. 10. Bull. 12.
of England; are both Ensigns of your profession, and remembrancers of your
royal Duty; to defend the true Church, and the true Faith, your Ma. devotion
testifies the peaceable part of the discharge: And does promise the other part
by the Sword, when GOD shall honor Kings to execute his will on the Whore. And
in GODS time, they who now adhere to her, shall count it their happiness to
follow your Ma. Example.

Behold now your Ma. Happiness in their misery: Their common end (to destroy
Protestants) has Card. Lothar. Practic. Cancel. Hisp. Aphor. Card. 16 22.
made them Confederats*: But God has divided them by their private ends like
Sechem and Abimelech: And juggling Prote^s, of a bloody Dragon, it turned a
crafty Serpent, and seeks his saftie, by wynding betwixt the Iealousies of
these great Princes. He is carried violently as hope and fear, canvasse him:
I^d. 9. 20.
Rut fire will break out from Abimelech and devour Sechem And these Princes
shall dwell in brotherly love, when they receive the Gospel of peace.

This private offering is a fruit and testimony of a commoun joy: the Flower
of the States of this land (present in this City, at the glad news of the
Princes birth) were overjoyed: And this city expressed their loyalty in all
significations, so that no place of these three Kingdoms could exceed. Virum
negotiosis^imum in Repub. Epist. 54.


It was S. Austines discretion to Macedonius a Judge, taken up with public
affairs, not to deteine him with long Epistles: What shall we do to so great
a KING?

Almighty GOD, who has set your Ma. on these three Thrones, multiplee royal
gifts on your sacred person, Psalm. 21. 6
and make You a King of many Royal blessings: That great Britain under you,
and your clement Name, may more and more be a terror to Antichrist, a comfort
to the Saints, and a Land wherein GOD delights to dwell.

AMEN.
Your Ma. most humble Subject, and Servant, M. WILLIAM STUTHER.

The Table of the Thanksgiving.
THE Preface of the Princes Birth. Page 1 1. The first part. King David a
Supplicant. 4. 2. The second part. Of a Monarchy. 6. The Author of it 7. 2.
The Necessity. 8. The Excellency. 11. The Character of K. 12. Their
Limitation. 13. Monarchy the best Government. 15. Affectation of Divinity is
a frenzy. 16 The PoPe taken with that frenzy. 17. Errors about Magistracy.
19. 20. We should pray for Kings. 21. And obey them in the Lord. 21. Three
ways to come to a Kingdom * 1. Conquest. 24. 2. Election. 26. 3. Succession
is better than both. 28. Women's Government lawful. 29 Queen Elizabeth's
instance determines the question 30. King JAMES instance. 30. A newborn
Prince a great blessing. 31. 3. The third part of the Royal Gift. 1. The
habit of Justice. 33. Religion falls under the care of Kings. 37. Popes
debarred them from it. 38. He gulled them by Cannonizing. 39. Some Princes
abused Religion. Reformation a blessing to Princes and People. 40. Popes tie
God to themselves, and loose themselves from God. 43. 2. The work of the
royal Gift is Government. 44. 1. The rule of it good Laws. 45. Difficulty of
judgment, in cause, parties, witness. 46. The necessity and danger of
Forture. 50. Princes Difficulties and Dangers. 52. Flatterers of Princes are
Pests. 54. It is faintness to lay down their Crowns. 56. Piety and Prudence
the Reme^de of their Difficulties. 59. 2. People the Subject of Government. 62.
Man is most obliged and most disobedient. 64. Gods Church most easily governed.
66. King^ governing of themselves* 67. Of their Courts. 69. 3. The fruit of
good Government. Peace. 73. Of the fruits of Peace. 74. Of Wars. 78. The
Purity, and peace of true Religion, their greatest task. 81 It is the greatest
blessing of Mankind. 82. No Mixture with a true Religion. 84. Reconciliation
with a false religion is impossible. 85. Confusions of Holland. 86. Damage of
schis^^es. 89. Three sorts of Kings. 1. Of Gods King. 90. 2. Machiavells
Tyrant. 91. 3. Of the Popes Vassal. 97. The pourtrate of ^ perfect King.* 98.
Tyrants both affright, and are affrighted. 102. Peoples hearts a Kings greatest
conquest. 102. Their love his best Guard. 103. An happy land. 105. Scotlands
happiness. 106. Great Britains Happiness. 107. Speech to the Nobility.
108. To the college of Justice. 108. To Edinburgh. 108. Aprayer for the King.
109. For the Queen. 109. For the Prince 110. For the Subjects. 110. True
Thanksgiving is true o^^dience. 111.
ERRATA.
Page Lin. ^ault. Mend. ^. in Marg. Peremptores. Pa^eicid^^. 44. ^. do more.
Do no more. 47. 2. the their. ^^ ^1. is best. is most. 76. 21. more. dele. 86.
20. (...) (...)

A LOOKING GLASS for Princes and people: Delivered first in a Sermon of
thanksgiving for the Birth of our hopeful PRINCE CHARLES, etc. In the great
Church of EDINBVRGH, etc.
The Preface.
REJOICE in the LORD, ye righteous Psalm. 33. 1.
(says the Prophet) for praise is comely for the upright.

I presume so far of your Christian affection ( Dearly beloved in the Lord)
that I need not exhort you to joy: The cheerfulness of your Countenance
testifies the great joy of your heart; so that it shall only be necessar to
direct you in the use, and expressing of so just and great a joy.

The Lord has blessed us in great mercy with the birth The Birth of ye
Prince: May 29. An. 1630.
of a Prince on Saturnday last, and refreshed us yesternight with these good
tidings: That blessing has many blessings in it: A Child, a Male Child, and a
first borne Male Child that came to perfection: A Son to a Father Polydor
hist. lib 5. Azor. in^^st* tom. 2. lib* 10. cap 1. Ecbertus tot^ ^^ insula
Monarcha. and Edmundus. La^francus totius Insula Britaniae Primas. Concilium.
Angl. Anno. 1085. Binius. tom. 3* part. 1. page 395.
that has no Brother, the apparent Heir of all these three Kingdoms, and (I
may say) The first borre Heir that ever They had. Some Histories wrongouslie
affirm, that some Kings were Monarchs of this whole Isle, and that same error
did creep in the Councels, speaking of Primats: But the first spoke as they
affected, and the other followed that error in simplicity: They borrowed that
style of (a Monarch of the whole Isle) from Severus time, and took the march of
it from his wall. Some have been borne Heirs of several Kingdoms in it, but
till now we find none borne Heirs of them altogether, and that to a King,
standing in the just title and peaceable possession of them all.

These are Gods great mercies to us; and the greater if we consider what our
sins deserve: They cry for judgment and our Conscience tells that we
deserve it more than other Nations that are scourged beyond Sea; but behold
when he might shower down deserved plagues, He sends us undeserved
Blessings.

Gods worship has two odd solemnities, of Fasting, Fasting and thanksgiving
two od solemnities.
and Thanksgiving; but it is more pleasant to have the occasion of solemn
thanks for Blessing received, than of mourning for plagues imminent or
incumbent: And better to hear now our Drums in the street, and Canons in
the Castle, by their sound calling us to these joyful meetings, than to hear
them in the feats of War.

There is no Affection so pleasant to the heart, as Thankesgiving is more
pleasan^.
Joy; it was created in us as a power to make use of good: When the heart has
desired and hoped for good, it cannot but rejoice at the obtaining of it; and
in all these actions about good, it abides most gladly in it self: We
brought evil in the World by sin, and so a necessity of sorrow: In grief
the heart is closed within it self, and has a selfe-consumption for its own
folly. No temporal good enters into our heart, but the joy for it fills it,
and then it delyts to dwell in that Joy as the own Element, and dilateth it
self to utter that joy conceived: As the Ear is opened wide to hear good,
and the Eye to see it, so the Heart to enjoy it, and the Mouth to express that
Joy. And what better expressing, than to power out our hearts on GOD by
thanksgiving? That as He is the Author of our joy, so it may return to Him
again. A well expressed Joy makes a sweet Sacrifice to GOD, and brings
down a new blessing, but excess of joy e^anishing in fleshly insolences,
and not reflecting on GOD, prouokes him whom we should please: Such was the
rejoicing of Pagans in their solemnities, but Gods Word Sicci^e exprimitur
publicum gaudium per publicum dedec^^. Tertul. Apolog. 35.
directs us better. We ought therefore to praise Him for the Blessing
received; and pray for a blessing to that Blessing, that his Mercy there in
may every way appear. And because of our selves, we cannot do this as we
ought; let us call on the Author of the Blessing, and crave such direction from
his Word, that in this solemn and public Joy, we may approve our selves to
Him.

The Text. Psalm. 72.
1. Give the King thy judgments, O GOD, and thy righteousness unto the Kings
Son. 2. He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with
judgment. 3. The Mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little
hills, by righteousness. The first part: K. DAVID a Suter.
LOOK not (Beloved in the Lord) for a full explication of every part of this
Text, The sum and order of the words.
with their doctrines and uses, as we do in Sermons, but only for such
points as this occasion craves: In sum it contains a prayer of King David
for his Son Solomon, and offers three things to our consideration. The
Suter who prays is King David: Next, for whom he prays, it is for Solomon:
And thirdly the things that he suteth, which are three: First, the Gift of
Kingly wisdom; verse 1. 2. The use of that Gift in righteous Judgment:
verse 2. And thirdly the fruit of that Gift so used, Peace and Tranquillity:
verse 3.

For the first, the Suter is King David, a Father for King David a Supplicant.
his Child, a King for his succeeding Son, and a Prophet for one that GOD
was to bless. Nature might move him as a Father to seek the good of his
Son; and Civilitie as a King, a greater Father of a Kingdom, to seek the
good of his Successor: But as a Prophet he is moved diuinly to suit that
which GOD had shown him he was purposed to do: In the first two respects,
he had an ordinary grace as a Father, and a King to seek this Blessing. In
the third: he had an extraordinary gift to augment the former two, being
privy to Gods mind in this particular. Therefore it is not only a Prayer,
but a Blessing: The one suting a Gift, the other conferring the sought Gift, or
rather declaring that it was to be conferred on Solomon.

Parents have a Fatherly authority over their Children to bless them, and are
obliged to seek their good (because Prius peremptores quam parents Bern. hom.
2 super missus est.
like Adam and Eve, they are first their murderers ere they be their Parents)
And Kings as Fathers over their Subjects; but Prophets are above them both in
this point: what the former have by nature, and Parents sensimus peremp tores,
etc. Cypr. de lapsis Sect. 7.
Gods power committed to them, that and more had David, a Prophet, as being
privy to Gods purpose. So that this Prayer is not so much a Prayer for
obtaining, as a prophecy that he shall obtain. That extraordinar Gift is now
ceased in the Church, yet every one Amos cap 3 5
should take heed how he prays: That as the matter he seeks is good in it
self, needful for us, and promised, Cu^ ipse Pater qui largitur ista suggerat
peti, etc. Cypr de ascens. cap. 4. Romans 11. 34.
so it be sought with confidence and liberty. If the Lord so open our hearts to
seek it, he will also satisfy our hearts in granting. None knows his mind,
nor has given him counsel, but when Providence is performing his promises,
he will give some notice of his purpose to his own in these particulars.

GOD had purposed this blessing to Solomon, and now he moves David to pray
for it as a means both to give his purposed Gift to Solomon, and to oblige
David the more for obtaining of it by prayer: The Blessing he has ordained
for us, he gives an heart to seek it, and in the very time of so free and
affectuous seeking, works in us an hope of receiving: For we know not what
Rom 8. 27
we shall pray for as we ought: But the Spirit it self makes intercession
for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searches the
hearts, knows what* is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes
intercession for the Saints according to the will of God. Gods Spirit will not
assist us with a spiritual liberty and confidence, in seeking that, that God
is not purposed to give; for GOD is ever like Himself. Grace compleats all the
parts and degrees of our happiness.


Prayer is on our part a Condition required, and a mean to obtain; and on
Gods part, a sort of beginning and obligeing to give us that blessing that he
has made us to seek. These are both temporary effects of Gods eternal
purpose, and means to perform it: This is the covenant of grace, to turn the
Condition in a promise, and then to perform it in us, that as GOD presents
Salvation under condition of Faith and other works of grace, so he promises
these conditions, and works them in us. He promised that they should
believe, who said, And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, Credituros
promisit, qui dixit, and non docebit ^nusquisq, proximum suum. Reconciliandos
promisit qui dixit propitius ero inquit atibus eorum. etc. Prosper de Vocat.
Gent. lib 1. cap. 9. Ephesians. 2. Psalm. 10. 17 2. Sam. 7. 27. 1 Chr. 17. 25.
Know the Lord. He promised that they should be pardoned, who said, I will
be merciful to their iniquities. He promised that they should obey, who
said, I will put a new heart in them. He promised that they should persevere,
who said, I will put my fear in their heart, so that they shall not depart
from me. So then, Grace purposes, Grace promises, Grace makes us to pray;
and Grace performs the promise in answering our prayers, that it may be
seen We are saved by Grace. This wonderful disposition of Gods Grace in
prayer, is summed up in one verse. Lord, Thou have heard the desire of the
humble, thou will prepare their heart; Thou will cause thine Ear to hear: And
David on this same purpose: Thou have said, That thou will build me an house:
Therefore have I found in mine heart to pray this Prayer to Thee.

To the KING. The second part: Of a Monarchy.
THis much for the Person that prays, To wit King David, the next is, for
whom he prays, and that is the King, even his Son Solomon, and that for
three causes: The first is common to Kings, whom GOD resp^cts Solomon prayed
for.
as his Deputies among men: The next is particular to Solomon, as being
designed in Gods promise to be a successor to David: The third is typical,
because he was the type of Christ, the King of his Church; and so had a right
to competent gifts for his place, for the better typifying of such a truth.
Gods great respect of Kings.


Here is the great respect that God has to Kings, he causes pray for them,
mark their business, and write portions of Scripture for them: So Solomon's
designing to the Crown gave us this Psalm* and his Marriage the 45. Psalm,
and their Acts has given us many Histories in Scripture, that his Providence
about them may be more manifest, and his care of them, may witness his care
of all mankind. God has set them up to be respected as the Heads of humane
Societies, and though there be innumerable people in the World different in
Laws, Manners, Languages, etc. Yet he has summed them up in several
Societies under Princes, and provided not only Order but also degrees whereof
Kings are the Heads. Therefore the holy Apostle calls them, Romans 13. 1
supereminent Powers: and the primitive Church expounded that clearly. We
honor the Emperor next to God, Colimus imperatore(...), etc.
and less than God alone.

This leads us to consider in principality the Author, Tert. ad Scapul. cap.
2.
the Necessity, the Excellency, and Limitation. The Author of Principality,
is GOD, the King of Kings; 1 The Author of Principality is God.
either immediately designing them, as he did David and Solomon, etc. or
mediately moving the hearts of people to choose them. He has made man a
sociall Cum res sit praesta^tissima ordo politicus, etc.
creature delighting in Society: and Necessity, and Profit, has confirmed
that sociablenes, and drawn them together in Societies and Incorporations:
they know Calvin* in hunc locum
by the light of Nature, that Society is better than Solitarines, and that a
multitude with equality has confusion, and Order without Authority is an
Anarchie with Oppression. Therefore, as GOD wisely ordained, so they willingly
admit these graduall respects of higher and lower degrees, and take on that
beautiful Order which he established: He appointes an outward Government to
mankind, and gives the influence of it not indifferently to all, but to Kings
and Princes as the most eminent parts of mankind.

If we look to man simply as he is reasonable it 2. The necessity of
principality.
is not impossible for him to live without public Government, but if we
consider him as he is now with corrupt reason it, is altogether impossible:
He could not live alone without Society, and in Societies he was worse than
alone, because of injuries: the wealthy oppressed the poor, and the stronger
the weak, so that by time Societies agreed upon a common Government, and set
up some one who excelled the rest to govern all, and that common consent gave
him power to rule, and disposed the rest for more hearty obedience. So GOD by
his Law written in their hearts, led them to Government, to deuolue their
power in the hand of one, for eschewing of injuries, and procuring both
public and the private good: Society remeeded Solitariness, and
Principality remeeded the injuries of Societies. Chessan. Catal. part. 5.
cons. 1.


Some have drawn Principality simply from the Ambition of men, because Cain,
Nimrod, and such like were usurpers. But they should distinguish betwixt man's
Ambition and Gods institution: Man had his own ends of vain glory, Avarice,
Revenge, etc. But as GOD was therein punishing sin, so also prouyding Order
among men, and therefore he takes with ^rincipalitie as his own ordinance.
By me Kings reign and Princes decree Justice. There be sundry ways to come
Prover. 8. 8
to a Kingdom: The suffrages of people in Election: Victories in Conquest:
Birth in Succession: But GOD is the Author of Magistracy who gives Kingdoms,
and transferres them at his pleasure. That Kings are, it Dan. 2. 11.
is the divine Law written in the hearts of men: But that such or such a man is
a King, is by divine ^rouidence. They are the most e^inent and conspicuous
Things in the World: Their beginning, course and end see^es to some to be of
Fortune: And such as contemn that blind idol, ascriue them to Fate, an
imaginary necessity beside the will of GOD and Man, but divine Providence
disposes all humane Kingdoms. Divina providentia regna constitu^ntur humana.


Man by sin has drawn on many Necessities, but GOD has appointed lawful
Callings as their Remeede and Supply: and if we compare him to a Body, they
go Man's necessity, and Gods supply by Callings.
in four sorts: The first is of Callings, absolutely necessar for our Being,
as Husbandry and Pasturage, the two Legs whereon the great body of man
stands. We are of the earth, we walk on it, and live by it, and these two
Callings draw the substance out of it, in Fruits and Fleshes for our
necessity. The profit of the Earth is for all: The King himself is served by
the Field. The second is Eccles. 5 9.
of such Callings as beside Necessity have great Profit for our well being;
as Crafts and Merchants: these are busy about the fruits of the former
Callings; the first perfecting them by Art, the other changing these fruits of
Nature and Art; these are as the two Hands, in this great Body. The third is
of such Callings, as beside Necessity and Profit have also Ornament for our
better Being. These are as the Heart of this Body in liberal Sciences and
Professions, etc. They frame and fashion the Soul which is the Man, and make
him a Man properly. The fourth is of such Callings as beside Necessity,
Profit and Ornament, are for human Perfection for our best Being in this
life, and that is Principality and Government; as the Head in the civil Body
perfecting it with humane excellency. But the Pastoral calling answers all
these respects spirituallie.

GOD made all this plain in the beginning. First he Genesis 1. 26.
gave Adam a Being, then appointed him Maintenance, Genesis 2. 16.
and a Law to lead his life: And when he fell, his first business was tilling
of the ground by Cain, and pasturage Genesis 4. 2.
by Abel, as means to help the difficulty of maintenance that came by the
curse laid upon the ^arth for his sins. Thereafter came the invention of
Mechanicke Trades, Gen 4 22.
to make use of the fruits of these two simple Callings, and Government came
in also in the own degrees and periods. Lastly, when men were sensible of
their misery Genesis 4.
spiritual and temporal, and from that sense Seth called his son Enosh (that
is, Miserable or Calamitous) ^hen Religion Genesis 4. 26.
was solemnlie exercised by in-calling on the Name of the Lord. They found such
misery, as neither humane Invention, Industry, nor Government could help;
and therefore took them above all to the Religious worship of God, that he would
mitigate the just curse by his supervenient Blessing, and lead them to a
better Paradyse than they had lost.

Three sorts of Government were in Adam: The Husbandlie Government founded in
Adam.
government over Eua his wife: The fatherly over his Children, and the
Princely over all mankind so long as he lived. The first was more, a bond of
love with his Wife, another himself: The third was a sort of authority, as a
Superior over inferiors: And the second was mixed of Love and Authority. As
mankind increased, so GOD drew out the Line of principality in Families,
Towns and Countries, etc. which are both several parts of Principality and
Images of it: to testify that mankind cannot well subsist without Government.
Every man carries the image of it in himself, he has a body of many parts,
and every part has the own temper and form, to be a seat or instrument of
some power in him. The Soul likewise has diversity of powers, to understand,
remember, will, etc. And yet notwithstanding of this diversity, they have all
such a respect unto other, that they submit themselves to a government for the
good of every one severally, and of the whole man, in which respect we may
call Man, A little Kingdom.

Government then is of absolute necessity, without which Princes give a
civil life to a Land.
neither House, nor City, nor Nation can stand, no not the nature of things,
nor the world it self: For what is a multitude of people without it, but a
liuelesse and confused mass? They are not set to work in their several
callings, neither have they fruit of their labors, neither use, nor enjoying
of their fruits: But Government as a vigorous life quickens all, gives a
beauty to the body, and a sort of ability to every particular member. It is
principally in the head, and from thence flows to every member, to enable
it for its own office: I need not to enlarge this point. This City, and other
places of this Kingdom that were sometimes quickened, and warmed civillie by
the presence of Kings, are now in a languishing Widow-hood, because of the
far distance of that warming Sun.

Principality makes a great relation in mankind: It is the 3. The excellency
of principality.
Head, and such an Head as receiving due respects from other Callings, imployes
it self again to their good: They sustain it by their offices and labors,
and it recompenceth them with a mutual sustaining, in that it prouydeth for
them both liberty to labor in their Callings, and peace to enjoy the fruit
of their labors, without which the better their Lotte be, the greater cross,
if it be pulled away by war or oppression.

It is Gods Wisdom to rule man by Man, and to set up The kindly and sweet
relation betwixt Prince and people.
some of Mankind above the rest: Though Kings be of the same kind by Nature, yet
their degree and Spirit make them seem to be of another kind, that the mutual
duties of commanding and obeying, may be the more distinct: And then to make
them the more pleasant, he has bound these far distant degrees in the bond of
one kind: Kings command their Inferiors, lovingly as their own kind, and
Inferiors obey Kings willingly, as their own kind: The communion of the kind
distinguished by God in degrees keeps that Relation contentedlie: The Head,
the Hands, and the Feet differ in their places and offices, yet are all one
flesh in one Body: The Head commands them not rigorously, neither do they
obey it grudginglie, but all their Offices are done in love to other. The
disposing of these places and degrees are absolutely in Gods hand, and he
commands every one to apply themselves to other according to their place. This
is the Finger of God to make Authority as a vigorous life to quicken a
Kingdom, and then to bind it up in such agreement, that many thousands of
different conditions do submit themselves to one.

Princes have this Excellency of Spirit, not so much from The Character of
Principality is of GOD immediately.
their Birth or bodily temper as from God immediately: He creates in them a
reasonable Soul, to m^ke them Men, and gives them a princely Spirit to make
them Kings among Men. David was of private breeding, but so soon as GOD took
him from behind the Ewes and set him upon the Throne; he gave him an heroicke
Spirit. Their Birth indeed gives them great Privileges; but the royal
Spirit is not infalliblie annexed to it: GOD reserueth it to his own free
dispensation: he has set them as Heads of Societies, and the Head is
plenished with Understanding, and with more Senses than the Body, for it is the
seat of all the Senses, and none but the sense of Feeling is diffused through
the whole body, and that flows from the Head. So Kings by their place should
be accomplished with humane perfections above their Subjects. This has with it
a largeness of heart to ouer-reach private spirits as far as their place is
above them, and that both in foresight to project their business, and
Prudence to manage it. And they have as large affections of joy and grief, and
their fruits answerable in Contentment and miscontentment. Their ordinar
measure in these things would be excesses to over whelme private Spirits:
Their greatest place occasioneth them greatest humane contentments, but lest
they become insolent as great miscontentments are annexed. So God has
counterpossed these great things in greatest Spirits, both to keep them from
extremities, and to hold them on the Balance of Equabilitie.

Power and Authority are invisible in themselves, but visible The signs of
principality.
in their outward signs, and the more evident, the greater difference they
make betwixt Kings and Subjects. Princes are men as other, yet are they far
in dignity above other, as the patterns of native Nobility that comes of
Birth, and the Fountain of dative Nobility that flows from Princes favor.
Though it fall out otherwise, sometimes for just causes, yet in an abstract
consideration they ought to be, and usually are the choysest Men in humane
perfections.

A special sign is that Majesty wherewith God stampeth 1. In their
countenance.
their countenance, to tell what Spirit dwells in such a Body: Though they
be but Men, yet that Majesty in their countenance equalleth their place. This
Quantus motus sit ad una^ iussionem imperatoris, Aug hom 16. Prove. 19. 12.
makes their very silence to be awful and imperio^s, it confounds
sometimes the most resolute Spirits, and puts posed wits to precipitation.
His whispering in his Chamber sets all his Kingdom on work, and the only
moving of his lips puts all his Provinces to business: But if they speak
in passion, it is like the roaring of the Lion. This can be no thing else but
the hand of GOD, that makes so sensible a difference between ruling and ruled
Spirits in one kind of Creature.

Next, God has given them four Ensigns of a kingly 2. In their Ornament.
Aut capite Diadema, aut in manu Sceptrum. Tertul. advers. Iud. cap. 10.
Power. The Throne as the ground of their Authority under God: The Scepter,
the sign of their Law-making, or Nomoth^ticke wisdom, by its touchgiuing
life to Laws: The Sword to execute Laws, as a token that all the Swords of
their Subjects are at their command for War and Peace: And the Crown, as the
sign of Glory, arising of the right use of all the former. God bestowed on
Solomon such a royal Majesty as had not been in any King 1 Chr 29. 25 2 Chr.
^. ^.
of Israel before: For the Lord his God was with him, and magnified him
exceedingly.

Their Place is great indeed to be Gods Vicegerents on Earth, yet that
greatness is not absolute, but has the The limitation of Princes.
own limitation: Their power is as well bounded as their Persons: Mortality
boundeth their life, so does Providence their Power; and that on Gods part by
Communication for the original, and overruling for the use, and on their part
dependence on God, and subjection to a reckoning hemmeth it in. I said, Ye are
Gods, and all of you the Children of the most High: But ye shall die like men.
It is Psalm 82. 6. 7. Sciunt quiillis dederit impertum a quo sunt secunds post
quem primi, etc. Tertul. Apol cap. 30.
not of themselves, but lent of God, and not for themselves but for him and his
people: It carries in it self an obligement to use it to his glory whom they
represent, and a care in that use to do nothing that is not worthy of him:
When Goodness and Greatness meet in them they are glorious Images of God,
but when their greatness is void of goodness, they are hurtful to mankind,
and make the Name of God to be evil spoken of: So long as they govern
aright, their government is acceptable to God; but if they abuse their power,
and follow their own will and not Gods, then he disclaimes their government:
They reigned, but not of me. The excellency Hos. 8. 4.
of their Calling cannot expiate these faults of their Person, but procures a
double wrath:

If they look only to their place; as coming by Birth or peoples favor, or
their own worth, without respect to God, they cannot but swell in pride with
Nebuchadnezar: But when they take them as out of Gods hand, they will reverence
him, and use them to his glory; and that wise employment shall prove a way to
a better Eccles^ 5. 9. Psalm. 51. Soli Deo reus quia hominem non habet qui ^ius
facta d^^udi cet. Cassiod. ibid.
Crown in Heaven. They are indeed above their Subjects* yet God is above
them, the most High and higher than the highest: David knew that he both
injured Uriah and his people, and that they could not correct him for his
offense, yet he saw the punishment in Gods hand, and being afraied thereof,
cried out, Against thee, against thee, only have I sinned. He confessed
himself guilty to God alone, because he had no man who might judge his fault.

Of all that is said arises a confirmation for a Monarchy: 1. Monarchy is
the best sort of Government.
a Refutatio^ of some errors: And a Direction in some duties. For a Monarchy
this Text is plain, because it speaks of a King, appointed and allowed of
GOD in mercy: Sundry sorts of Government have been devysed as Monarchy,
Aristocracie, and Democracie* and these either simple or in diverse mixtures,
but so that some one form did preponder Tum Resoub. id est res popul^ been ac
just geritur sive ab una Rege* sive a paucis optimatibus, sive ab universo
populo. August* de Civi^. Deilib, 2. cap 20.
the rest, and gave the name to the whole. Though all be good in themselves,
and God can serve himself of any of these, yet they all point at a Monarchy
as the best: For supreme power is to be found in them all, but the difference
is in the number of the Persons: For that same supreme Power, which Monarchy
has in one Person, Aristocracie has it in some few of the best, and
Democracie in the multitude of the people, so that every one of them is a
Monarchy indeed diversified in the number of Persons.

As for their Practice, when more ruled, they feared the usurpation of some one,
and upon that fear as they saw Their practice is Monarchy.
any excel the rest in Riches, Wisdom, or Friendship, they served him with
an Athenian Ostracisme, or a Syracusian Petalisme, and for one years ruling,
cast him in ten years banishment: But by time they saw the ill of that censure,
that it made worthy men hold back from public meddling, and opened a door
to unworthy ambitious men to misguide all: And the Romans who like a feverous
man, changed all sorts of government to find out the best, as Kings, Consuls,
Tribuns, etc. were forced in great danger to choose a Dictator, and in end
turned to a Monarchy, which is nothing but a perpetual Dictatorship. And when
Augustus fained politically to lay down the Empire, the Senate requeasted him
to keep it still, they had been burnt so often with the violence of a
tribunitious government, that they chused rather to hazard on the faults of
one Monarch, than the furies of a multitude.

Every form of government has the own Commodities, but Monarchy has more,
and all these disputes Monarchy is the end of all.
that conclude for a Monarchy, do understand such a Monarch as is furnished
with these three most essential gifts: Perspicacitie in judgment: Honesty in
designs: and constant stabilitie. There is but one head and one heart in the
Body, one Sun for the day, and one Moon for the night: And Birds, Beasts,
and Bees, have but one Leader of their company: And God set up but one Moses,
one Joshua, and one Judge in Israel at once. He reproved Israel for seeking a
King, not because of the unlawfulness of a Monarchy, but for loathing the
government of Judges which he had established, and that ruled more moderately
than the Kings of the Nations:

The errors to be refuted are these which have fallen either 1. Error in
Princes: affectation of Divinity.
in Princes or people. Some Princes looking only to their greatness above
their Subjects, have forgotten that they were men, and sought to be counted and
called Gods: They doated so on their prerogatives as to be ashamed of
Humanity, and puffed up with Victories above men, would not be men any longer,
but set forward their Conquest to Heaven. So Alexander in his floorishing
state, and Domitian and Caligula in the midst of their pleasures, and Caius was
so confident of a Divinity, that he pitied the Jews, who would not count
him as a god: That same pity (if we trust the Stoickes, who banish that
passion from their wise men) might tell him, that he was but a frail man. But
they were as senseless of the inward convictions of their error, as they were
ignorant of the Truth.

There fell never such a frenzy in man, as to be tickled with That conceate
is a great frenzy
a desire to be a god, or a conceate that he is so: Sound Humanity knows
that Divinity is a thing transcendent, and they who are sick of that disease,
are void of sound judgment and have put off Humanity it self. it was
Satan's bait to Adam in the beginning, but he proponed it afterward in a
grosser sort to such as was sick of Ambition: And it fell not in good Princes,
but in the worst, for Domitian, Caligula, and such Monsters were greedy of that
honor, but Augustus, Titus and Traian were not so. They were conscious to
themselves of great wickedness, and knew that the world abhorred them, yet
they would cover all with that fair color, as to be better than all men,
while they were the pests of their time: But a good King needs not seek to
be counted a god, for he is better than any of the gods of the Heathen. But
all that affectation of a Godhead Ante ^mnes Deos and super ^mnes Deos. Tertul.
Apol. Cap. 30.
was gross Atheism; for if they had thought that there were any Gods, they
would not have usurped upon their place or office: And it proved that these
injured gods were not at all, for if they had been, they would not have
suffered themselves to be oppressed by a multitude of Monsters, who did not so
much vex them by that encroaching, as destroy their account by profanesse.
That multiplication of gods destroyed their fear and respect among men.

I know not whither it was a greater trick in Satan, or It is Satan's policy.
madness in them, to seek a place among the gods: But it testified in them
both, a mocking of the gods, whom they counted no better than Companions to
such Monsters* for they were as far dishonored, as these men were honored
imaginarilie; but indeed all was alike here. Though we follow that
distinction of Lares and August. civit. lib. 9. cap. 10
Larvae good and evil Spirits, or their Manes, whose good or ill was
uncertain, yet it is sure, that the best of their gods were but men, and the
most part either cruel oppressors or filthy Atheists. Bacchus was a
drunkard, Hercules a Palliard, Jupiter a Parricide, Venus a Whore, and Gentium
numina scelerum nomin. ^.
in a word, the gods of the Gentiles were but the names of Vices: But indeed
Satan had an higher intention to dishonor the true GOD, and exalt
wickedness, while he purchased a commendation to Vices (which are too
alluring of themselves) by the color of Religion, and a Divinity. GOD
punished that frenzy in Herod, for suffering Iovem non magis regno quam vitijs
principem Cypr. Epist. 2 Portenta non numina, Cyp de va^t. idol. sect. 2.
the people cry, The voice of God and not of man; he refuted their flattery,
and punished his pride, by making worms at once to breed of him, and feed on
him: He is a miserable god who is turned in the matter and food of worms, and
in one instant is both their Mother and Nurce. God took that summar course
with him, because he usurped upon the true God, whereas Pagans usurped upon the
false gods only, who were as wicked as themselves.

We would count that madness fabulous, if the Popes brought The Pope is taken
with that frenzy.
it not on the Stage again, and none but they in the Christian world; for
Pagan Princes find no Successors of their pride in the Throne of Kings, but
only in Peter's Chair: And what wonder, since they profess a power by
Consecration, to make stones and stocks to be adored with a relative and
terminatiue worship; and give Pontificale de Consecratione Imaginum. Minor est
si tune Deus dicitur. Tertul. Apol. Maledictum est, ante Apothensim Caesarem
Deum nuncupare. Tertul. Apol. 34. Nec Deus es nec bomo.
power to Priests, by mumbling of five words to creat their Creator: Why may
not the Author of so many gods call himself a God? and crave adoration: The
concoat of their transcendent power, has transported them from their wits; for
under other names and colors they follow the pride of Alexander and Domitian
to be counted gods, and of Diocl^tian to be adored as a god while he lived:
And that more damnablie than they, because these Princes were ignorant of the
true GOD, and the Divinity they affected was worse than Humanity: But Popes
prosessing the true God, and usurping his Name and Titles, are more
sacrilegious than they. They will not bide so low as to be Men, and cannot be
gods, therefore they must be some third thing, and what that is may be known
by their Luciferian pride.

The errors about principalitiie in people are two especially: 1 Anabapenemies
to Magistracy.
The first of Anabaptists who think that Magistracy cannot stand with Christian
Religion, as though Christ who came to persite man by grace, destroyed good
order among men: His Redemption loses us from sin, but not from the ordinance
of GOD; he came to destroy the works of Satan, but not the works of God:
And Christian Religion in the Magistrate is so far from taking away his
power, that it adds moreover an aptitude to use his Power aright: And in
Subjects it loses not the obligement of obedience, but confirms it Si quis
putat quoniam Christianus est, etc. Aug. propos. 72. ex Epist ad Romans
For if any man think because he is a Christian that he needs not pay
tribute, nor give due honor to Superiors, he falls in a great error. Iudai
non peccarunt dicendo non habemus Regem nisi Caesare^, sed quia abnegarunt
Christum. Aug. Ps. 55.
And the Jews sinned not, because they said, they had not a King but Caesar,
but because they denied Christ. It is a singular work of God to erect and
maintain a right Government in the world: Singular Dei opus est rectum in
mundo princi^ patum erigere ac tueri. Calvin in hunc locum. Romans 13.
And the Apostle has commanded us to render tribute to whom tribute is due,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.

The mystical Body of Christ is not a multitude of one gift, one degree, and
one office, but in diversity of gifts and Operations does respect other.
Preheminency in Princes, and Subjection in people stand well with grace, and
the holy Spirit can direct the one in commanding, and the other in obeying
without any disparagement of grace: for he who said, By me Kings do reign,
says also, Let every Grace and Magistracy agree, Prove. 8. Romans 13. 1.
Soul be subject to the higher Powers: Since grace then has the own order
and degrees in his mystical Body, it can well agree with the order and degrees
he has made in the civil Body of Kingdoms. The like may be seen in
Heathen Princes, Potes and officio ^urisaictionis tuae fungi and humanitatis
meminisse. Tertul ad ^cap cap. 4.
for their jurisdiction destroys not their humanity but they may keep them
both, it enableth Humanity in them to curb the inhumanitie of oppressors. The
heavenly City of the Church is here lodged in the earthly City of worldly
Kingdoms, and it were a bad requit all for that her lodging to destroy them:
Therefore let that heavenly City obey the Laws of that earthly City, so
long as she soio^^nes in it, that since mortality, is common to both Cities,
concord may be kept between them in things that concern it.

These men do sin against God; the law of Nature, and the good of humane
Societies Ambros. Hexam. lib. 5 passim.
for even reasonlesse creatures have a King of their own kind, and submit
themselves to him. It is but a fleshly license that they seek under the name of
a Christian liberty Secundum istas vestras fallacissimas ^anissimasq. rations
habenis laxatis. Aug. contr. epist. Gaud* lib. 2. cap. 1^.
as was said of old to the Donatists their forefathers, according to these
deceitful and vain opinions the raines are loosed to humane license, and all
sin left unpunished, that a boldness to hurt, and a liberty of wantonness
may reign without the bar, and opposition of Laws: Yea, take away that
which wholesome Doctrine commands wisely by the holy Apostle for the health
of the World: Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers.

The second is a popular error of some, who think that 2. A popular error
that Princes get good, but gives none to their people.
Magistrates receive only benefit of Subjects, and give no recompense again:
But they should remember that duties betwixt Princes and people are mutual,
and their fruits also: The wise governing of Kings, and peace following, is as
great a good as people can give to them: GOD has tied them together by mutual
respects and the more they are kept by both the parties, the more they
increase; and there is neither possibility nor hope of safety to either but in
their agreement. The people of Rome fell in this same error, they departed
from their Senate, because they sat in ease, while the people endured labor
and lose of war: But Menenius Agrippa cured that error by a popular
comparison.

All the parts of the body (said he) were angry on a time at the Belly,
because by their care and service all things were purchased for it, which in
the mean time had ease in the midst ^ivius Dec^d. 1. lib. 2
of the Body, and enjoyed the fruit of their labors: Heerevpon they
conspired against it, that the hands should not bear meat to the mouth, nor
the mouth receive it, nor the teeth bray it: But while by this anger, they
would dantoun the Belly, all the members of the Body fell in extreme
consumption whereby it appeared that the service of the Belly was not in
vain, and that it was no more nourished, than did nourish the body, while it
sent out prepared food to every part: Theerfore they resolved to quyte their
miscontentment, and do their wonted offices to the Belly. By this rude and
populare Oration, the people of Rome began to hear of concord, and at once
were reconciled to their Senate: The Bees give the like respect to their King,
he alone among Ambros. Hex. lib. 5. cap. 21
so busy laborers, is exeemed from labor, and yet is placed in the midst and
largest room of the throng Hyue.

The directions for people are to pray for Princes, and obey People should 1.
pray for Princes.
them in the Lord: Gods care of Kings, is both for their Place which he
assigns unto them, and for their work to be his Instruments for the good of
mankind: And therefore, people are bound in the Lord, to honor them for their
place, so far above them: To love them for their work, so profitable for
them: And to commend Nos pro salute imperatoris Deum in vocamus a ternum. Ter.
cap. 30. 1 Timothy 2. 1.
them daily to GOD, that he would hold their Heart in his hand, and magnify
his ordinance in their government: So David's example in this place, and the
Apostle commands us to make Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions for all men,
for Kings, and for these that are in authority. Their condition also craves
this, for their education is usually in liberty without controlement; and
since corruption in Subjects breaks out in great insolences, What may it do
in Kings? great power without great wisdom, and a special assistance of God
is dangerous both to the possessours and those they rule. Their place lays
them open to many dangers, and therefore a necessity on our part to pray
earnestly for them.

Our prayers are both for their good, and our own: though Such prayers are our
profit.
the fruit come first on Princes, yet in the next room it comes to us: The
rain that falls on the mountains bydeth not there, but slydeth down to the
Valleys: So when servent prayers bring down blessings on Kings, the people
are therein blessed also. When the Apostle bids us pray for Kings, he
tells that our fruit shall be a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness
and honesty, and 1. Tim. 2. 1.
when God bids his people pray for the peace of the City where they dwell
in captivity, he promises that in Ier. 29. 7.
their peace they shall have peace.

The standing and falling of Princes imports their Subjects 1 Kings 24.
greatly: So long as David walked in his vprightnes, God blessed him and his
people, but when he waxed proud, Satan tempted him to number them, and they
were punished. And when Rehoboam forsook the Lord, he fell not alone, but all
Israel fell with him. When one of the people goes wrong, he alone perishes,
but the error of the Prince involveth many, and hurts all that he rules. Si
quis de populo deviat, solu^ perit: Verum Principis error multos involvit.
Bernard. Epist. 1^7.
The fall of Kings is the punishment of people, for as by their virtue we are
safe, so by their error we are in danger. Therefore we should pray to God
that we may have a glorious and perfect King. Regun^ lapsus p^na populorum est
Amb. Apo Dav^d. Quapropter utile est ut bon^ diu lateq. regnent. Aug. Civ. Dei
lib. 4. cap. 3.
It is then most profitable that good Kings reign long, and that profit is
not so much to themselves as to these they rule: For their Piety and goodness
(which are the Lords great gifts) suffice them to true happiness, but the
blessings of their good government comes down to their Subjects.

The next duty required of Subjects, is to obey them in 2 Obey them in the
Lord.
the Lord, and that not of fear but of Conscien^e. If it be of fear only,
then their subjection is servitude, and themselves are Slaves, but when it is
of Conscience, their obedience is Sonlie, and they themselves loyal Subjects.
Then they obey for Conscience, when they reverence Gods ordinance in Princes,
and have reference to God, the Author of their power, and the Judge and
Rewarder of obedience. Let every Soul be subject to Superior Powers, Romans
13. 1.
for the powers that are, are ordained of God: And that not for wrath, but for
Conscience.

Of Succession in a Monarchy. THE KINGS SON.
THis is King Solomon: For David was a King, but not a Kings Son, and Absolon
and Adonijah were Kings Sons, but not Kings; so according to the Letter, this
Text is proper to Solomon and his Posterity, whereof two things arise: Gods
designation appointing him to be King, and the Prophets acquiescing thereto.

Gods designation was that Solomon among all David's Sons Gods designation of
Solomon.
should succeed him in the Throne: Behold, a Son shall be borne unto thee,
who shall be a man of rest: He shall be my Son, and I shall be his
Father, and I will establish 1. Chro. 22. 8 9. 2. Sam. 7* 13. 1. Chro. 28. 5
the ^hrone of his Kingdom over Israel for ever. Whereupon King David said to
his people. The Lord has chosen my Son Solomon among all my Sons, to sit on
the Throne. He was not a stranger, but known, and near to David* not a
friend or Cousing, but his Son, whereby God established the Kingdom in
David's Line by Succession.

Herein we have a clear Doctrine for Succession in Kingdoms: Great disputs
have been made about these three ways of coming to a Kingdom, Election,
Succession, Three ways to come to a Kingdom.
and Conquest, but God here concludes for Succession. Every one of these has
both the own good and ill, but that is best, which has least ill and most
good, and that is Succession. Man by nature is desirous to reign, and oftimes
the least worthy are most ambitious to conquer. Therefore the ordinary remeeds
against Conquest are 1. Conquest is violent.
Election and Succession: Conquest is nothing but violence, and a formal
tyranny, it begins with blood, it grows, and is kept with blood; Pride
and fear in the Conqueror, and Hatred in them that are conquered, are the due
relations of it. Their subjection is not of love, but constraint; and while
their bodies are awed, their wills rebel with a continual wishing and waiting
of opportunity, to oppress their oppressors: As it begins with violence,
so it must stand, and the usual ^illers for that standing, are the destroying
of the Race of former Rulers, and the making of new Laws, that their new Body
may have a new life, and new sinews, Machiavell de principe. Conquerors abuse
Providence.
and may live by the death of former Laws, and Races.

But two things seem to warrant Conquest, Providence and Prescription:
Providence puts such a people under the Conquest of such a King; and
Prescription in civil matters seems to mend the error of a faulty right.
But concerning Providence, men's faults should not be fathered on it; GOD is
ever just, in punishing a Nation by oppressing her liberties, when the cup of
their sin is full: And vet the Instruments of that oppression do sin
grieuouslie; for while God is in the work of his Justice, they are serving
their own ambition: They have neither Gods end before them, nor the
disposition that he requires, but in their Conquest are like Nimrods mighty
Hunters, and oppressers, while GOD is a just Judge, So he speaks of Ashur. O
Assyrian! the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is my
indignation: I will Esa. 10. 5. 6.
send him against an hypocritical Nation, and against the people of my wrath
will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to
tread them down like the mire in the streets. Howbeit he means not so,
neither does his heart think so, but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off
Nations, not afew: They look neither to Gods glory, nor man's good, but to the
satisfying of their own humor.

Prescription is not a full and just right, it can neither denude Prescription
alone is not sufficient.
the lawful Possessour of his right, nor invest the Usurper with a sufficient
right before God, or in conscience, It is rather tolerate, for eschewing
endless pl^a^s then allowed: Though it make a fashion of right before men, yet
with GOD it is nothing, but a long usurpation (except consent of people follow)
for what is not valide from the beginning, cannot be made valide by process
of time. GOD indeed has ever just cause to punish Nations for sin, but if
we ask Conquerours, wherefore they trouble peaceable people, and destroy men,
women and Children? we shall find no other thing written in their heart, but
Pride in a burning desire of reigning. Infer bella ^in. timis qu^d aliud quam
grande latro einium nomi^ nandum est. Aug. de C^^. lib. cap. 4. 6.
They trouble the peace of mankind and shed blood for this only end, that
they may be called Conquerours, whereas more justly they may be called the
Pests of mankind. To make war on Neighbor Nations, and tread down innocent
people for no other end but desire of reigning, what should it be called else
but a great Robbery.

Therefore that Pyrate Elegante^ enum and veraciter Alexandro Magno Pirata
respondit. Aug. C^vit 4 c. 4
is ^ustlie commended for his witty answer, he gave Alexander, who den
anded, Why he troubled the Seas with Pyracie?? He answered. And why do
thou rob the world? for there is no difference between us, but that I do it
with a little Ship, and thou do it with a Navy. So slaugh er committed by
one, is counted a Crime, but don* by Armies is counted Courage. Impunt ^itatem
sceleribus ac quirit, etc Cyp. ad D^na.
And the greatness of the cruel^ie: and not Innocence makes great sins
unpunished. There is no difference between a Brigand and such Conquerours, but
that the one is liable to the Laws, and is punished, because he is weak; the
other is counted a Conqueror, and makes Laws of his own, because he is
strong.

This Prescription is now the maine ground whereby the Prescription the maine
ground of the Popes Usurpation over Princes
Pope maintains his usurpation over Kings. He sees that Reason has beaten him
from his three old pretended grounds, of divine right, Tradition of the
Apostles, and Donation of Princes. Therefore he is come now to this fourth
ground of prescription the last refuge of oppressors: But it is as weak as it
is new and kindly to such a new Usurper. They should remember their own
laws. He who alleges Prescriptio^ ought also to prove a just Title, Dur
and, spe cul lib. 4. 2. 25 marta de lurisdict part, 1. cap. 33. number. 13.
because Prescription without a title is but corruption. They could never as
yet prove a Title, but a late Usurpation, as is manifest in their usual
sophistry; for when we require a reason from Scripture and antiquity of their
usurpation over Princes, they give us the fact or deed of some usurping Pope.

Concerning Election to Kingdoms, if men were patient to suffer Providence
rule the matter: Or they who Election to Kingdoms is tumultuous.
have voycetherein, were so just as to give it where they see God has given
worth* surely it were a good way to enter to a Kingdom: But since all men are
corrupt, and the most un worthy are most ambitious, they supply that want of
worth by the purchase of voices: They also who have suffrage, are vsuallic
carried more with Hope and Fear than with Conscience, therefore it comes to
pass that Election makes oft-times Butcheries in Kingdoms: and what
difference is there between foreraine invasion by Conquest, and factions
within by Election? but that the one is from without, and the other at home.
Election is both the occasion and matter of tumults: And it is as hard to find
many Electors agree in one, as it is to find their agreement in good. But
Succession is ruled of God, who provydeth himself of Princes in the womb, and
thereafter blesses them with a more princely Education than if they were
elected: It is not so much free election that caries the matter as the force of
a prevailing Faction: Even as in the factious choosing of Popes, he is not
enrolled as an lawful Pope, who was Canonicallie elected, Satiut esse
exist^mabant eos intrusot qualescunq, tolerandos. Baron. An. 897. number. 1.
but he who had the strongest faction: And his Competitor, though both more
worthy, and chosen Canonicallie, if he could not make his cause good by
force, is called the Antipope: They give us the reason hereof, that though
they came by tyranny, yet it was better to tolerate them, than to rent the
Church with a Schism.

This also brought on the ruin of the Impyre, for It hastened the ruin of the
Impyre.
Augustus invented a Praetorian band of 1200 old Soldiers, in show to
strengthen the Impyre, but indeed it ruined it; and that by the occasion of
Election, making themselves master of Armies, Senate and Emperor: For after
that Julius race ended, they took too much on them, and afterward carried the
matter absolutely, and set up, and cast down Emperors at their pleasure. In
so much, that they cared not to change Emperors every day, that they might
find daily Donatiues and Rewards. So the way Tertul, apol.
to come to the Impyre, was neither men's worthiness, nor the Election of the
Senate, but the violence of the Pretorian band, who being altogether saleable,
preferred them, who gave largest money. In like manner do the Ianisars, the
Turks Pretorian band; and so will the Jesuits, the Popes Iamsars do, when
they have hanked up the affairs of Popery in their hands.

But Succession is better than either Conquest or Election: It 3. Succession is
the best way.
wants the tumults of Election, and the violence of Conquest, and is most
acceptable to people, beginning with birth, and confirmed by education. It
burieth the seeds of changes, but Election keeps them green and fresh as a
tusked wall in building, makes more way for building. It relieveth Kings of
many cares how to come to a Kingdom, and how to gain the love of their
people. Their birth prevents these cares, and at once possesses them both in
their Kingdom and their peoples heart. It is also most pleasant to people,
because it secures them from fear of changes, that come of Conquest or
Election and settleth their Affections sweetly on their native Prince. They
delight rather to be under a known Lord, than a stranger. The Sons of their
Kings are brought up amongst their; they know their dispossion and manners, and
how to deal with them in their afaires: They need neither an Interpreter for
language (a great band of humane Society) nor a Mediator to the love of a
native Prince: They count them their Fosters and Consorts in a manner, and from
the very womb their hearts embrace them as their desired Heads. What is the
great Joy at the birth of Princes? such as (blessed be God) I see in you all
this day, bot the hand of God wedding the hearts of people to their newborn
Princes, and the earnest and engaging of a constant love to them hereafter.
That bond is native and strong that begins at the Birth, yea, and sooner in
the great desire that people have of native Princes before their Birth, and God
who begins so soon, confirms it by time to the mutual comfort of Prince
and people.

Moreover, both Election and Conquest yield to Succession Election and Conquest
yield to succession.
as the best way to come to a Kingdom: For Conquerors being settled, do
labor to stablish it to their Posterity by Succession. And many Kingdoms
sometimes Elective are turned to Succession, and it is likely that the
remanent will do so be times: And so both Conquest and Election by an open
consent do acknowledge Succession to be the best way in that they affect to
be changed in it.

Some (good men otherwise) have spoken harshlie of women's Women's government
lawful.
Government as an inconvenient of Succession; But that was more from some
particular, than the matter it self: They distinguished not betwixt the faults
of some persons, and the equity of Gods ordinance. They wrested the These to
their own Hypothese, and in a preiudicate manner determined the cause by some
badde accidents of their Scripseram cum resinter nos turbulentissima essent.
time, as though the matter were so in itself, and had ever been so as they
saw it practiced in some. This was to give Laws to God, and not to expone his
Providence as it runs in the own liberty and latitude, but to force upon it
such a construction as pleased them. But others speak more moderatly, that
there was nothing more unjust, than the Lata est illa Lex Vocon^a, nequis
haeredem faeminam faceret, nec unicam siliam. etc. Aug. Ci^it. lib. 3. cap. 21
Numb. 7. 8.
Law of the Romans, that discharged men to make their Daughters their Heirs.
And God gives this Law in the case of Zelophehads Daughters, that they succeed
in their fathers portion of Canaan as they were Sons. If a man die, and have
no Sons, then he shall cause his inheritance to pass to his Daughter.

This Yland in our time has seen two great instances Q. Elizabeth's instance.
in the right of Succession: The first in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth (of
happy memory) in whom God refuted reallie that Objection that is taken from
women's government: He blessed her forty five years Reign, with such
prosperity, both spiritual and worldly, as few Kings could equal. Of former
times only Zenobia seems to strive with her, but she is nothing like: for
what she did was by borrowed forces; and after she had proven valorous for a
time, was taken captive to Rome, led in triumph, and died private: But
Elizabeth did all (under God) with her own Forces; she lent Armies to others,
as this Land, France, and the Low Countries can testify: and after a long
prosperous Reign, dyed in her own Palace, in a true Religion, in peace with
God, love of her Subjects, commendation of her enemies, Thuan.
and admiration of the world.

The other was in the succeeding of K. James (of happy K. James his instance.
memory) In his Youth Papists fed themselves with a conceit of the
possibility of his turning and that without any occasion of that fancy offered
by him: But when he expressed his love to the Truth by his Letters to Q
Elizabeth, and by the Monuments of his ingrne, and specially in that Basilicon
Doron; they turned their hopes in despair, and took them to plot his debarring
from England: and when the Pope had written Brieues for that end, and all men
looked for wars, God in mercy according to the right of Succession, gave him a
peaceable entry to that Kingdom, and kept this Yland from the invasion of
strangers, and factions within: They found their former peace continued when
God had provided him one, who could as well by his Tongue and Pen mainetaine
the Truth as by his Sword.

But we need not dispute where God has determined, he Gods determination.
promised to the King of Israel, that if he would adhere to him in his
government, he should prolong his days* and the days of his Sons in the
midst of Israel. And when Deuteronomy. 17. 26
he had set David on the Throne, he stablished the Crown in his Line by
Succession, and put it in a promise as a blessing. When thy days shall be
fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, I will set up thy Seed
after thee, 2 Samuel 7. 12.
which shall proceed out of thy Bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom.
Therefore (all things being duly considered) Succession is the best way to
come to a Kingdom.

The next point is David's acquiescing to Gods designation, David rests on Gods
designation
testified by this prayer for his Son: Herein he found sure grounds for
rest: He had obtained a great blessing, he rejoiced and prayed for the
continuance of it, and thanks God for giving him such a Son as was able for
so great a Kingdom: Shall not a soul rest in the sense of Gods mercy, in a
joyful praising and confident praying for more? It is kindly to a Father to
rejoice in his Sons succeeding and a work both of sound Nature and of grace:
Nature makes them love the Child who is another themselves, and Grace makes
them rejoice in Gods ordinance: Where can it fall more pleasantly to them,
then in their Son, who is not so much another person as themselves, and that
not decaying or dying, but waxing and surviving.

Some Kings have been so unnatural as to cut off Barbarous Princes cruel
against their Children.
their Sons in ^ealousie, as Solomon did to Mustapha, and some write, that
Constantine moved with Calumnies killed Crispus his Son, though other deny
it; but let that cruelty bide with Barbarians. Barbaritie is the dreg and ure
of Humanity, till it be refined by Letters, and Sustition, and false Religion
makes them more unnatural. So soon as the father dies, the most powerful
Brother embrues his Funerals in the blood of all the rest of his Brethren; but
there the father bathed himself in the funeral of his son. Gods fear
teaches Christian Kings to rejoice, when they see their Sons in their
Thrones; but Tyrants, as they desire none to reign with them, so they wish
that the Kingdom and world ended with them.

Of all this second point, is manifest, that a Kings Son A Kings Son is a
great Blessing.
is a great blessing; he is a pledge of Gods love both to his Parents and
people, and a band to tie all their hearts to God, and amongst themselves:
Kings are the more bound unto God that gives them that fruit of their Body,
and the more tied to their people also, because a Son is the best Pawn of
their love to people: He is also a strong motive to move them to a loving and
peaceable Government, that thereby they may endeare him in the peoples
affection: The Son of a good King is precious to a good people, and what ever
love his personal worthiness deserves, it is doubled for his Fathers cause:
There is no such Rhetoric to perswad a people to love the Kings Son, as the
good government of his Father: Their love to the Son diminishes not their
love to the Father, but rather augments it; and the increase of the Object
increases loyalty. It was the error of some to worship rather the Sun
rising, than going to: But Christian Subjects are taught of God, not to make
them opposite Objects of their affection, but in a Christian loyalty, to love
each of them the more because of other.

Our newborn Prince then is Gods great Blessing to this The Line of this
Kingdom*
Yland: He is a Guarde to his Father, and a comfort to the Subjects, in
stopping their perplexities about Succession, and the plots of factious and
ambitious men. This Land for almost eleven Ages was ruled by elective Kings:
Thereafter for some eight Ages it has been ruled by Succession: And the race
of Stewarts above two hundredth years has succeeded one another, and the new
Hector* Boeth Les^^ns. A Zorius Tom 2, lib. 10 1.
borne Prince (whom God preserve) is the eleventh of that Name, and the
hundredth and ninth of the never interrupted Line of Fergus the first.

The third part: Of the royal Gift, And first of Justice. Thy Righteousness
and Judgments.
THe third thing in this Text is the Blessing that he cra^es to Solomon, and
that in three things: The Gift, the work of the Gift, and the Fruit of that
work. The gift is Righteousness and Judgment wherein we shall consider the
Nature, the Necessity, and the Extent of it. I will not trouble you with
School distinctions of these words, because the excess of Affection is
impatient of Subtlety. For Quoniam Gaudium sem per properat. etc Cyp. Ep. 33.
Joy ever hasteneth, neither can Gladness suffer delays. And I must say with
one, that your Affection has preveened my words, so that I cannot satisfy
you: yet with another I promise to speak briefly least in such a solemnity
the length of Praevenit omnia verba mea vester affectus Aug. Psalm. 147.
speech burden your Devotion. In a word here is meaned the gift of Kingly
government in the Spirit of righteousness and prudence. So David exponeth it in
his prayer to God for Solomon. O Lord, give Solomon a perfect heart. And in his
Dicemus bre^ ^iter. Bern. de resurrect. sermon. 2.
Blessing of him: The Lord give thee Wisdom and Understanding. And Solomon
clears it by his desire, when God ^ade him choose what he would, he chused not
Riches or Spiritu rectitudinis. etc. Calv. in hunc locum.
honor, but a wise heart, even the heart of a good King: Give thy Servant an
understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern betwixt good and
bad: and this is justice, an habit of the mind kept for the good of the 1
Chro 29. 19. ibid. 22 12. and 28. 9.
common, giving every man his due.

It looks to Ius or Right as the object; to Justice the 1 The nature of
Justice.
Habit or Virtue: and to judgment the sentence or fact flowing from both, and
contains three things. The first is a discerning knowledge to understand
exactly, and judge between right and wrong, together with a conscience to
temper the rigor of right with equity in some co^siderable cases: This is as
the Eye of the Judge: The second is purity of the Will and Affections flowing
from that knowledge, that they love the known Right, though it were in cause
of their enemy, and hate the known wrong, though in the cause of their
Friends: This keeps the Heart free from the base affections of fear or hope.
The third is Courage cled with Authority, both to pronounce and execute
according to that knowledge. A private man may have exact knowledge of causes
in his mind: with equity and purity in his affections: and yet wanting
authority, his sentence has no weight, nor his work any efficacy. But God
has joined all these three in this Kingly gift, as their place is above
privacie, so are their eyes to see, and their hearts above these base and
perverting Passions, and they are cled with supreme authority, to give life
and power to their words: They have both a Mouth to pronounce, and an Hand to
do, Eccles. 8. 4.
for where the word of the King is, there is power.

Iethros counsel to Moses has all these: Choose (said he) Exodus 18.
men of courage, and that because their administration will encounter many rubs
of miscontent humors, which they cannot through, without Courage. Next, men
that fear God, because that is a Bridle to keep them from ill, and a Cordial
for faintness. Thirdly, men that love the Truth, that is, have Verity in
their mind, Veraoitie in their word, and Sincerity in their actions, that
Heart, Tongue and Hand go all one way. And lastly, men that are not greedy,
because it is impossible for an avaricious man, either to be just in private
Bargans or righteous in Judgment.

God has stablished that Sovereign power amongst 2. Necessity of justice.
men for three special reasons. The first is the unjust and 1. It is the
bridle of man's corruption.
selfish disposition of man: We are all in societies, and ought to seek the
good of the common and of our Neighbors, but self-love turns every man into
himself: It kills in us the love of the common and of our Neighbor, and
suckes in our own particular good with the hurt of them both: God has written
this law in our hearts, and in his word, Do to other as thou would be done to,
and has Luke 6.
given us a Conscience to check us for the breach of that law: But the
violence of self-love caries us away against both Law and Conscience:
Therefore there must be without us an Justice clad with a coactiue power, to
repress that corruption that Conscience cannot mend: This correcting Justice
God has primelie seated in Princes. So there is a necessity of a living Law,
armed with authority, to urge the Observation of the written Law: This is Gods
arrest on man's corruption: For the power of Kings, and the force of the Sword
and the instruments of the Burrio, and the Arms of Soldiers and all the
Discipline of Rulers, are not appointed for naught: For when men Nec sane
frustra institutae sunt potestates. Aug Epist. 54
fear these things, both the wicked are dauntoned, and the Godly live more
peaceably among the wicked. Innocen cie is safe among the unrighteous, that
while their desires are bridled by the fear of punishment, their will may be
healed by calling upon God.

The second Reason is from our Lotte: God has given 2. It is the Guarde of our
Lotte.
every man his Lotte, and fenced every part of it from the Injury of his
Neighbor with commands: He has fenced our Honor with the fifth Command, Thou
shall honor thy Father and Mother: Our life with the fixed, Thou Exodus 20.
shall not kill: Our Chastity with the sevent, Thou shall not commit
adultery: And our Goods by the eight, Thou shall not steal, etc. These
Commands are like Marches in a field divyded to a Commonalitie, whereof every
one has his portion designed unto him: But man, who can never be content with
Gods appointment, is given to pass these Marches, and incroacheth upon his
Neighbor, to hurt him in his goods, name, etc. Therefore God has set Princes
as Wardens of these Marches, to see that they be kept as his Providence has
fixed them; and every man's Lotte secured by the ministration of justice, which
is nothing else, but a perambulation upon the Lottes and Marches of people.
Remota iustitia quid sunt regna nis si magna la* trocinia. Aug. ^ivit. lib. 4.
cap. 4.
What are Kingdoms without Justice, but great robberies. Per iura Regum
possidentur possessiones Tract. 6. in Ioh. Noli dicere quid nihi and Regi?
And by the just government of Kings we possess and brook peaceably our
possession: This is Gods Guarde on every man's Lotte.

The third Reason is for settling inumerable and 3 Decyding questions.
endless questions, for every calling has the own gift for it is work, and
righteousness is the gift and accomplishment of Kings, and God has given them
power as an Usher of that righteousness to make way for it through the body
of their Kingdoms. Right and Equity are Summum in Regibus bonum, etc. Greg.
lib. 7. Epist. 120*
a straight Line, and being rightly applied, make a clear difference in men's
causes, between Contentment and miscontentment, Peace and oppression, etc. But
man's affairs furnish many questions to his contentious humor, and the least
circumstance makes a new case, and every case alters the state of the
Question. It is impossible to write such Laws as can either meet with all
cases, or decide all questions: That same question the day may be diverse the
morn, by the smallest change of place, Person or Time: For this cause, God
has set Rex est lex vi^ va, and Lex est Rex iustissimus. Philo. de vita
Mosis. lib. 2.
Kings as living Laws, in respect of the habit of Justice in them; and
speaking Laws to express that Justice by word and Edicts: And doing Laws, to
apply the generality of the Law to every particular by execution. It was said
of old, That the Commonwealth could not be governed without wrongs, so
native to man is iniquity: And Rempub. sine iniuria regi non posse. Au. Civ. 2
ca. 21.
therefore the best Remeed is Justice, without which (said an other Proverb)
Jupiter himself can not reign.

Judgment is justly put in the hand of Princes because their place sets
them above outward things that Princes fittest for to Judge.
may corrupt, or passions within that may be corrupted: They are above honor,
riches, etc. And so need not be ambitious of honor nor greedy of goods: And
within four things especially pervert Judgment, fear of Hurt, hope of
Gain, hatred of Boes, love of Friends. Where these rule, the Balance is
deceitful, and persons and causes are confounded together. They see the right
of their Foe as a wrong, and the wrong of their Friend as a right* What ever
Judge puttethon the person of a ^riend or F^e in Judgment, he lays aside
both the person and Conscience of a Qui person nam amici induit exuit persona^
and conscienti ^^^ iudicis* Aug.
Judge: But righteousness seated in the heart of Princes, purges them of
these base affections within, and secureth them from these temptations without.
There is no temper nor disposition of it self more capable of Equity, or more
able to pronounce and execute Judgment a^ight.

Of Princes care of Religion.
THis much for the necessity of Justice: The extent of it is not to be
restrained to civil things alone, as 3 The extent of Justice.
though Princes might not meddle with Religion, but God has given them an
interesse therein: For if the proper work of Justice give every one his due,
then surely that must be her first task to see God get his due: Reges terrae
serviu^t Christo, etc Aug. Epist 48. In hoc enim Reges* etc. Aug. con.
Cresconium
and so Religion comes within her compass as the first and maine task. The
Kings of the Earth serve Christ, when they make Laws for Christ; and herein
they serve God, if in their Kingdoms they command good, and forbid evil, and
that not only in things pertaining to humane Society, but also in divine
Religion.

In matters of Religion three parties have interesse: First, GOD has absolute
power: as He is the only Author Three have enteresse in Religion.
and Object of religious worship, so is He only Directour and Judge of it.
Next, Pastors are not Judges, but Indices, or interpreters, to point out that,
that God has set down in his Word. Thirdly, Princes are neither Judges nor
^ndices, but Vindices or Promoters of true Religion: They are neither the Rule
nor exponers of it, but Vrgers of men to do according to the Rule proponed of
God, and exponed by faithful Pastors.

Constantine the great made this distinction to Churchmen, Constantins exact
distinction.
God has made you Bishops of the inward things of the Church, but he has
made me Bishop of the outward things. That is ye have a calling to discern
between Truth and Vos eorum quae intra Ecclesia geruntur, Episcopi esti^ etc.
Eusebius vit. Constable. ^ 24.
heresy in doctrine, hurtful or wholesome in worship or manners: To preach the
word, minister the Sacraments, and lead people in religious Worship, to deal
with the Inner Man, and instruct the Conscience in the Truth: But my place is
to maintain Religion in the Professors and their maintenance, to deal with
the outward Man, and to see that my Subjects worship and obey God according to
the Rule, that he has given, and ye point out of his Word.

All his business about the Council of Nice, was nothing but a Commentar of
that distinction: he saw the Church poisoned with the Heresy of Arrius, and
rent with the Schism that followed thereupon: And not being able of himself
to judge and determine these questions: he conveened the most learned and
godly Churchmen, to whom that inquitie appertained: and when they had
determined the matter, he repressed the Heresy that they damned, and
maintained the Truth that they proponed. So Theodosius the great curbed the
Macedonians in the Council of Constantinople: Theodosius the younger, the
Nestorians by the Council of Ephesus: And Marcianus the Entychians by the
Council of Chalcedon: And when the Nestorians raised up their head again,
Justinian curbed both them and Pope Vigilius their Patron, both by a Council,
and by his Edicts against their tria Capitula, the sum and marrow of
Nestorianisme.

Synods and Councels assembled in the Name of the Synods for Religion.
Lord, are as Counsels to Kings, in matters of Religion, and the Word of God is
to rule both Princes, and Synods. So though David was a Prophet, yet he did
nothing of himself in Gods house, but with consent and advyse 2 Chapter 29. 25
of Gad the Seer and of Nathan the Prophet: for so was the Commandment of the
Lord by his Prophets. He had Gods 1 Chro. 17. 9.
command for the warrant of his Command. And Iehoshaphat sent through the
Cities of Judah, and they taught the People, and had the Book of the Law of
the Lord with them. This was their Directorie. Popes debarred Princes.


Concerning the extent of their power, some Princes got wrong of others, and
some did wrong to themselves. They got wrong most of the Pope, who after he
affected Antichristian greatness, closed up Kings within civil affairs, and
counted them but profaine Bellar de Laicis. cap. 1. Pet Thy. les. de Eccl These.
3
Laickes, who had no intresse in matters Ecclesiasticke. If they meddled with
Investitures of Benefices, it was called Simonie, and oppressing of the
Ecclesiasticke liberty. Francise. Boz. de Monarchia.
And the discharge of that duty which God has founded in their Thrones and
Scepters was called the Henrician heresy, Pla. Gre. 7 Canonizing of Kings, the
popes bait to gul them.
and a fighting against God.

On the other part they bewitched Princes by the show of Canonizing. This was a
deep policy by the hope of that bait, to steal from Princes their authority
as the best way to that Canonizing, and to turn them Babes in this life, under
hope to be Saints after death. It was too superstitious simplicity for that
hope to disgrace themselves and their places, by surrendering their power to
the Beast. He knew that Princes were ambitious Bella de offi^. Principis. lib.
3 a cap. 3. ad finem.
of honor, and there was none greater than they had already, except it were
to be sancted: He persuaded them that there was no way to that honor of
sancting, but by his Canonizing; who had the Keys of Heaven at his Girdle.
Therefore, when Princes were tickled with that Ambition, they cared not how
baselie they prostitute themselves, and their dignity, to him for that
Imaginary Advancement.

Or rather shall we say, that God in this politic abusing And the popes
discover.
of Princes, was discovering a part of the Mystery of iniquity: For about
th^se times: when Kings were made Saints, the Popes were Monsters: In
Cathedra Petr^, solio Christi erant homines monstruosi vita turpissimi, etc.
Barron. Ann. 897.
In the ninth and tenth Ages Ignorance reigned in the Church, and barbarous
Cruelty in Popes; every one disgraced his Predecessor, and abrogat his
Ordinances: then Princes abhorring that wickedness, were the more stirred up
to Piety, and so (comparatiuelie) they seemed to be Saints in respect of
these monstrous Popes. It was the complaint of these times, That it was easier
to find many Laymen turn good, than one religious man grow better: And that
it was Bern. Ep. 96.
a rare foul on earth to find one ascend but a little, above the degree that
he has taken in Religion. The Chair of Peter was some time broodie of
Saints, but then it became so barren, that it brought out none but Monsters;
and that justly: for the Popes loathed that Chair, and affected the Throne of
Princes: And holiness being banished that Chair, found her place more in
Princes than Popes. This was Gods Justice, that since Popes would be Kings,
that Kings should be counted Saints: And yet both of them were but usurpers,
for neither did God admit these Saints in Heaven for intercessours, whom the
Popes thrust on him; neither did he allow the Popes kingdom, which he threw
from Princes.

Again, some Princes wronged themselves, concerning Religion, 1 Politic
abuse of Religion.
and that in Policy, Superstition, and Neglect. For Policy, some of them
harbored Religion in their Kingdoms, but abused it politically to their own
ends: They measured it by the persons of Preachers; and seeing them in worldly
things the meanest of their estates, did think as baselie of Religion it
self; and so served themselves of it, as the fairest color to luster their
foulest purposes. Iehu 2 King. 10. 16.
in show was zealous for God, but indeed all his zeal was to stablish the Crown
of Israel in his own house. So soon as he obtained that end* his zeal for
God was quenched, and he followed the idolatry of Achab It was the Authority
of Achabs house, and not their Idolatry that made him 1. Kin. 12. 26 28.
zealous. So Jeroboam followed the counsel of his own heart in making two
calves, and sparing the peoples pains in going to Jerusalem. But indeed he
cared neither for Gods glory, nor the people, but for stablishing his own
house: He pulled the hearts of the People from God, and from the house of
David. So Julian when he thirsted for the Impyre, he gave Animian. Marcellinus.
up his name among the Clergy, and frequented the Assemblies of Christians,
to make him mor acceptable to people, as Basile obiecteth unto him: Memini enim
me and ^e communiter aliquando etc. Basil Ep. admirand 4. Iusia. desert.
So Mahomet made himself great by the color of Religion, though he neither
believed nor kept these Precepts which he fained to be of God, Quam quod Deo
and religioni etc. Cusan. Crib. Alc^r. lib. 3. cap. 8.
and the Popes seeking a Monarchy have used Religion for a cloak, as Leo the
tenth in his last words, told his Secretary: Leo 10. P. Be^b.
Thou art not ignorant how much vantage that Fable of Christ brought to us. But
such politic abuse of Religion, moves God to cast down these Thrones which
they seek so to establish: Never sin was either more severlie or justly
punished than this, when God the chief end, and Religion the only way to
that end, are turned in base means to bad purposes.

Secondly, some Kings have superstitiouslie taken too much on them in things
merely spiritual: Uzzah would do 2. Superstitiouslie abused themselves in it.
the Priests part, in burning Incense: and Constantius took upon him to
moderate a Council alone in favor of the Arrians, and prejudice of the
Orthodoxes. And Sigis mund would play the Deacon at Constance, in assisting the
Mass, and that, as appears more, because that days Lecture began, Exijt
edictum a Caesare, then for any love of the work; or possibly because he was
bound to that service, as being a Chanon in S. Peter's Church, or Prateolus.
lib. 2. hares. 8. Durand Rat. lib. 2. cap. 8. number. 6.
the Laterane: for the Pope imposes these Tittles on Emperors, as an homage,
for holding the Empire of him. But God showed his anger against these
preposterous courses Uzzah was smitten with bodily Leprosy: Constantius found
confusions in the Impyre, and Julian to usurp on him: for he was an enemy to
Christ, and a more cruel persecuter than Nero or Decius, as Hilarie Hilar.
lib. 3. contr. Constable.
calls him. And Sigismund had a worse ^eprosie when he gave way to burn John
Hus, and Jerome of Prage.

Thirdly, some Princes have either with Gallio neglected Religion as a light
matter and impertinent to them: 3. Neglect of Religion.
Or like Herod, held Christ out of their Kingdoms: as though his Throne and
theirs could not stand together. This was a maine motive of the persecution by
pagane Princes: They thought that Christian Religion would ^verthrow their
Kingdoms: But Herod needed not fear Christ's coming, for he who gives
heavenly Kingdoms, will not tak Et nune Reges entelligite id est n^lite
tristes esse, etc. Aug. psa. 2.
earthly kingdoms from him. But beside the neglect of their own Salvation
they look not wisely to their worldly standing. It is never better with
Kings, than when Christ freely reigns in their Kingdoms, and there is no
such proppe to their Thrones as his Scepter. True Religion Non auferet mortalia
qui Regna dat cale^^ia, Sedul.
in a Land is more forcible to hold people in obedience to Princes, than many
thousand Soldiers in Garrisons: Every heart that has the grace of Christ is
a loyal heart to authority: Every Parish where God is truly worshipped, is
a Garrison, and great Cities planted with faithful Pastors, are as Citadells
for the security of Princes.

Obedience goes under one name, yet it has many True Religion makes people
more obedient to Princes.
branches, it begins at God, who is both the first Object and the fountain
of Duties: We ought to respect him before all, and that for himself: But we
respect other things for him and in him; as he has ranked them in the order of
his commands, or the degrees of place or goodness: If therefore we fear the
Lord, we are thereby prepared and enabled to do a duty to man: Our Faith,
Love, and other religious bonds to GOD, are so far from defrauding Superiors
of their due, or disabling us from doing of it, that on the contrare they get
more respect, because we love God; and we are both the abler and readier to
do so to them: Our hearty Obedience to God gives a life and cheerfulness to
our obedience to man: Godliness and righteousness are the sum of both
Tables, the twin-fruites of one Faith, and the works of that same Spirit. The
more godly, the more pliable to righteousness to man, and the more righteous,
the more sincere in godliness: the Soul that loves God truly, will also
respect man duetifullie in the Lord.

This is manifest in Europe; so long as Princes were Princes owe their liberty
from ye pops tyranny to reformation under God.
popish, and suffered their people to lie in popery, they were never sure of
their peoples hearts: They had no care to bind them to God by a true Religion,
and therefore God suffered them easily to be loosed from them: Every roaring
of the Pope from the Capitol in excommunication, made people rebel against
their Princes. But since the truth of the Gospel shines amongst them, they are
not so soon moved: It binds them to God, and their Princes in God, and
makes them contemn these thunders of Rome, as wisemen do, that fatuous wild
fire that has a color of fire without burning: The Popes excommunications
were fearful in the darkness of popish ignorance, but now in the night of
the Gospel, wise people do scoff at them justly. Truth an usher of loyalty.


After Hildebrands time, Princes were pitifully abused: bot since Luther
arose, Popes have learned more modesty in their Censures; and Princes have
found more respect of people: Such as harbored the Gospel in their Land are
free of that abuse, and even they who adhere to the Pope, are obliged to the
revealed Truth, that they are not so often beaten by Excommunications as of old:
And people have their own blessing by the true Religion, that thereby they are
taught more chearefullie to obey Princes: So great a blessing is the Truth both
to Princes and people. Kingly prudence is the gift of God.


We may close this verse with this Lesson: That the gift of Kingly
Government is not infalliblie annexed to Crowns, but the gift of God to
Kings: So Christ Jesus tells us, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree
Justice: By Prove. 8. 15. 16 Nam si propria virtute satis instructi essent
Reget, etc. Calvin. in hunc locu^.
me Princes rule and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. Their Spirits
makes them capable of royal gifts, and when he gives Kings in mercy he ever
gives that gift. This is more tha^ either their Birth in Succession, or peoples
consent in their Election can give them: And it is a maine difference betwixt
Gods calling and man's: Man's calling can do more. but fill the place with the
man, and apply such a person to such a Station: But Gods calling sits the man
for the place, And makes the person meet for his Station: His providence
puts them in it; and his liberality furnishes such gifts as the place
craveth to justify his providence, Man's calling gives an outward warrant to
the wrok, but Gods calling gives the sufficiency, and ability to do the
work, and that with a conscience of his Calling and furniture. This was a
ground for David to ask this gift for Solomon: He knew it was Gods will to
set him upon the Throne, and therefore he suteth of God who had appointed him
that Station the answerable gifts for it: He saw that same Throne without
these gifts in the person of Saul, but found them in himself, and craved the
like to his Son.

It is therefore a great folly in Popes to tie Apostolic The popes tie God to
their Chair* but not themselves to God. Ceremonial. lib. 1. 6. 2.
gifts to their triple Crown, or pretended Apostolic Chair: These things
come of a free dispensation, and not of the merit of any place: If we ta^ it
for a material Chair, all is uncertain; for they know not whither it be the
Chair of his installing, or the other of his repose; or the third for proving
his sex, which now has no use since their Children end that question. If we
take it for a mystical Chair. it must be either in Apostleship, or Doctrine.
But the first dyed with the Apostles as a personal Privilege, and the second
is lost, Non Cathedra facit Sacerdotem. Chry hom. Matthew. 43.
because they have not the Chair of S. Peter, who hold not his Doctrine: This
their opinion of not erring, is a Capital error, thereby they tie God to them
and theirseate, while they loose them selves to sin. In sedem Apostolicam
horenda. etc. Bar. 900 n. 3 Per A^nos fere centum, etc. Genebr. lib. 4. sect.
10
But God has confuted their folly, and showed to the world, that that seat is
but a seat of scorners, for their is no Line of Christian Princes or Prelates,
that has more monsters in it than the Succession of Popes: For the space of an
hundredth and fifty years some fifty Popes fell close away from the virtue of
their Predecessors, and were rather inordinate and Apostaticke than
Apostolic, and in a word, they were ^lagitious Monsters, as Barron. An. 897.
number. 4. Stertentibus. omnibus quibus fuerat vigilandum. Idem. Anno 899. ^. 3^.
Idem Anno, 900. n. 1.
I said before, from their own confession. Indifferent men would think that
where truth forces their Conscience to confess so matchless wickedness in
their Popes, they would grant also a possibility of erring: the interrupting of
Succession at least in Doctrine: and so the Apostacy of their Church, etc. But
they infer the contrare conclusion: That not witstanding the wickedness of
Popes who both neglected to guide the Ship of the Church, and did rather what
they could to drown it; yet God had a care to keep a Church amongst them.
These are the conclusions of hardened hearts, who take the work of their own
sin and Gods punishment to be a work of mercy: We grant they have a Church,
but an whorish, and heretical one, not an Apostolic, as they pretend, but an
Apostaticke as they confess.

2. The work of the royal Gift. Just Government. That he may judge thy
people in righteousness.
THis is the second thing he prays for, the work The work of ye royal gift
is good Government.
and use of the gift, the governing of Gods people aright: Every gift of God
is his blessing to mankind, and that both to the possessour and others. It
makes the possessour idonous, and fit for to do some good to mankind: And the
want in other it respects as a remedy to work such a good as they need:
Therefore, there is required a work of the gift, to prove the liveliness of
it in the possessour, and to produce the work of helping others: A gift
without its own proper work, is but liuelesse, and a Talent dug in the
earth. The gift it self is a sort of Gods presence with the possessour, but
the right use of it is a greater degree of his presence: And for this cause a
gift even in a Mechanicke calling, is called a Spirit: I will power my Spirit
on Bezaleel, etc. To testify it is all in action, a vigorous and actuous power
in man setting Exodus 31. 30.
him on work: The end also of all gifts is for action, whither it be a gift
of common providence, the possession is personal, but the use is common, or
whither it be a gift of grace for edification, the possession is also
personal, but for a common use.

We shall consider this work in the rule, the Practice 1. Good Laws the rule
of Government.
the Difficulty and Remeedes: The rule is the Law: As all gifts are for work,
so the gift of Kingly government, and that both to make good Laws by common
consent, and govern according to them: In the beginning Societies had no
enacted Laws, but a power committed to one. Populi nullis legibus tenebantur.
Aug. Covit. 4. 6.
But when they saw that one to abuse his power, GOD by that same Law of Nature,
that led them first to Government, took them a step further to make Laws,
that both Ruler and people might have a standing and set Directorie, by common
consent: So that as tediousness of solitariness drew them to Societies, and
injuries of Societies drew them to Government, so the tyranny of Governors
drew them to Laws for the good of the whole Body.

Laws do not only teach what should be done, but also Good laws have both
direction and sanction.
enjoyne that it be done, and that with respects of rewarding obedience, and
punishing disobedience: so God gave his Law hedged with promises to allure, and
threatenings to terrify; for he knows our slownesse to good has need to be
allured by rewards, and our forwardnes to evil, to be bridled with
punishment: These respects are proper to man, for other creatures, as natural
Agents work according to the Law that God has given them: They have no more
but a common assistance of God* as the first cause; neither has the work the
moral respect of virtue or vice, or of reward, or punishment: But man comes
in another estate, he has a mind to consider the equity of the Law: a
Conscience to be sensible of the obligement: and a will to incline to do: And
therefore his obedience: has the Name of righteousensse, looking to the
promised reward, and his disobedience, the name of sin, looking to the
threatened punishment.

Good Laws are the sinews of Societies; though they direct Good Laws the
sinews of societies.
us in outward things, yet they stick fast on our Reason which being in kind
but one in all men, makes a great sibnesse of Notions in all: so that reason
in every man can easily conceive, or condescend to that equity, which
universal reason ( the extract of the eternal Law of God) directs us to do.

All Laws have a binding notion and use, though in diverse The diverse
respects of of Laws.
respects: The eternal Law is in God his will, the fountain and rule of all
Laws: And amongst men, the Noetick Law of Nature written in the hearts of all
people in principles. The laws of nations Dianoetick or discursiue in
conclusions drawn out of these principles, which are diverse in sundry places,
because of the diversity of circumstances. The greatest perfection of humane
Laws is in their conformity to that prime and eternal Law in God; and in
their vigor, when they are put in execution, like the effectual providence
that executes the prime Law.

Written Laws are for direction, and the living Law They are both for
direction and execution.
(that is a King) is for actions, to see that direction obeyed. As their
calling prescryveth this, so the people crave it. For Justice is an habit
dwelling in the Souls of Kings, and cannot be seen but in the work; and
people are not so subtle as to consider royal Justice in an habit* but as
they see it in practice: When they see sin punished and virtue honored, that
is more forcible to persuade them of the gift of government in Kings, than a
thousand subtle demonstrations. This is plain in the end of Solomon's desire;
he craved a wise heart, not for that end to dwell in pleasant theorie, but for
practice, that I may go out and in before thy people. No King abounded more 1
King 9 3.
in profound speculations: yet ^ee made them not his end, but used them as
means to fit him for a practike Government, and to give the world a proof of
his ability for his calling. It was not the habit of wisdom in his heart,
but the practice that made him famous to the world: The words that he spoke,
the order of his house, and wise dispatch of his affairs, made the hearers and
beholders 1 King. 10. 4
astonished.

Laws are not made for Theorie, but for Practice; and 2 Practice of Laws.
the best practice on the part of the people is Obedience, and on the part of
the Magistrate execution: And the best execution is when rewards and
punishments (the pases of Leges been stabilitas sed sed male observatas*
Ber-Non eris innocent. Bern. Consid. lib. 2 The due application of Laws is
fruitful.
the worlds Clock) are applied as men deserve; the god lie rewarded, and the
wicked punished. It has been an old complaint, that Laws have been well
made, but evil observed: And he cannot be innocent, who either spares him
that should be punished, or punishes him that should be spared.

By just punishment three things are procured. First, the amendment of the
offender; for so the evil of punishment laid upon the evil of his
disobedience, will curb that corrup^ion in him; since it brings upon him a
worse evil in his account. Next a bettering of other, who seeing iniquity
punished, will fe^re to do the like, least they incur the like punishment:
Thirdly, the peace of the whole Body, when such as trouble it with their
wrongous dealing, are condignelie punished for their wrong^. On the other part,
when righteousness is rewarded, three answerable fruits do follow. First,
the righteous are made better, when the good of their righteousness is augmented
by the good of their reward: Next, others are provoked to righteousness, when
they see it rewarded: Thirdly, the whole body is rejoiced to see the good
honored, for when the godly are exalted the Prove. 29 2.
people rejoice; and so public peace is kept by the universal care and
study of well-doing.

But when the application of these things go contrare, Their wrong application
is hurtful
both to the meaning of the Law, and the deserving of the persons, then
fearful confusions follow: All men are discouraged from righteousness, which
they see neglected and punished: And none sleeth from evil, but rather
follows it; when they see it honored with the reward of good: The wicked are
both imboldened to commit sin, and proud of their reward: The godly are
grieved that matters go so cross, and lament to see good men cled in the
liveray of the wicked, and the wicked in the liveray of the godly: It is a
shame for the sons of men when the wicked are exalted. In such a case Laws
are Prove. 29. 2. Psalm. 12. 8.
without life, their execution is contrare to their direction, and their
direction serves for no other end but as a shining light to discover the
iniquity of such application.

Impyres and Kingdoms are no less mortal than a man: Unrighteous nesse is
the mortality of Kingdoms.
they have their own Infancy, Adolescence, and Vigor; and from that, their
inclination, decay and death, and others arise of their fall: Their greatest
high is in Piety and Justice, and their deadly disease is in profainesse and
unrighteousness: As the heat decaying in the heart, so is profainnesse in a
Kingdom, and injustice is as a palsy that dissolveth the whole Body.
Ministration of Justice. Eccle. 3. 16.


It was one of Solomon's remarkes of vanity, I saw under the Sun the place of
Judgment that wickedness was there and the place of righteousness that
iniquity was there It is grievous to see iniquity any where, but most in the
seat of Justice: and it is great boldness in iniquity to outface Justice in
her own seat: and great presumption in the unrighteous when they darre either
prosecute or ^nter leges ipsas delinqui tur, inter iura peccatur. Cyp. Epi st.
2.
defend iniquity in Judgment: The case of that ^and is lamentable, where
Justice ^eats are ^ade seats of injustice, and the remeede of inquitie turned
in the disease: there is no hope that Justice can reign where iniquity
usurps so upon her as to thrust her out of her place, and from thence under
her name maintains wrong. That case seems so desperate to Solomon that he
puts Ecclc. 3. 17 Perverted Justice is a case reserved to God.
it amongst these cases reserved to Gods own cure, and the great appellations
to be discussed at the last day. I said in mine heart, God shall judge the
righteous and the wicked, for there is a time for every purpose, and for
every work. God has established Justice amongst men to do them right, but
when she is so oppressed as to be displaced, and her name borrowed, to color
iniquity, then of a Judge she turned a Plaintiue, compleaning to God of that
violence.

Though Laws were wrong exponed in their meaning, It shall be censured at ahe
last day.
and their rewards wrong applied yet, supreme reason (the life of the law)
lives with God, and will vindicate the own true sense, and apply rewards
aright. This is the law of Laws abiding in God, which we may know and ought
to follow, ^ut may not judge, so that we may say, THAT THE LAW OF THE COURT
OF HEAVEN, Lexcuria c^^ lestis and Re^pub. est volunta^ Dei. Aug.
AND OF REPVBLICKS IS THE WILL OF GOD. He has appointed Indicatories to
keep men in order, but when they are abused to maintain wrong, and oppress
right, he has the last Judgment for a remeede, to call all proceedings to a
new trial, and to discuss the appeals of the distressed.

Kings indeed have long ears to hear, and long hands to do many things; yet
they cannot hear, and do all by Difficulties of judgment.
themselves: Therefore Iethroes counsel to Moses was good to divide his
burden, and set up Judges and Magistrates with authority under him. But that
work is full of difficulty, and that in respect of the Laws, the parties 1.
From the Laws.
and Witnesses. Laws are many, and yet short for all incident and daily
emergent causes. Justinian thought he had put out a perfect body of the
Laws, when he caused digest the Roman Laws for twelve hundredth year; and
yet these many Volumes may be called short for so universal a purpose: and the
matter appointed to end Pleas, is turned a seminary of pleas, because of
briefnesse: Though all Laws and Decisions were gathered together, they cannot
meet with every new circumstance: Man's corruption is ever devysing new
wrongs, and new colors to color them withal. ^he diverse interpretation of
Laws increases this difficulty, and that Emperor misseth Ad citiorem litium
decisionem. Cod, ^^. in it para. h^c igitur.
his end of the hasty decision of pleas, when after long disputing, the
question is more doubtful than when it was first stated, albeit the small
brooks of Laws before Lotharius time, are turned since in Mare magnum, a
great ocean of Laws.

The parties usually whither of simplicity or purpose, 2 From the parties.
are bold to bring the evil cause to Judgment, they are confident of their
cause* and often times the worst cause has most diligence, to supply the want
of equity by the excess of business. If righteousness ruled men, Judges
would have little to do; and if Truth were in their words, questions were
soon decided. But the Clients information to their Advocats is so badde, that
it is hard either for them to know, or the Judge to discern where the Truth is.

Witnesses also help this difficulty: They are subject to their own
corruptions, and may deceive the best Judges, 3 From witnesses.
who by their office are bound to judge, according to things alleged and
proven. If the religion of one Oath had force, the matter were easy, for God
has ordained it to put an end to controversies: but man's wickedness has Heb.
6. 16.
turned it in a means to hyde the truth: If Aequivocation had place in
Judgment, God had never ordained Oaths for ending of questions; though the
Jesuits have perfected that colored perjury in our time, yet it is natural
to man who is a liar. It confounded all Judgment, Psalm. 116. 11.
so that neither the oath of calumny in the parties, nor the oath of verity
in the Witnesses wants the own suspicion: But possibly betime Judges will be
forced to invent a third sort of oath (occasioned by Aequivocation) to make
parties and Witnesses swear that they swear truly.

Moreover, though Knowledge and Experience in Remeedy of these difficuties.
Judges overcome these difficulties, yet their frailty of affection is
inclinable to the Parties: Therefore it was a good devyce to plead causes
without designing the names of the parties, but under the fained names of Seius
and Titius etc. And that suffrages should not be given by Word, but by Notes
on a Table or by Whitestones for assenting, or blacke-stones for dissenting. So
Rev. 2. 17.
a way was provided for liberty in votting* and for security from challeng
for that liberty. But the absolute best remeede for Parties, Pleaders,
Witnesses and Judges, is to set God the supreme Judge before them, and to
remember that God sitteh in the assembly of gods, and to proceed Psalm. 82 1.
as in his sight. When cause is simply compared with cause, and reason with
reason, the sentence will easily rise according to right and equity.

But this difficulty is greatest in criminal causes, and Necessity of
torture is a torture to the criminal Judge.
has brought on the necessity of torture, which is a sort of torment to a
pitiful Judge. It is a miserable supply of the want of probation, and so
insufficient, that the vrgers of it permit the sufferer after torture to go
from his deposition or bide at it. It was first devysed by Pagans, and is
justly called a Tarquinian cruelty: They had not spiritual and divine
motives taken from GOD or Heaven, or Hell etc. to press the Consciences of the
guilty: therefore they took them to that brutish motive of a bodily pain:
Man is reasonable, and truth should be sought out of him by reasonable
motives, which choppe on his reason and Conscience* and that in the respects of
eternal reward or punishment: But the way by bodily pains is more fleshly
and the order is preposterous, by the bruising of the flesh, to open the mind:
An extorted confession is but a bastard confession as fire forced out of the
flint.

It is lamentable, that among Christians there is as It is as necessar among
Christians as among Pegans.
great necessity of torture, and as small fruit of it as among Pagans: What
ever be the lawfulness of it, the mind of he Judge is tortured. He would
know the Truth, and must use such a means to search it: He knows not
whither the sufferer be guilty or not yet must he suffer as suspected of
obstinacy in denying, lest he die as guilty; and in avoiding death, he
suffers death in torments; he suffers not, because he has done the
crime, but because it is uncertain if he have done it: And so the unavoidable
ignorance of the Judge is the calamity of the Innocent, and the more he
press to help his ignorance, he hurts the innocent the more: This is
lamentable, and to be washes with floodes of tears, that while the Judge
tortures the susp^ct person least he kill an innocent, he kills that
innocent whom The innocent sometimes punished.
he tortureth lest he should kill him: And when their pain makes them choose
to die, rather than to be tortured, they confess the crime that they did not,
and so are innocent both in torture and in death. And yet when they are execute
the Judge knows not whither they be guilty or innocent: And so oftimes both
tortureth and kills an innocent, while he labors to eschew it; By these
things a wise Judge is drawn on not by desire of hurt but by necessity of
ignorance, and yet (since humane Society craveth it) by necessity of
Judgment. This is contrare to the tortures of the old persecutors, they
tortured Ideo torque^^ur confiten tes and absol^imur negantes quia nomin^s
proelium est* Tertu.
confessing Christians, and let them go free if they denied; but the criminals
torture that they may confess, and destroys them for their confession.

On the other part, how often do the guilty endure torture with obstinacy, and
harden their hearts to conceal the truth: Such obstinacy at the first is
resolved, but if Apologet. The guilty some times escape.
it turn judicial by a wilful denying, with cursings and execrations, then
it works either a stupifying senselesnes in their flesh, or else (by way of
diversion) fasteneth the mind so upon loss or shame (that follows a
confession) that it lets not the flesh feel pain: Satan can stupifie his
martyrs in maintaining lies, that he may play the Ape to GOD, who mitigateth
the pains of his martyrs by spiritual comforts. It is not therefore for
naught, that God took of the Spirit of Moses and put upon the Elders, because
they had a Calling full of difficulty: In all which cases it is best for a
Judge to look to God, and that eternal Law in him; and withal to crave his
direction that Psalm. 25. 17.
he err not in Judgment, and cry, Deliver me, O Lord, out of all my
necessities. But there is no better spur than Iehosapha^s exhortation to
Judges, Take heed what ye doc, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord,
who 2 Chro. 19. 6. 7.
is with you in the Judgment. Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be
upon you, take heed and do it: For there is no iniquity with the Lord our
God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts.

Of Princes difficulties and dangers.
IT lies then on Princes to exercise their Gift, as they 3 Kings have great
difficulties.
would prove the liveliness of it: and this brings on them a world of
difficulties: There is none in their Kingdom of a more laborious life. The
Head that moves all must have action in it, and the heart is in a continual
motion, to furnish fresh Spirits to the body: Great is their task to know the
state of their Subjects, to hear the plaints of the poor, to repress the
insolences of the Qui impera^t serv^^nt eis quibus videntur imperare. Aug.
Societati humanae dominando consulitur and consulendo servitur.
proud, by causing minister Justice to all. God has set them above their
Subjects, but that same exalting in some sort puts them under, because they
are servants to their Subjects, in that they watch for their weall and safty. I
herefore the Apostle in that same place where he calls them supereminent
powers, calls them also the Ministers of God, to minister Justice, for he is
the Minister of God to thee for thy good. They are Gods Ministers, attending
continually upon this very thing. They have Romans 13. 1. 4
supreme power, bowing down to a Ministerial work, and a Ministry clothed
with supreme power.

Many are quicke-sighted to see the defects of Government, And great dangers.
who will not see the difficulties and dangers of it: for beside the weight of
such a Calling, the most lawful use of their coactiue power, bears them on
many dangers, either in punishing the unjust, or affraying them that would be
so: Every curbed humor by fear of punishment fretteth against them; God has
fenced them indeed against briares and thorns with their supreme authority,
and yet sometime they feel their sharpness. It is impossible to them to
please all, yea, not to curb many in execu^ing Justice, and their danger is
not so much from open Enemies and secret malcontents, as from their friends
and Attendants: The force of the one is not so fearful as the treason of the
other: Their guards are to keep them safe, and yet are they often in greatest
danger in the midst of them: So both solitariness and Society are dangerous
to Princes.

They reign over the multitude, wherein are more unjust Justice irritateth
unrighteous men.
than just, and more that will be offended than pleased: And in every Kingdom,
the mighty and the people are as two factions* and Princes sail betwixt them
as two extremes, but the upright ministration of Justice is the best wa^:
Private men can hardly please both parties, but Princes cled with authority
need not stick in these strai^es, but to give every man his due. This is the
Causa supplicis non est iusticia iudicis. etc Aug. de Trin. lib. 4 cap. 10.
great benefit of Justice, that beside the native and intrinsecall goodness,
it has also this accessorie good, to make a safe way for Princes, betwixt
contrary factions. When a Judge inflicteth punishment, the cause of punishment
is not the Justice of the Judge, but the merit of the Crime. (a) God guardeth
Princes by a special providence.


Greatest Princes have greatest cares; and the largeness of their Dominion
enlarges their labor; as great hollow Statues overlayed with gold, are full
of worms, and Spiders, so the greatest Monarchs under show of worldly glory
are full of noisome cares: All these cares should indeere them in the hearts of
their people, because they are not for themselves, but for their people: A good
Princes wakerifenesse keeps the sleep of his Subjects: His labor, their
idleness: His business, their vacancie: and his care makes them careless.
The greatness of a Prince is as much for his peoples good, as it is above
them. Great business with dangers and difficulties are their ordinary diet,
under which they would succumbe, if God supported them not with as great a
Spirit to dispatch business, contemn dangers, and expede difficulties: So
that though their Crowns be of Gold, yet they may be called Crowns of
thorns and their just ^mbleme, is a man sitting in a Chair of state with a
naked Sword hinging by a small hair over his head: But God the King of kings
has a special care over them, and guardeth their persons by a particular
providence, l^st his sacred image in supreme authority should be violat by
every miscontent humor. Flatterres are a snare to Kings.


These are their seen dangers, but they have another enemy less hated, but
more hurtful, and that is, Flattery, (the bane of greatness) it follows it
as the shadow does the body, and looks not to truth but to acceptance, and
puts a visorne on the native face. Satan durst thereby assault Christ
though he despaired of success, how much more will he assault sinful man
where he is sure of victory: He knows that even they who overcome vice are
often corrupted with praise. Scarcely is there one who gives not patent cares
to flattery, and as they will not patiently suffer evil to be spoken of them,
so if they live well, they would be counted of: And who is he whole virtues
breaking forth desires not to be commended? Or that contemns the praise of
men? Princes therefore are most exposed to the praises of mankind, both for
their eminency as an object, and for their power to requyte with reward:
Flatterers have suggested that poison to Princes, as to make them think their
will is a law, their power the measure of their will, and that supreme Reason
and their pleasure are all one: They labor to possess them with the opinion
of complete absoluteness from dependence on any Author, from limitation by
any Law, from error in their doing, and from reckoning for their doings to
God. All men by nature like to be rubbed with this Comb, and with a deceiving
delight admit that praise which their Reason and Conscience refuses: But the
angry countenance of a wise King will scatter these flies.

For expeding these difficulties, some Princes have It is faintnes to lay down
their Crowns.
used the faint remeede to lay down their Government. Diocletian re signed
his dignity to Galer^us, and turned private. It was not so much for sa^ietie of
honor as impatiencie Nicephor. Eusebius. Ruffin. Diocletianus post cruentam
^aedem in persecutione, etc Constan. apud Eusebius. lib ^. cap. 25.
of disappointment: He had for eighteen years cruelly persecuted the
Christians, and not being able to root them out (as he desired) he
satisfied his miscontentment by retiredness and privacie: The Martyrs courage
made him a Coward, and he brake his own spirit in despite, because he could
not break them, the Name of Jesus was more glorious by his persecution, and
Bar^n. Ann^. 304. nu^. ^.
in end he dyed miserably. This was the hand of God throwing him down from
the top of honor which he abused: He would be worshipped as a god, but
fell low from the Throne to a Garden; and from the Scepter to a Spade: and more
from an affected Godhead to a male-contentment; but indeed that swelling
conceate of a Godhead was a worse fall than when he turned private. Lotharius
also resigned his Kingdom to his Sons, and being weary of the imperial
Crown, he would take on him the Monkish shaven Crown, and render himself to
a Monastery. This last age also saw some of it in Charles the fist; so long as
he was zealous for God, and earnestly sought Reformation, God blessed many
great things in his hand. But when the Pope fed his ambition with the bait
of the Impyre of Germany, and he had devoured it by hope (a conceate where
with his house is drunk until this day) then he Bell. Smalea.
persecuted the Protestants with an unjust and civil war. After that, never
thing prospered in his hand, but God cast him in such disastures, as suffered
him not to brook the public; and therefore choosing retearednesse to digest
them, he was digested and overcome by them. Such a disposition in Princes is a
deserting of their place, their gift, and themselves; and on Gods part a just
desertion dryving them in the straits of a private spirit, who have prevaricat
in his public service: The largeness of the heart is the uprightness of it
When it dilateth it self on God by Faith and affection; but when men close
their Heart upon God by seeking themselves, they are both separate from him and
excluded from themselves in that selfe-respecting.

But the best remeede to overcome all these difficulties 1 Piety the first
remeed of these difficulties.
are Piety and Prudence. Piety directs them in all actions toward God, and
maks them in their adoes to depend on him, it holds them daily with him to
seek both the gift, and the use of it, in his assisting and blessing of their
labors. Though he be high, he must day lie do homage to God, who is higher
than the highest, as he would have his presence with his Government. The more
he pray ardently and look on God, he shall the more find wisdom in that
Fountain, and have a pattern to work himself to, in the use of that Wisdom.
The complete furniture begins at the Spirit of the Lord, and is specified
in Isa. 11. 2.
the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge, and closed with the
fear of the Lord, or true piety.

The hight of their place exempts them not from this dependence, but subiecteth
them the more to it; the heavier their but then be, the greater need have
they to seek Gods help: Their business seems to stay devotion, but the
necessity is a spur to prayer: The more business, the more necessity of
help, and the more felt necessity the greater earnestnes with God for a
blessing: David's a does made him not forget his devotion, but he Psalm. 119. 164
kept his day lie diet thereof: Seven times a day do I praise thee because
of thy righteous Judgments. God has ever noted religious and devote Kings
with excellent The popes profainnesse in the Consistory.
Blessings in their Government.

This makes me remember a gross impiety in the Consistory of Rome. When the
Pope is absent, the oldest Cardinal Palaot. de consul. Consist. page 373.
M^rum nemini esse debeb^t -- quod prop^ ter sactissim^ Christ's Vicarii
praesentiam -- sed ad secretioris my sterii significatione^^.
prays unto God to bless their adoes, but when he is present, he praves
none at all: Let no man (says their Cardinal) Think it strange if the Pope
pray not for the assisting grace of Gods Spirit, because it is likely he
prayed before he came thither. Besides it has been observed that because of
the presence of the most glorious Vicar of Christ, who is thought to be
assisted by the grace of the Spirit, that Ceremony is not kept as in other
places, and that not to withdraw any thing from due devotion but to signify a
more holy and sacred mystery: So that the imploring of Gods assistance is but
a Ceremony to them: That is a mystery of iniquity to think any man exeemed
from a necessity of praying unto God for a blessing to his a l^es: What is it,
but to tell that the Pope is a god, and needs not implore Gods ass^stance? As
though Gods presence were superfluous, where that pretended god presideth: Or
shall we say, That God makes him proclaim himself the man of sin, by so
profaine a misregard of God in his weightiest adoes. Did. 40 cap. Convivia.
Their Canon Law inioynes their Clergy to bless their meat, and has not
their Consistory affairs greater necessity of a blessing? It was the height
of Pelagius pride Recede a me non te ^abe^ necessarium. Hieron. advers ^elag
to bid God adien, for he had no need of his help: And what other does
the Pope? He contemns the preaching of the Word as a base service, though it
b^e indeed the most Apostolic, and thinks the Consistoriall affairs
only worthy of his greatness: If therefore he be so profaine in that he
counts most weighty? What devotion has he in lesser matters? Since they have
left off to preach, no wonder they cease to pray, Nullum tibi venenu^, nullum
gladium magis formido quam, etc. Bern de consid. lib. 3. Bellar. de officio
Principis lib. 1. cap 22 Illius ergo ^^bis virtus quaerenda est, etc. Gregor.
lib. 6. Epist. ^^. 9.
and their style to Princes that was to bless, request, exhort, is turned now
in a mandamus and volumus to command and will. Bernard feared this pride in his
Scholar Eugenius: and Bellarmine exponeth it rightly, that the business of
the Court of Rome would stay devotion in him: If he condemns that slacknesse
in Eugenius, why reproved he not that gross Impiety in Paul the fifth, whom
he saw act it in the Consistory: But the older Popes had more devotion, and
acknowledged that in their adoes his grace was to be implored, without whom
we are no where without perrill and sin.

The second necessar virtue is Prudence: There is no creature more unruly than
man, and the more reasonable in nature, the more unreasonable in his actions,
turning the 2. Prudence expedeth difficulties.
quickness of understanding to plot and practice wickedness: He is more
intractable than the Beasts, impatient of equity, but more of servitude, and
in a natural blind love of liberty, he hates them that govern. As for the
multitude, it is called a Beast of many heads, but void of Judgment, they
measure all things more by the events than causes, and the events by gain or
loss: Their knowledge is rather a guessing than Science; the The multitude
intractable.
vulgar opinion makes all the Topics of their Logic, and the fashion of the
world is all their moral wisdom; they know nothing but extremes Hosanna, or
crucify: extreme love or hatred without moderation. They are credu lous of all
surmises, and expone all to the worst sense: They are so desirous of Novelties
that Providence is counted Lazines, but headie-violence is taken for Courage.
They are the basest part of the Kingdom, yet they crave greatest
consideration: The terror of Princes to hemme in their absolute power: And a
raging sea that cannot be stilled by force, but must be sailled by the Card
and Compass of prudence if Princes would eschew ship wrack. Therefore there is
no moral virtue more necessa^ to Kings than Prudence, and that amongst other
studies (to enable them to govern) they study the disposition of their
people, and specially of such as they trust with their affairs: Nations,
Families, and Callings; have their own complexions as well as particular men,
and will change with times and occasions, by prosperity or adversity, a
peaceable or a severe government: and it is a part of fatherly prudence to
know the temper of his Son: So David led his people in the integrity of his
heart, and according Psalm. 78. 72.
to the discretion of his hands.

This Prudence leads Princes to Moderation a special Moderat Government is
durable.
pillar of their Thrones: Extremities are only necessar in extreme cases,
which cannot fall often to them in respect of the eminency of their power: If
Rehoboam had followed the moderation of the Ancients, he might have kept
the ten Tribes to the house of David: Man's rashness 2 King. 12.
and peremptory courses make way to a precipice, which has no evasion but
ruin. Moderat Government has ever proven durable, but violence is a degree
to tyranny, and overthrowes it self. Moderation is both Gods command, and
ever followed with his blessing, and most powerful to rule man, who is a
reasonable creature, but violence is forbidden and abhorred of God, and
punished with selfe-ruine. Wisdom then is as necessar to King as reason is to
a man: It is his greatest ability enlarging his heart to conceive, and direct
things aright, as he conceives them: He compasses his affairs in his
mind, and levels all to the best end: It is in him the Image of the Ancient
of days, who has all things ever present, and disposes them sweetly and
powerfullie: Thereby things past are made present by remembrance: things to
come are present by foresight, and present things by that universal view, are
rightly ordered and applied to their circumstances: And so the King by wisdom
stablisheth the Land. Prove. 29. 4.


Of the subject of Government: Gods people: Thy people: the Poor.
But whom shall the King judge? Thy people: a people David's subjects are Gods
people.
gathered in a Society; and by Gods providence subjected unto him: And thy
people, even the Church of God for the time, and his choice of mankind: He had
blessed them with true Religion, and the means of grace, to incline them to
righteousness amongst themselves, and yet for all this they have need of
civil Government. The best man has some remanent Corruption, and in the best
particular Churches are some who have not the power of Religion, nor are
disposed for righteousness

Herein appears man's unruliness: Gods mercy supplying Man most unruly of all
creatures.
it with Government: And the happiness of such Kings as rule the people of
God: This is man's unruliness that though he be reasonable, and of one stock
in Adam, and of one condition in sin, (which should make him to love his
Neighbor) yet we are most unreasonable and inhumane to other: Neither the
bands of common nature, nor common misery, no not of Religion can make us live
in righteousness. It was truly said, That the necessitis of many Physicians
in a City argued great intemperance in a people: So the necessity of
Magistrates argues great unrighteousness amongst men. If we had stood in
Innocence as we were created, we had been to others as harmless Lambs and
gallesse Doves; our pure mind took light of God fully; our Will followed that
Light freely, and our Affections and the whole man went one way to obey him:
But by our fall that furnishing is lost, and that harmony broken; our mind
takes not Gods Light, our will and affections miscarie the whole man
violently; we break to God, and so cannot do a duty to man.

That fancy of some Schoolmen of a mere and pure No pure and mere Nature.
Nature is a pernicious error, that ignorance and concupiscence were the
conditions of that Nature, and that man in his first estate would have been
carried to the desire of sinful things: This obseureth the integrity of our
creation, the misery of our fall, and Gods mercy restoring us: In our
innocence we had no disposition to sin; our original righteousness was a
sweet applying of every power in us to another, and all of them to God. But
now being void of that original justice, and full of iniquity, we Psalm. 49.
are like unreasonable creatures. Man is in honor, and understands not, he
is like a beast that perishes: As the greater Beasts devour the smaller, and
ravening fowls prey upon the weaker, and greater fishes eat up the lesser: So
every man as he has a gift above his Neighbors uses it to their hurt: The
wise man turns his wisdom to intrappe the simple; the mighty man his power
to oppress the weaker; and the rich man makes his riches as feet and hands
to fulfill his evil purpose against Philo de ^ita mosis* lib. 1. p. 475.
the poor. So, though it would seem an easy thing for a King to rule a
multitude of reasonable men Idem de Agricultura. p. 150.
brought up in civilitie and Religion, yet it is a matter of great difficulty:
Therefore one said right, That Kings ought to be Pastors, and that because
they rule men Affectu bruto d^cuntur.
who are led by brut^sh affections.

This is a Glass for man's infirmity: That he is the most Man most obliged
and best furnished, is most disobedient.
disobedient creature: the will of God is an eternal Law, the cause and rule
of all equity and reason; thereby he disposes his own actions, and gives
the extract of it respectively to creatures, and all of them (except man) obey
that Law according to their power: This power is specified in their essential
forms, and these forms are the immediate cause of their working, and
Character of their work: Man's disobedience is the greater, because he has the
most excellent form; is best obliged, and best furnished; he has a reasonable
Soul, and the greatest extract of Gods eternal Law both wri^en in his heart,
and revealed to him in Scripture. He alone has a Conscience to charge him
with obedience in the Name of God: As a Center he is compassed with obedient
creatures: If he look above, he sees the Angels keep their celestial Law,
in loving, adoring, and imitating God; if beneath he sees all creatures keep
their Law: the fruit of their obedience is his comfort, and if they altered
their course but a short space, he would perish: And yet notwithstanding of
the excellency of his form, the riches of his furniture, and his compassing
with a cloud of so many obedient witnesses, he remains still vntractab^e.

Secondly, herein is Gods great mercy to man, that he God has set Magistrates
to curb men's outrages.
leaves him not in this disorder: He knows that he would be as a beast,
pushing and goaring other therefore he has set up Magistracy as a sovereign
remeede of that fury, and given it power to secure the weak from the injuries
of the mighty, and wisdom to save the simple from the snares of the crafty:
That if the great sort will abuse their power in tyrannizing over the weak,
they may find in Kings a power to control them. The greatness of Kings above
their Subjects is both a staff to the weaker to lean to, and a bridle to
restrain the outrages of the mighty, as the Prophet expresses. Defend the
poor Psalm. 82. 3 4
and fatherless, do Justice to the afflicted and needy, deliver the poor
and needy, rid them out of the hand of the wicked. This vindicating power of
Princes is as great a blessing to the oppressors whom it restrains, as to
the poor who are rescued.

Thirdly, this is the happiness of Kings that rule over Kings in Gods Church
are most happy. Psa. 16. 6.
Gods people, that their lotte is fallen pleasantly in Gods inheritance. They
who reign over Barbarians are Kings over beasts rather than men, and they who
rule over civil Countries where true Religion is not, are Kings but of men;
but they whose Kingdom is a particular Church to God, are Kings over Kings, or
Christians more than men; and their common Subjects by grace have more true
worth, than such Kings as are over Barbarians, because we are a royal
Priesthood. The one reign^th 1. Pet* 2. 9.
in a Paradise, the other as in a barren Wilderness. This excellency has
also an easiness with it to overcome man's native unruliness; for Gods Scepter
brings people to obedience, as this Prophet acknowledges: It is Psalm 18. 47.
God that subdueth my people under me. When man's rudeness is broken with a
true Religion, it is most pliable to authority as to the ordinance of God: he
both commands and allows that obedience, and disposes people thereto
willingly. Numa by Religion plied his rude Romans more to the offices of War
and peace, than Romulus austere government: If a false Religion, did this in
Pagans, what shall the true Religion, and the grace that accompanies it work
in Christians?

It is far more easy to rule good people, than badde, because there is none
so rebellious to Authority, as those Good people easily ruled.
who rebel against their own reason; and a good man is more obsequious to
Princes, than a Russian: The godly do fear Princes more, than they are to be
feared of Princes: but no bands can keep the wicked in order: True Religion
binds us to God, and the grace of it is our greatest perfection in this life,
and that partaking of the divine Nature makes us the more respectuous to Gods
ordinance: 2 Pet. 1 4.
Where that is not, Laws, Rewards, and Punishments are but weak motives; but
where it is, they need not a Law: The least notice of Gods will, is sufficient
to move them to do his will.

God communicates his eternal Law to creatures according Best people most
capable of equity and disposable to obedience.
to their kind and capacity: He gives to heavenly creatures a celestial Law
to adhere to him; to reasonlesse creatures a natural instinct, to direct them
in their course, without either sense of his goodness, or reflecting on him:
But to man renewed, such a Law where of Reason is capable, and Conscience
sensible, and that both in piety and righteousness: The first is all in
respect to him, the other to man: Natural men can exerce materiallie the
works of Justice, but not spirituallie, because they have no grace, nor the
bands of a true Religion to God. Justice and piety of the old Romans were but
a forced curing of the contrare vices, that their ambition and pride (whereof
they were sick) might rule in them.

Of Princes ruling of their own Persons and of their Court.
THis princely government is not to be restrained to the people alone, but
begins at the person of Kings ought to rule them selves.
Princes, and goes to their Families: So David who conceived this Prayer,
wrote that Commentat on it, that he would sing of Justice and of Judgment,
not only exercised amongst his people, but also in governing himself and his
Psalm. 101. 1. verse. 2*
Family. For the first he says, I will behave my self in the perfect way:
That is a good government that begins at himself: Private men are tolerablie
called Kings, when by Quic^^que proprium corpi^^ subegit, etc. Amb. in psalm.
118. ser. 14.
Gods grace they command their own passions: For whosoever subdues his own
body, neither suffers his Soul to be troubled with passions while he
refraineth himself by a kingly power, is justly called a King, because he
can rule himself: And if we rule the earth, even this our earthly body, we
are Rege terram and eris Rex terra, etc. Aug. Psalm. 75.
Kings of the earth. But this is more in Princes, who have as much native
corruption as private men, and more power to utter it.

The wise ruling of themselves is necessar to moderat Selfe-governement is a
safe government.
their great power: The Heathen could say, If thou will subject others to thee,
subject thy self to reason. And the Impyre agrees to none, but to such as are
better than any of their Subjects. Xenoph^n. Cyr.
But the Divines spoke more clearelie; (a) Seneca Ep. 37.
by Kings, understand these who direct the motions of their soul according to
the will of God. Greg psa. penit. 5.
And they are good Kings who can prove themselves Governors of their Body.
Ambros. psalm. 47.
And justly they are called Princes who exerce ever a principality, over their
own thoughts by sound Judgment. Greg. mor. lib. 11 cap. 12
It is often seen that greatest power has greatest righteousness joined with
it, and that for the good of Princes and people: If their passions were like
their power, they would soon ruin their state, or persons, or both; but
Piety and Justice joined to their power, moderateth their passions, and
preserves all, as the King of the Bees has a sting, but never uses it to
revenge. Nam etsi ha bet aculeum, tamen eo non vtitur etc. Amb. Hexa mer. lib.
5 c, 21
And where shall Justice have the own work, if not in the heart of Kings. It
must first begin there, else it cannot have the work on other.

Justice distributeth duties to each one; and there must Justice begins at
Kings.
be in a just man, a just order, that the mind be subject to God, the body
to the Soul, and both to God: If this be not, there is no righteousness in
us, and so there cannot be an Aug. civ. 19. 4
external governing righteousness. This is the glory of Kings, when their
power is accompanied and sweyed with Justice in their own persons; when the
living law lives according to the written Law, and authoritatiue Justice
becomes exemplar Justice, their life by example Tot Dominorum quot vi^ tiorum
servus civ. 4. 3.
insinuating that to people, what the Law and authority commands them; then
Justice is not so much a gift annexed to their power, as a grace changing their
persons: An evil King is a servant to as many masters as he has vices, but
he who commands his passions, is a Multae bestiae nobis sunt. Basil, exam.
hom. 10.
King indeed; because he rules himself, and is neither taken captive of
sin, nor carried violently of vice.

Man that rules over beasts, has beasts within him: Qualiter alios
corrigere. poterit. etc. Aug. Abus. grad. 2.
anger barketh more fiercely than a Dog; he that is speedy to wrongs is a
Serpent, and he that is set for revenge, is a Viper. Shall man have Impyre over
the outward beasts, and leave the inward beasts loose? This is most necessary,
Malus etiam si regnet ser* vus est. Aug. civit. 4 c, 3.
that rulers of men rule themselves, least they fall in contempt: For how can
he correct the manners of others, who cannot correct his own? An evil man
though he reign, is a slave to his passions.

The Kings example is a Law to his Subjects: Their Kings are examplers.
minds are lift up to his Eminency, and what he does, he seems to
command: The peoples inclination to imitation is the greater, because of the
greatness of his person: They pass the good or bad quality of the fact, and
take his greatness for a reason: The faults of a King overwhelme a people, and
he hurts more by example than by the sin it self: And his good example is
as forcible to make his people good: If they be godly, chaste, temperate, etc.
they draw many of their Subjects to God; but if they be profaine, or
dissolute, etc. they draw multititudes to Hell.

Pharaoh, Herod, Nero, and such can tell what evil great Great power without
grace is hurtful.
power joined with great wickedness can do: Therein Satan exalted sin,
when he vented it by so great persons, and disgraced Magistracy when he made
it an instrument of monstrous sins. But God had his good work therein to
teach us, what men clothed with power are in themselves; and that principality
without his Spirit is but a naked sword in a mad man's hand; and what a blessing
good Princes are, who use their power in such righteousness, that the world
must say, They are as good men, as they are great Kings.

This is the Privilege of Christian Kings; God gives Christian Kings are
Kings over themselves.
them a greater blessing than other Kings; he makes them by grace Kings over
themselves as well as over their Subjects, as they give Laws to other, so they
take Laws of God, and use their power, as they may be best countable to him;
they have principality of authority as Kings, and they reign by grace over
themselves as Christians. There is no truly free King but a Christian King,
and Tune enim vere Regi Regum amplius placebit. etc. Gregor. lib. 5. Epst. 106.
such as is neither captivat by the corruption of Nature, nor popish
superstition, but set at liberty by the Law of the Spirit of life in Jesus
Christ. Such a King is an Image of God, who governs all in righteousness and
wisdom, and then he shall most please the King of kings, if restraining his
power, he think that less is leasome to him than he may.

The other task of his government is his Family: I The Government of his
Family.
will walk within mine house with a perfect heart. I will set no wicked thing
before mine eyes, etc. And in all that Psa. he Psalm. 101.
sets down the diet of his house or court-governeme^t, a fit pattern for
Princes to follow. The court of Kings is an abridgement of their Kingdoms, and
the circle of the Subjects nearest to them: It is a proof of the Government
of their persons and an Image of the ruling of their Estates. If every house be
a beginning and part of a city, and every beginning Civit. 19. 16
ought to be referred to the own end; much more the Families of Princes,
which are not simply parts but rather compends and extracts of their
Kingdoms. People cannot always see the person of their Kings, but they may
guess at their disposition by the manners of their Court: As is the Prince so
is his Court, because they seek by his imitation to procure and keep his
favor; and as the Court is, so will the Country be. Such as his servants
are, such is he counted: For men can hardly think but they are such by his
command, or connivence, or example. If therefore they be godly and righteous,
they win the hearts of people to the King: But if they be profaine and
godless, they procure his contempt. This care ought not only to be of his
nearest Attendents, but also of these whom he intrusteth with his affairs
abroad: If they minister Justice, defend the people, exact no more than is due,
then the people ascryue all that goodness to the King, commanding his Officers
to handle his people tenderly: But if they be violent and outrageous, the
contrare follows, as if all that severity were commanded of the King. A good
king by doing good, makes his Subjects good, and is as eminet in example
before them as in dignity above them.

The Roman Impyre had a great proof of the force of Kings are as helmes
sweying their Kingdoms.
their example both in their Court and people, when in fifty four years
space it found five changes: First, Diocletia^ like his Predecessors was a
Pagan: Next, Constantine turned himself and the Impyre to Christianity: 3.
Constantius his son turned all Arrian: 4. Julian the Apostate went back to
Paganism: And fiftlie, Iovinian following Constantines zeal brought them back
again to Christianity. So important is the example of Princes either in good
or evil, 2. Chro. 28. Ibid. 29. Ibid. 33. Ibid. 34.
and so changeable are the people to follow them. The Kings of Judah were not
vn^^k: Achaz an idolater, Ezekiah a zealous worshipper of God, Amon and
Manasseh restorers of idolatry: Josiah a destroyer of idolatry etc. And their
Courts and Countries followed their steps.

Constantius the father of Constantine tried his Courteours Constantius wise
try all of his Court.
wisely; he offered preferment to such as would worship Pagan gods, and when
some for fear, and desire of honor did so, others laid down their honor,
rather than that they would quite Christ; h^ereby he saw the ground of his
Courtiers hearts; he degraded such as had forsaken Christ, and said, They would
never be true to him that were false to God; but he honored such as were
ready to loss all for adhering to God; he made them his Guard and Governors
of his Kingdom, saying, That such men were to be numbered as his special
Friends, and Familiars.. Itlos tan. quam Dei proditores imperatoris servitio
indignos censuit; etc. E^seb. in Vit. Constan. lib. 1 cap 9. and 10. Baron
Anno. 304 number. 18.
And Theodoricke the Goth, an Arrian King, had some like practice, but with a
more summar censure; for when one of his Court willing to please him forsook
the faith of Christ, and turned Arrian, he was so offended that he killed him
with his own hand, affirming, that he would not be trusty to him that was a
traitor to Christ.

To close this point, the fruit of David's prayer is manifest in Solomon's
extraordinary wisdom; and that both in speculation and practice. For the
first, he knew all mysteries, and wrote of the nature of all things from the
Cedar of Lebanon to the Hysope on the wall: Beside his heavenly Doctrine in his
Song (whereof none of all the wise men of the earth could so much as dream) in
his moralities in the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes he passed them all: Though they
came long after him, and had the benefit of his Writs by some two Greek
translations before the Septuagints, yet they are no more to his wisdom, than
a aram of vnfined silver-vre to a talent of pure gold.

As for his practice, his first trial proved an excellent Proof of Solomon's.
wisdom. 1 King. 3* 16 17. etc.
practical gift: It was a plea betwixt two Harlots; both of them clamed the
living Child, and no doubt, with the like boldness, and cursing, and execration
the usual companions of passionat pleading: Here God offered a fit purpose, to
prove the truth of his promise to Solomon. The question was not of civil
things, but natural: to find out the mother of the living Child; and there
was no witness, but both parties alike peremptory in their alledgeance. His
wisdom leads him to find out the truth by natural affection: He laid
this sure ground, that the Mothers affection is tender, and the bowels that
bredde the Child, would never agree to see him killed: On the other part, that
the cruel affection agreeing to the division of the Child, was but a strange
and stepmotherly affection: On these grounds he pronounces, That the living
Babe shall be cut in two: It might seem a cruel sentence to kill the Babe,
but some equity in the just division; but the truth was, he found the
decision of the matter Maternus affectus parcens affectus, sed novercalis
affectus crudelis.
in the show of division, and adjudged the living Babe to her, who in a sparing
affection choosed rather to want her Babe, than the Babe should want his life.
He saw in the tender affection of the one, the equity of her cause, and in
cruelty of the other, the iniquity of her clame. This was a proof of deep
wisdom: The people heard of it, and were both glad of such a King, because
the wisdom of 1. King. 3. 28
God was in him; and yet feared him, because they saw he was such a one as
could discover the secrets of their hearts, and counter-mine their deeepest
policies.

3. The fruit of their Government.
Of PEACE.
Verse. 3. The Mountains shall bring forth peace. etc.
THis is the third thing he craveth, the fruit of kingly Government in the
blessing of peace: whither we take Peace the fruit of a good Government.
the Mountains and hills figuratiuelie, for the estate in general, or for the
degrees of power in greater and lesser Princes, etc. all is to this end, that
Justice well ministered brings peace to a Country: for the mighty (who are as
mountains) when they shall see Justice reign in the King, are stayed from
oppressing the poor, and become a shadow to them. So Justice is both the
mother to bring forth, and a Nurce to foster peace. Peace is the desired and
sweet end of all blessings, and prosperity it self, without it, is but
adversity: All our labors are for Peace, and Wars (the wrake of mankind* and
br^ake of Peace) are undertaken t^ purchase and keep Peace. And God, the
Author of all has contempered the vari^tie and dis^rds of creatures, to bring
them all to a purposed peace. All men are of him, he summeth them all up in
Government, and peace is the beauty of all.

This Peace may be considered in four sorts: The first is Peace with God,
which comes of a true Religion: 1 Peace with God.
When men are led by the truth to believe in God, to repent their sin, and
sinde remission in Christ, that is the way to Gods Peace. Being justified by
Faith, we have peace with God: No faith justifies, but the true Faith, Romans 5.
1.
and no Religion informs men in the true Faith, but the true Religion: As it
leads us in a sure way to peace in Christ, so it leads us to keep that
peace in sincere obedience. In which respect when God gets his due, he
blesses us with his Kingdom within us. For the Kingdom of God is
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Romans 14. 17. Iustitia non est nisi
in ^a Repub. etc. Aug.
Ghost. This is the peace that no Kingdom can have, but such as have a true
Religion; they may have a civil and politic peace amongst themselves, but
none of this peace with God.

The second is a civil peace with man, when every one keeps his place, and
does his duty as he stands 2 Peace civil.
bound; the body is then in good plight when every member is whole, and
exercises the functions in order: So in a Kingdom when every one in his
calling does his duty with a loving respect to other, there is peace; or if
any be not peaceably disposed, their broyling humor is hemmed in by Justice
that they trouble not the peace of their Neighbor. This is a civil peace, the
health of the civil body, and a comely beauty in it; when every one brooketh
another in love, and works to others hands: And though there were innumerable
men in callings, places, offices, etc. Yet they seem all to be but one man
with one mind, seeking the good of other, and of the common body: As in
Musical instruments sounds Aug. ^^vit. 2. 21.
are diverse and contrair, high and low, etc. and yet make a sweet harmony;
so in a Kingdom are diverse estats* rich and poor, etc. Yet they have an
harmony and concord, and that concord is peace. That rule is general for all
things, Let no man seek his own, but every one another good. 1 Cor. 10. 14.


The third is a particular peace of our Lotte; when every man brooketh his lot
peaceably without oppression, either 3 peace, particular.
violent, or colored by Law: This is as the life of our lot, when our right
and possession have a peaceable use following, and every man may eat under his
own vine, and under his own fig tree: It is the very lotte of our lotte,
and a pleasant Micah. 4. 4.
sauce to sweeten our use, a sort of fruition of our Lot, the fruit of that
fruition, a way to Contentment, and the very prosperity of prosperity.

The fourt may be called, a Kingly peace, when people 4. Kingly peace.
are in love and peace with their King. They are his body, and he their Head,
under whose shadow they have these peaces: The use and enjoying of them will
reflect upon him as a procurer and maintainer. None can find comfort of a true
Religion in liberty and peace, but he must love and pray for him, under whose
government he has that great blessing: None can look on that public peace
the health and beauty of the civil body, but he must love and honor that
Head, from whom the influence of the public peace flows: And none can enjoy
the private peace of his Lot, lying down and rising in peace, but he will love
the preserver of it: Yea, that peace that flows from supreme Justice, is a
native and kind Daughter, and so just as to make us honor him who ministers
Justice for the procuring of peace. All these are strong bands to ty the hearts
of good people to such Princes, by whose government God blesses them with so
inestimable blessings.

This order is in the Angels Song, Glory to God in heaven Luke 2. 14.
peace on earth, and toward men goodwill: When man gives God his glory,
worshipping him in Spirit and truth, then God gives Peace to man, being
reconciled to him in Christ; and the ground of both is Gods good will toward
man, whereby he elected him in Jesus Christ; that good will sends down true
Religion to man, to direct him in the obedience of Gods revealed will.

These are the fruits of Justice in their several branches: The harmony of
these, peaces.
The first is Gods peace in our mind: The second is, man's peace in the civil
body: The third is Peace of our Lotte: And the fourt is, a peace with the Head
of the common body. The first appeaseth the terrors of our Conscience: The
second stays sactions and divisions amongst Subjects: The third, private
oppression: And the fourth, Rebellion against Princes: And all of them are our
ends in their several kinds: when God dwells in us, and makes us enjoy him
in his peace, then he makes us brook one another, and our selves in him.

Where Justice is not, these fruits of peace cannot be No Justice, no peace.
Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 27 28.
found: Where God gets not his due honor in a true Religion, there can be
no peace with him, but he sends war or other calamities to trouble their
peace and revenge the quarrel of his Covenant: As long as Israel worshipped
him a right, matters went well with them; but when they fell to idolatry, he
raised up bordering nations to punish them: In like manner he can punish
injustice among people: Lawful Government ministers Justice, and Justice
brings peace, so want of Justice brings confusion, and confusion breeds
discord. Heerevpon also comes the loss of particular Peace, when by tumults
no man can securely possess his goods, his blood or life. Where violence
rages, there reason is not heard, and the Laws are silent more where Arms
do speak.

Justice well administrate is a great preservation to a Saving severitie.
Land: It purges it from sin committed, by punishing the sinner, and keeps
many from sin, that they would otherwise commit, and so holds off Gods anger,
and procurreth his blessing, But neglect of Justice is cruelty and Cruel
Clemency.
not clemency, or rather a cruel mercy; it fostereth sin, and hasteneth
Gods wrath; when grievous sins are committed, they defyle the Land, and the
Land defiled can Number. 35. 34
not be expiate, but by the punishment of the malefactor: What shall God do,
but power out his plagues, and make the Land spew out her Inhabitants, where
sinners will not repent, and the Magistrate will not punish.

These two then Justice and peace go in others hands in Justice and peace go
in others hands.
a well governed Kingdom: Justice without Peace is a fruitelesse severitie,
and peace without Justice is a conspiracy against God: Justice is Gods
arrestment laid upon man's corruption, and peace is the quietness that
follows that arrest: Both the necessity and difficulty to keep peace are
as great, as to purchase it; for peace brings wealth, and wealth because of
our wickedness brings insolency, and insolency brings violence, so that
the daughter Peace would devour justice her mother, except Justice did her
second service, to keep men from violence: Her first service is to give every
man his due, and her second is to secure him in it: Peace of her self is a
thankful daughter to her Mother Justice, but our corruption Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
that abuses all, can abuse her also, and Ieshurun waxing fat, will kick
against his feeder; but peace is both best purchased and preserved, when
Justice absolutely reigns: Therefore good governors of Provinces may
tightlie be called Justices of peace: their name bears these twinne
blessings of Justice and peace, and if they answer to their name, they are
worthy instruments under God, and the King by ministration of Justice, to
keep peace amongst people. Solomon answers to this peaceable name. 1 Chro*
22. 9. 10.


In this point David alludeth to Solomon's name, for God told him: Behold, a
Son shall be borne to thee who shall be a man of rest: And I will give him
rest from all his enemies round about: For his Name shall be Solomon, and I
will give peace and quietness to Israel in his days. On that prophecy David
foundeth this prayer, and Experience proves both the truth of the Prophecy
and force of this prayer. He answered to his name; as he was called
peaceable, so he ruled his people in peace, and God blessed them with great
prosperity under him: Judah and Israel dwelt every one under his vine, etc.
They had peace 2 Chro. 1. ^5
with God, so long as they kept his Commandments, and peace with
neighboring Nations and amongst themselves: And the fruit of long peace was
gold and silver as Stones at Jerusalem.

Herein he was the type of the true Solomon Christ Christ the true Solomon
Multa de Solomone dicuntur quae e^ conventre non possunt, etc. Aug. Civit. 17.
8. 1 Cor. 1.
Jesus, whom this Psalm principally respects, and who for this same end was
shaddowed by Melchisedecke; he is first King of Righteousness or Justice, and
then King of Salem or of Peace. He proved the King of righteousness, when he
fulfilled all righteousness, in satisfying the Justice of God for us: and then
applying and imputing that Righteousness unto us, is the Lord our
Righteousness: for he is given of the Father to be our Righteousness,
Redemption, etc. He proves the King of our Peace, in that he has purchased
us peace by righteousness: For Esaias. 53.
the chastisement of our peace was on him, and by his strips we are healed:
When we are covered with his righteousness, Number. 23.
God sees not sin in Jacob, nor iniquity in Israel: His Justice being
satisfied, has no quarrel against us, but by virtue of that satisfaction,
justly adiudgeth peace and salvation to us. It is as proper to Justice to
pardon a penitent sinner in Christ, as to punish an impenitent 1 Ioh. 1* 9.
sinner: If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive them.
Christ's obedience has a double respect to Justice, the one of satisfying all
it can claim of us, the other of meriting all good to us. The first puts
away the demerite of sin The other possesses us in peace and glory.

Of War.
THus a good King rules his people in peace; but Necessity of war.
some time necessity will draw him to War, and that either for defense of
the truth, his Crown or Country, the just causes for a lawful war. Some
have thought Wars unlawful to Christians, Tertul de Coro^, militis
but that was only in some times and cases, when the Heathen Emperors urged
Soldiers to offer to idols, and if they refused, they were shame fully
cashired or martyred: In such a case it was good to abstain from a voluntary
or mercenarie warrefare: To go to war is not sin, but to do it for prey
is sin. Non enim militare delictum est, sed pro praeda, etc Aug de verb. Dom.
in Matthew sermon. 19.
And though warfare be a lawful calling, yet war is one of the three
plagues wherewith God usually breaks the pride of man's body: As by
withholding of nourishment in Famine, So by violence with his Arrow of
pestilence, or by the hand of man in wars.

Our sins procure war at Gods hands: For when we will not serve him in peace,
he makes us suffer in wars: And when our lusts rebel against his grace,
why should he War is for sin. Galat. 5. Romans 7.
not punish us with the wars of man? Yea, our lusts fights within us,
before we can fight with man without: For if man could dwell in himself in
the contentment of his lo^te, he would not encroach on his neighbor in
ambition, cruelty, avarice, etc. Miscontentment with our lot, and too great
love of earthly things makes us quyte peace, and fall in iarring: Wars are
sweet to them that have not felt their misery, but a taste of them gives a
sweeter relish to peace, and this is among other reasons why God afflicts a
Land with war, that thereafter they may count more of the blessing of peace.

The fruit prooveth it to be a plague: Thereby peace is broken, Laws are
silent, oppression and iniquity do It shakes all.
reign. There is neither marches of possession, nor property of use: and no
man has place to judge, or power to set things aright: beside the violence of
the enemy, the insolence of our assistants is intolerable: They who come to
help us, think they cannot hurt us, but under color of defense they bereave
us of our goods, and of our lives also if we resist; and though neither the
enemy, nor assisting Friend use violence, the license of people in their own
Country is no l^sse hurtful: The Soldiers girdle loses the most part from
all fear of God and respect to man: children and women (the objects of pity)
find no pity, but their chastity and lives destroyed at once, and their
defyling is more bitter than their death; cities of many years building, in
one hour turned in ashes: And though a ^and be a Paradise before Armies, yet
after them is an horrid wilderness.

Man exceeds all creatures in Hostility: Lions against Man cruel against
man.
Lions, and Dragons against Dragons are not so cruel as man against man: Their
fighting is but at occasional encounters, yet out of sight of other their rage
cease: Neque enim vnquam in^er se Leones aut inter se Dra^ cones, etc. Aug.
civit 12 22.
But man can spend days, nights and years in devysing mischief against
absent man; their yoaking in Battle is but the fruit of their former
plotting: Reason (our privilege above Beasts) when it turns furious,
puts us far under them. We are borne naked, but cruelty has turned us
all in armor: And where it might be called prudence to invent defensive
weapons, yet cruelty is more inventiue of offensive weapons to hurt other, and
more forward to destroy others than save our selves. This last Age (the
Rendevous of all wickedness) has fetched from the hels the invention of
Gunnes and fire work, and that with a defect on the defensive part: There was
no hurting weapon before, but Nature found a Guard for it; but fire-work has
not yet found a shield. Corrupt Nature is more ingenious to destroy than to
preserve, and decaying mankind falling further from God, ^urneth more to
Satan's image, both in an active and passive destruction.

When Armies join in Battle, man is going out of himself: And though he be
reasonable, yet being clothed Armies are men transported.
with Brass or Iron, he is more brazen and irnish, than his Armor: He has
none other respect to his enemy but to destroy him, and that rage is so
b^nded, that they cannot help their Friend: Though wounds strike their
neighbour-Souldier to the ground, yet the necessity to keep their rank
turns them out of love and humanity; and if they be straited, they must
trod on his belly to keep their order: The feet of horses on their head or
womb, pressing out their Brains and Bowels, are the usual comfort that
fallen men can sinde. Their death is violent in rage at their enemies, and
without comfort in soul or body from their friends: A Roman Soldier
spoiling his slain enemy, found that he was his Brother, and killed himself
for grief: And what is Aug. Civ. 2. 25.
all warre-fare, but a killing of our Brethren?

Wars then are the last of all remeeds: A wise Physician goes not at the
first to cutting and burning, but after all other cures have failed: So a wise
Prince goes not to war, till all peaceable treatings fail. It is not
undertaken for it self, but for peace; and some in a tolerable peace have made
war for a better peace, As a man evil cured of a broken leg will break it
again, to have it better cured. This is the task of a good King, in peace to
be furnished for war, and in war to aim at peace, and if he must have
wars abroad, to keep love and peace at home with his Subjects, and amongst
themselves.

True Religion in purity, and peace, the greatest care of Kings and Subjects.
OF all that is spoken, a general duty rises, both for Princes and people,
that if they would have all these True Religion the great care of princes and
people.
former blessings, they strive carnestlie to maintain a true Religion: So
Theodosius on his deathbed exhorted his Sons above all things to maintain
the true Faith: And Iustine told the like to Tiberius his Successor. It
directs Kings to be Kings according to Gods heart, and people to obey as the
Lords people: It tempereth authority in Princes, and sweetneth Subjection to
people: The great power of Princes that might turn in tyranny, is made
profitable for people; and the natural antipathy that is in some people is
mitigate, and so Princes rule meekelie, and people obey willingly: Thereby
Kings are taught the form of Government from God, who disposes all things
sweetly and powerfully; and people submits themselves to his ordinance, as
to the will of their Father: Kings see great meekness joined with great power
in Christ, who being the Lord of all, made himself a servant to all; and
people see in him a willing subjection to Joseph and Marie, in the course of
his education: And both of them respect other, not only as men but as
Christians, the Brethren of Christ, and partakers of that same grace and glory
in Heaven. Out will by nature is captivate to sin, and the fountain of
disobedience; but being made free by grace, it sweetly inclines that way
that God directs it: God dwells in Kingdoms where true Religion is
harbored, and by grace gives an higher qualification to men; as it makes
them true Christians in their Persons, so their actions and offices are good
service to God, when they are done at his command, and respect to his glory.

Impyres have their beginning, growth, hight, and fall: But they fall not as
they rise* They rise by small degrees True Religion is the health of Kingdoms.
but fall at once, as by a precipice. Belthazar in one night lost his life and
his Kingdom, and the Persian Monarchy fell to Alexander in one day. But there
is nothing more forcible to make a Kingdom immortal, than Religion truly
practiced, thereby God dwells in a Land as their glory and their Shield.

Kingdoms without true Religion are not so: the old Monarchies of Assyria,
Greece, etc. and Republickes, as Pagan kingdoms far behind Christian
Kingdoms.
Rome, Sparta, etc, are but bad paternes of Government; they went no further
than Nature, because they had none other guide: And neither knew God in Christ,
nor sanctification by grace: They had indeed a right to secure them from the
challenge of man, but in the use of it were almost as far behind Christian
Kingdoms, as flock, of Beasts are behind Pagan societies. The Heath^n saw
this far, that Religion is most necessar for Estate: And some of them
gloried, that the Romans came to their Monarchy, Religio and timor Dei est
qui custodi^ etc. Lact* de ^ra. 12. and 8.
not so much by power and craft, as by their Religion. But what they spoke of
their superstition, we apply it to the truth, for it is Religion and the fear
of God that keeps the Societies of men in order, without which the life of
man would be filled with foolishness wickedness, and cruel^ie.

As true Religion binds Princes and people together, so True Religion keeps
peace among Kingdoms.
does it Kingdom with Kingdom. The pride of Conquerours falls not in a
godly Prince; all the four Monarchies were founded by Pagans; and when the
Roman Emperors turned Christian, they left their conquering humor* though they
had power to conquer more: Christ the Prince of Peace, makes such Kings (as
he rules) peaceable; his Gospel is a Law of peace, and his grace makes men
as Lambs, to do as they would be done to: ^hogh the beasts in the Ark kept
their natural fiercenes, vet God suspended it during their byding there, and
the Lion and the Lamb lived peaceably together. Nature and superstition bid
men use their sword to conquer and destroy, but the grace of Christ makes them
turn their Swords in Syths, and Isa. 2. 4. Micah. 4. 3.
their Spears in Mattockes. Pagans and Mahumetans war against other, and
both of them against Christians; and amongst Christians the conquering humor
is not in Protestant Princes, but in Papists: because their superstition
mortifies not their corruption, but gives it full liberty. Since the
Catholic Kings became Iesuited as well in policy, as in Religion, they are
the oppressors of Europe; but when they turn to the truth, they will lay
down that invading and encroaching humor, and content them to rule their own
Subjects in peace: But since popery directs them to oppress other, and for
that end has set up the negociating and statizing order of the Jesuits, it is
not the Religion of the Lamb, but the cruelti^ of the Dragon. France, Austria
and Spain have their own iealousies and encroachings on other, and will keep
them so long as they are Popish: But when they become reformed in the true
Religion, they will accord among Regna in orb ut domus in urbe etc. Aug
themselves. So true Religion is a bond of peace, and makes Kingdoms in the
world like houses in a City, who delight in a neighborly concord.

By all means therefore Princes and people would No mixture of Religion.
maintain the true Religion, and that without any mixture, or liberty to
profess a false Religion. There is but one God, and one true Religion
expressed in Scripture, and all false Religio and ve^ ^eratio nulla alia quam
vnius Dei, etc. Lactant. lib. 1* cap. 20.
Religions, and their mixtures with the Truth offend him. He forbad Israel to
till the ground with diverse sorts of Beasts, or to sow it with diverse seeds,
or to make garments of linen and woollen together: and that not so much for
these things in themselves, as to tell that he abhorred all mixture in
Religion. Therefore Constantine spoke like Istud omnium maxim -- vna fides --
etc. Theod. l. 1. cap. 10.
himself: I have thought that most of all to be proponed by me, that in the
multitude of the holy Catholic Church one Faith, and sincere Charity should
be kept.

Politics call this mixture an Accommodation or Toleration: Such mixture is
unlawful.
the Cassandrians call it a mitigation or condescending; and Atheists call it a
liberty of conscience which is nothing but a passe-port to run to hell: For
what a worse Qua est peior mors anima, etc. Aug.
death is there to the Soul, than the liberty of error? But God calls it,
An halting betwixt God and Baal, and gross Atheism in the want of Gods fear:
The people that were sent to dwell in Samaria, worshipped the Lord, and the
gods of their own Nations; they thought themselves 2 King. 17. 32 33 34.
sure in that plurality of gods, and liberty of worship; but the Scripture
says, They feared not God at all. The Papists fall in that same sin; they
have multiplied gods with the true One. Beside God, they have their gods and
goddesses, and they honor their cannonized (a) Qua Divorum nostr^rum
Apotheoses. Cerem. p. 1
Saints as the Pagans did their Apotheosedmen: and their Pope used it more
eminently, in calling the blessed Virgin a goddess when he is suteing timber
to build her Church at Loretto Ne D^am ipsa^, etc. Leo. 10. lib. 8. Epist. 17.
But their patron grants that these names savor of Paganism, and desires
them to be a mended in his Books; Bellar recog. p. 2.
and as for the worship given to them, another Vives ad Aug. civit. 8. cap. 27.
grants that he saw no difference betwixt their opinion of the Saints, and
that, that the Gentiles held of their gods. Varro Civit. 4. 22 It is a fleshly
policy.
boasts that he appointed to the gods their offices and sacrifices and what
else are the Rituals and ceremonials of the Papists, but that same business
under other names.

The Kings of Egypt granted liberty of Religions to their people, and that in
a fleshly policy, that while every faction courted them for favor, they
might keep all factions obno^ious to them: And Julian at his entry gave the
like liberty to Jews, Gentiles and Christians: with the Aug Epi. 146.
same spirit he rendered the Churchs to damned Heretics, and opened the Temples
to devils.

Many Christian Princes have a slayed reconciliation of It is impossible.
Religions, but God never blessed that work in their hand: Constantius made
his Typus Heraclius his Ecthesis, Zeno his Henoticon, and Charles the fifth his
Interim; but all of them kindled the fire more than quenched it. They found the
truth of the old proverb, Isthmum perfodere, to dig through the Isthme,
which was spoken of works, neither lawful to attempt, nor possible to do.
And though some proud kings thereby assayed to correct Gods creation, in joining
Seas which he had distinguished, yet they were om^nouslie forced to desist: So
others have labored to reconcile the true and false Religion (which he has
made irreconcilable) but their labor to this hour was ever in vain. It
seems but a small matter (for condescending) to cast one letter in the midst
of a word, and turn Baron. Ann. 357. n. 12.
homoousios in homoiousios, that is the same-substance in the like-substance;
and yet that one Letter overthr^w the Article of the Divinity of Christ. And
when Basile in the end of a Bin. Tom. 1. p. 519. 520.
prayer, said in the holy Spirit, for with the holy Spirit, great offense was
taken by the people: therefore he advised Amphilochius to examine not only
words but syllabs and letters in Divinity. So hard it is to work a
condescending Basil. de Spir. Sanct. cap. 1.
even by the smallest alteration.

Some reformed Churches have found woeful fruits of Confusions of Holland.
such liberty, and he proves now a true Prophet, who said, That liberty of
prophesying in Preachers, and of professing in people, would shake Religion in
Holland. Libertas prophetand^ in Pastoribus, etc. Pareus.
They began modestly with some five disputable points, as the small end of the
wedge, to make way for grosser heresies: And if God had not put in the heart of
K. James to devise* and Prince Maurice to effect their curbing by the Council
of Dort, their heresies ere now had overflowed that Land: But God has
justified that prudent foresight of K. James, since they have declared, what
the^ they denied. They have taken Socinus by the hand, whom I may call (as one
did Origin) Theophil. Epist. pasch. 1
hydriam omnium haereseon, a mass or surviving monster of all heresies: And to
mitigate the horror of these opinions, they are pleading for favor to the
Socinians, as men that either err not, or if they do, they are excusable, and
not to be censured, because (forsooth) their errors touch not the foundation.
Anonym dissert* de pace and concordi^ Ecclesia. An. 1630.
They laid the seeds of these Apologies covertly long since; Vorst pra^ fat.
Exeges.
but now they are discovering to the world, that their grounds are the
overthrow of the grounds of Religion. Their rule is (e) Grot. de Ver. Christ.
Rel. in fine. Exam Cens. cap. 10. C^eer. de Di vinat. ^dem de Not. Deor. lib.
3. in fine.
to preach and profess what they please without censure. Man's original
misery in original sin they call with Pelagius, figmentum Augustini, or
Augustins dream; and the efficacious working of the holy Spirit, applying
grace to us, they call figmenta Calvini, Calvin's dreams. In the matter of
free will they follow the Pagans, as it is pleaded by Cicero: He was so hot
in that cause, that not being able to conceive how Gods Prescience, and man's
Free Will could stand together, for maintaining of Free will he denied both
Gods Prescience and Divination: And rather then these two should stand, he
denied a Deity. His arguments taken from Laws, Rewards, Aug Ep 107. Ci^it.
^ib. 5. c* 9. toto.
Prayers, and Exhortations, etc. to prove the absoluteness of Free Will;
Pelagius has borrowed from him: Socinus from Pelagius; and they from Socinus.
So in end under color of Truth according to godliness, they come to the
natural Religion of Pagans, the common Rendevous of all defections from the
Truth.

Thus after long gadding they prove that Socinus is transformed in them, as
Jerome said, That Basilides was transformed in Iovi^ian, and that both in sense
and style: For they affirm that they teach otherwise, than heretofore was
believed: A^^ter qua^ hactenus cre^ ditu^ est. exam cap. 18.
So said he before them, that his opinions of Christ were hid from others, and
that the true meaning was not known of all the Interpreters that are extant.
Explanatores latuisse videtur. Socin Explic* 10. 1. inifio page 1. and 3.
And again, our opinion is unheard, not only in our time, but also in many
Ages Sententia^ nostra^, ^nauditam scimus Socin. de not. Christ p. 1.
before: And more fully with disdain of the Fathers: We ingenuously confess
that our sentence of Christ's Adversari omnibus, etc. So^in contr* V^jek p. 134
Nature and Essence is contrair to all interpreters of Scripture who are come
to our time. Moreover, he professes the noveltie of it* in his Uncle, who
first proponed the opinion which he imbraceth of Jesus Christ, and tells us
the way how he got it, was by Revelation. Lal. Soc. primu^ omniuu^ docuit.
Soci^* def^ns. Asser 1. Soc. de not. Christi. p. 7.
This is like his friend Puccius, who affirmed that his opinion of universal
salvation was revealed to him by God Cert^sumus hanc interpretatione^, etc.
Puc. Christ ser. rat 120.
This plat-forme of his divinity is for Epicures, and that not far from
Origens mercy, to plead for Satan Annihilation, if not Salvation. What grace
could this plat-former of Religion have who refused to be baptized: and when a
zealous Preacher challenged him for that he was not baptized, nor would not
be baptized Cuteu. Object. 21
he answered like a novelling opiniator. That, what he thought of Baptism
he would leave it to his own thoughts. Quid hic faciat aut sentiat* etc. Soc.
resp ad C^t. Ob. 2^
Sure^t is, that one who refuses to be initiate in Christ by sacred Baptism,
is not a fit instrument to reform Christian Religion.

After this same manner spoke the old Arrians, of who^ Lyrinensis says, That
they overthrew well grounded Antiquity by wicked noveltie, and that the
ordinances of the Ancient were violate -- while the desire of profaine and new
curiosity cannot contain it self within the marches of sacred and pure
Antiquity Dum been fundata* etc. Lyrin. Con. cap. 6.
And they speak directly like the Pelagians: by us as Authors, as beginners
and expounders; condemn the things that ye held before, and hold these things
that ye condemned, cast away your ancient Faith, and receive another: And
what faith? I shrink to speak it; they are so proud, that I think they
cannot so much as be rehearsed, let be refuted without some guiltiness,
Damnate quae ^enebatis* etc. Ibid c. 14
in like manner, Abelardus said, All men think so, but I think not so. And
Bernard posed him justly, What then art thou? Tell us what is that, that
seems to thee and to none others? What has the Law? What has the Prophets
and Apostles, or Apostolic men preached unto us? but that, that thou only
denyest? Omnes sic, sed no^ ego sic. Ber^ Epist. 190.
And Hilarie speaks like an Orthodox. These things I have believed by the
holy Spirit, so that beyond this Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ I cannot be
taught. And a little above: I hold fast that, that I have received, neither do
I change that, that is Gods. Quod accipi* ten^o nec d^muto etc. Hilar* ad
Constant p. ^81.
I demand of them as Pacianus did the Novatians; Who teaches so? Did Moses,
or Paul, or Christ? No, none of these: Who then? Novatian commanded it after
three hundredth years* Quis hoc vendi^at an Moses Pacia^. Epist. 3 apud Biblio.
Pat. Tom. 3. col. 4.
So I may say, That Socinus has both invented new heresies, and renewed old
heresies after a thousand five hundredth and eighty years. And I charge them
as Jerome did Vigilantius, If any before thee has received this thy
Interpretation, let it be true thou says; But if the Church of God never
heard of such wickedness, and Satan has spoken by thee, then repent in
sackcloth and ashes, and wype away such great wickedness by continual
tears. Et tant^ scelus iugibus absterge ^acry^^s Hieron* advers. Vigilant.


This is the damnable fruit of liberty of prophesying, and professing, after
that God has blessed a Church with a body of sound Doctrine, according to the
pattern of wholesome words: The minds of people are shaken from the Truth,
made susceptible of any opinion, and inclinable to the worst. When Arianisme
and other errors, had shaken the Church for a time, the ambiguous minds of
people received Mahumetisme greedily.

For keeping of true Religion, it is necessar to keep Schism renteth both the
Church and the state.
Peace in the Church: Schism brings heresy; and these two renting the
Church, do rent the state also: The Church and state are twins, and their
peace, and trouble are inseparable: Some Politickes have advysed Princes to
foster dissentions in the Church, as a way to make the Impyre floorish: So did
Themistius to Valens the Emperors, but he found confusion in the end: And
Julian allowed Heretics to vex and trouble the Church, because he thought
Aug. Ep. 146.
these dissentions a special means to put Christian Religion out of the
world. When Peace is kept in the Church, the state flow risheth, but where it
is neglected, horrible confusions follow as well in state as in Church. The
Schism betwixt the Greek and Latin Churches could never reconceale* and the
Greek Emperor lost the hearts of the people for too much inclining to the
Pope. The divisions of Germany are most by schism^, and the disputes of their
Theologues turn the Courts of Princes in factions: The thrusting of Gregory's
Liturgy on Spain divided the hearts Field of the Church. page 189.
of people from their King, and amongst themselves; for al^ beit things were
good, yet change of custom do more Plus no vitate turb^nt, qu^ vtilitate
prosunt. Aug. Epist. 118.
hurt by noveltie then help by profit, as Augustine well observes: When
affections accord, men may well brook other in diversities of opinion, but the
renting of affection (the marrow of Schism) breaks unity of opinion: also:
By nature we are averse from the Gospel, but if a stumbling block be laid
in our way, our averseness finds a reason for it self. The kingly Prophets
practice is good herein: Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper
that love thee: Peace be within thy walls Psalm. 122. 6, 7
and prosperity within thy Palaces.

Of three sorts of Kings,
1. Of GODS King.
BEfore I leave these verses, suffer me to present to you three sorts of
Kings: Gods King: Machiavells Gods King.
Tyrant: And the Pops Vassal: First a good King whom we call gods King, comes
to his Throne in Gods mercy, 1. His entry
both to himself and to his people, as David and Solomon, etc. Secondly in his
Disposition; he is religious, to acknowledge 2. His disposition.
his placeing on the Throne not to come of man or Fortune, but of God: His
exalting above man, makes him not forget his subjection to God, but by hearty
devotion he does homage to him daily; both for the Crown he holds of him,
and for gifts to use it. His business is not with people alone, but with
Cuiplus licet qua^ aliis* plerumq. plus libet* quam licet.
God, to enable him for government: He thinks that a Tyrants verdict, si
libet licet, if thou like it is leasome: and knows that to whom more is
leasome than to others they can easelie will more than is leasome.

Thirdly, in his government, he is wise by Rehoboams folly: He leans not
to his own wit, or to the counsel 3 His Govevernement.
of these who are of his own years, but labor* th(...) to do Gods work
with Gods wisdom: Therefore he^ reads and meditateth his Word, and with
David maket^ Ios^. 1. Psa^* 119.
his Commandments the men of his counsel: He knows nothing in his
government will be acceptable to God ^ut that which agrees with his word: As
he holdet^ his Kingdom of Gods will, so in ruling it, he follows his
revealed will, that he may abide in his favor. 4. His account of his people.


Fourthlie, in his account of his people; he counts them not slaves but free
men, even Gods people, to judge thy people; and that by Creation, Redemption,
and Covenant: He knows that Gods right to them is first, and more than his;
and that his power over them is not absolute, but delegat for which he must
be countable 1 Chro. 28. 2*
to God: He counts them as his Children, as David spoke to Israel, Hearken
my Brethren and people: He looks not so much to that relation of domination
and subjection, as to that sweeter relation of Father and Son. He rejoices
as much in the name of a Father as of a King, and sweyeth the kingly Scepter
in a fatherly love. Fiftlie in his ends: By all means he seeks the wealth
5. In his ends
and peace of his Subjects as his joye and glory: But he counts their
divisions amongst themselves, or their hatered of him as greevous wounds: He
craveth their hearts more than their goods, and counts their love his best
Guard under God.

2. Of Machiavells Tyrant.
But Machiavell, (or rather Satan in him) has drawn up the Portrate of a
Tyrant under the Name Machiavells Tyrant.
of a Prince, and that contrare to all the points of my Text. First, he
directs his Prince for his entry, not 1. His entry
to care how he come to a Kingdom, so that he may have it: Truth or
false-hood, right or wrong, craft or cruelty, Match. pr^n. 18 disp 3 42
blood or poison, etc. All are alike to him, if they further his end: He
looks not to God and Providence, but to Fortune and his own fleshly
wisdom, not to the equity or iniquity of the means, but to their
possibility to bring his evil purpose to pass: And commends to him joyntlie
the cruelty of the Lion and craft of the Fox: Both Machiavel. principis ^. 18
and 19.
good and bad may possibly be alike in desiring dignity; but they are not
alike in the acquiring of it: The first goes Gods way in righteousness and
virtue: The other takes him to by-ways with craft and cruelty.

Secondly, for disposition; He forbids his Prince to 2. His disposition.
be religions indeed, but to seem so: the show of it is enough to do his
turn with man, whom he alone respects; and that only to deceive him: He
knows that Antimach. 191.
men are carried with outward shows; and though they who are near to him know
his piety to be fained; yet they dar not resist the common opinion of people,
who count him to be godly indeed. He counts the Conscience and fear of
God: the care to please him, and to be approved in the last reckoning, and
such other practicke points of Religion, to be as many cut-throates of his
politic designs: If these thoughts fall in his heart, they but drown him in
perplexities; and suffer him neither freely to intend his wickedness, nor
cheerefullie to follow it out: Therefore he holds them all at the door of
his heart as odious stranglers of his spirit; and sets up Atheism or deep
Hypocrisy in their place: He leaves Religion to such as he counts base
spirits, who delight (as he thinks profainelie) to terrify themselves
needlesselie with the conscience and reverence of a Godhead.

Thirdly, for his Government, he ady viceth him to 3. HiS government.
have sufficient wit of himself, at least to think that he has it; and so
turns him in a Pope with infallibility of judgment: Match, de privit. 23
To be jealous of all, and keep^ close his intentions; that the imparting of
them to other were they never so godly, wise, or trusty* may discover, and
frustrate Antim. 482, 487.
his purposes: If he could be another himself in another Person, he would
suspect and decceiue that Petrus Rex Arragonia.
other himself, and he would rent his inner Coat if it were privy to his
plots.

Fourthlie, for account of his Subjects, he directs him 4. His account of his
people.
not to count them Gods people but his own; and that not as freemen but as
slaves: He is a slave to his own humor, and thinks them for none other
end, but to serve him in serving it, He takes neither the relation, or
affection of a Father, but his actions are full of tyranny. 5. His end. Match.
Princ. 20.


Lastly, for his end, he advises to keep his people in continual discord,
and to expone their concord a conspiracy against him: There is nothing so
terrible to him, as good correspondence in the mutual intelligence of their
affairs: If the fear of God, and love of equity keep them in peace, he
will cast in the apple of strife, and put them in factions: He seeks more
their goods and service, than their hearts; and like Nero cares not they hate
him, so they fear him: So he fills all with fear, Oderint dum metuant.
and most himself, for he that will be feared of all, must fear all: that
fear fills him with suspicion, and suspicion draws him to cruelty, which
makes his kingdom a tragical stage.

This is Machiavells godless direction, whereof he was Borgia Machiavells
Darling.
not so much the inventer as a polisher; the pieces of that policy lay
scattered in Histories, but he put them together, in one form as he saw them
acted at the court of Rome under Pope Alexander the sixth; and from the practice
of such a father, directed Borgia his Son, an evil egg of an evil Crow:
What could the world look for of him, who was the Son of such a Father as
Alexander, and the pupil of such a Tutour as Machiavell: Quae enim meliora
novo Principi Praecepta, etc. Machiavel. Prin. cap. 7.
He took him as the object and Center of all his wicked devyses; and sets
him out to the world as a most perfect exemplar to be followed. Italy was
then desirous of some one Prince to restore her to liberty; and the Court
dreameed that this one should be Caesar Borgia: Summa bonitas preces Authoris
audivit. etc. Practic. Can. p. 233.
He began his Monarchy with the killing of his elder Brother, and of a
Cardinal would be a commander of an Army; and went on, till God made him and
his father spectacles of his wra^h: They had plotted to poison some Cardinals
for their estate, but God by the error of a Cup Bearer, made them Paulus
Iovius. Guicciardin.
fall in the snare they had prepared, and drink the poison appointed for the
other: Here was a time to repent; but when he saw all his devyces
disapointed, he blasphemed; and called that work of Gods justice, an
extraordinar malignitie of Fortune. Extraordinaria. quadam, fortun^
malignitate. Machiavel. Princ. cap. 7. Borgia fortunes play fool.
This is the temper of godless spirits, to plot wickedness boldly, and when
they are disappointed, rather to rail against God under the name of Fortune,
than to acknowledge his Justice and repent: Such blasphemy is worse, than the
calamity it self.

Borgia was never so right placed, as when he was put in the belly of a Mulet,
to draw the poison out of his body: Here was a fit place for Machiavells
darling: he was never more suitable cled than with such a carkase; and that
belly was never worse filled, than with such a Monster. Here was such lips,
such lat tuce, and a worse kernel, than the shell: He was a compleete circle
of Fortunes turnings: First her darling in his exaltation, next her ludibrie or
mocking-stocke in his downe-cast: And lastly, a document of her futilitie and
waikenesse. This was an example of Gods just Judgment to all Tyrants, who will
conquer and rule a state in contempt of God.

All this is called wisdom in the world, but it is extreme Machiavilian
policy is madness.
madness: For beside their sin which they misregard, even in sound natural
wisdom, they procure their own ruin by these same means, which they choose
for their stablishment. He is a foolish builder who chooses for the
foundation of his house an hollow ground full of Caves, and these caves full of
powder, and other matter meet for fire or earth quacke; then dobbeth the walls
with Pitch or Brimestone: Such is the building of Machiavilians; they lay the
grounds of pride and Atheism in themselves; and of fear and Hatred in their
people: They build up their work with Hypocrisy, cruelty, and craft:
Therefore the least sparkle of Gods anger shakes their building from the
foundation. They begin with impiety contemning God; they go Job. 5. 13. 1
Cor. 3 19.
on with iniquity oppressing man; and in end some tragical calamity
destroys them and their state. So the Lord catches the crafty in their
craftiness. He contemns both Christian Princes and Religion.


But he is not content to set out his Tyranny to the world; but reflects also
upon Christian Religion and Princes; as though it made them effeminate and
brake their courage, because it teaches them to seek the heaven, Machiavel.
Disput lib. 2 cap. 2*
and contemn the glory of the world: And so prefers Pagans religion, and
Princes to them both: Here he plays the Atheist in mocking the life to come,
and bidding men range like beasts for present contentment: He knows not
that Kingdoms are but common gifts, because God gives them to good and
evil, lest the godly Regna mundi bonis and malis communiter praestat. Aug.
Civit. lib 4. cap. 33 Qu^ Augusto, ipse and Neroni Ibid. lib. 5. cap. 22. Aug.
Civit. 5. 25.
should seek them as perfect happiness: He who gave the impyre to Augustus
gave it also to Nero, and he who gave it to Constantine, gave it also to
Julian: Neither knows he that true courage or greatness stands not in a
brutish headiness, but in true Faith, and the fear of God, directing them to
enterprise nothing but good, and to submit themselves to his will. All the
Lines of Pagan Emperors have nothing like, David, Charles, or Constantine the
great, whom God blessed with greater blessings than any man lawfully may wish.

Julius, Augustus, Antoninus etc. were great names indeed, and their fame the
vmbrage of a great fancy; like Stat magni nominis umbra.
these Giants before the flood that were men of name* but not of worth: and all
their greatness was to bring a deludge on the world. They were great scourges
in Gods hand to plague man; and that not with a lent cure, but Genesis 6. 4.
with violence: Like a Paracelsian extract in a plethoricke body, to turn all
vpside down: The Romans for 700. years oppressed the world; and Caesar in
three years oppressed them, and overthrew their liberties. Titus called
Delitiae humani generis, the dainties of mankind, had no courage; at the
approaching of death; he weeped as a Boy in a School, and complained that he
was pulled vntimously and vnservedly from his great Fortune. Traian was so
just, that the Senate call him Optimus, and honored him with a Statue in his
life time; his Virtues made some superstitious Monks, to feign that Gregory's
prayers relieved him out of hell. They are as gouttish in their mind (who
credulouslie believe these fables) as they feign that Gregory was punished
with the Gout for his indiscreet Ciacconi^^. But Bellarmine refuteth him, de
Purgatorio. lib. 2. 8.
devotion: but Traian ascryvedh^s Impire to Jupiter, and for a time was a
cruel persecuter: Principality was never better harbored than in a Christian
breast, it makes them in their life courageous to fight against Satan, and to
rule and bridle these passions, which commanded heathen princes; and at their
death, peaceably to lay down their Scepters in Gods hand; that they may
possess an heavenly Kingdom. There is more true worth and valor in a good
Christian King, than in all the heathen Conquerours.

Mankind has not ever been so happy in Government Tyranny can not destroy
Government.
as to be free of Tyrants. Rashness in Counsels, and the swey of passions and
factions, do often preponder the best course; and yet not withstanding all
these, God has ever kept in mankind a form of government. These are like
sickness in the body, the blemishes in face, and heresies in the Church; as at
the first they are evidences of their corruption who have them, and punishments
of the bodies where they are, so to the judicious they are testimonies of a
providence, overruling all. Though created speces of creatures by their
mixture produced Mangrels, yet these Monsters could neither destroy, nor
obliterate the created speces: These errors of Nature pass not further than
the first degree, because they are not under the blefsing. Increase and
multiply, which was Genesis 1.
given only to the created kinds. So right government is Gods ordinance, and
could never be thrust out of the world by Tyranny. They who took occasion of
the miscarying of things, to doubt of Providence, were but short-sighted: They
stood at the first step of disorder, and unequal rewarding of humane merits,
but they should have looked to the final event. For though God suffer the
course and midst to play confusedly, yet at last he never missed his good end.
Man's imprudence is both a matter, and evidencie of divine Providence.

3. Of the Popes Vassal.
We have heard of Gods King, and Machiavells tyrant, The Popes Vassals.
the Pope also has a Mould of his own for framing of Kings: He differs
from them both, but inclines most to Machiavells. Gods King is for the good of
all, Machiavels tyrant for the hurt of all. But the Pope over reaches his
policy, and makes a King for his own ends; a snare to his Subjects, and most
to himself, the reproach of authority, and as baselie obsequious to the 1.
He usurps on their entry.
Pope as any Vassal. 1. For their entry in the Kingdom, he sets up and
cast^h down Kings, as though God had put them under him, as Chesse men, or
Counters in a Merchants hand to be changed in their place, and worth at his
pleasure. 2. For their Task, he inioyneth them to serve him absolutely in a
blind obedience; 2 prescriveth their task.
to maintain Idolatry and persecute the Truth: If they do so, they are his
beloved Children; and he breathes on them his Apostolic benediction, in
recompense of kissing of his Feet: But if they use their power against his
tyranny, and keep their people in the Truth, then they are excommunicat as
pushing Rams that trouble the Flock: Yea, though they were zealous Papists
in superstition, Bellar. Romans Pont. lib. 5. cap. 7.
yet if they be not forward to destroy Protestants, they shall be killed as
profaine Politics by some Iesuited zelote.

3. For their Rule, he keeps them always as Babes 3 Appoints their Laws.
under Tutorie; he suffers them not to rule according to Gods word, and the
wholesome Laws of their Kingdoms, but thrusts upon them his Brieues, and
Commands by his Legates: His dispensations and Non-obstantes are sufficient to
remove the Impediments of divine and humane Laws, and his Mandamus is a
warrant good enough to execute his tyranny. 4. For the respect due to them he
thrusts them out of their place, and bestows upon them, but the Latter*
meat of public prayers, and in other places prefers Presbyters to them,
and the occasional modesty or civilitie of Martyn, giving the Cup to a
Presbyter at the Table of Maximus the Emperor, shall be called the just
valuation, and preferring of a Presbyter Sulp. Sever* de Vita. S. Martini.
Bellarm. Apolog.
to the Emperor. This is the point of his tyranous usurpation over Princes,
which has tossed Europe these six hundredth years, and craves a fuller
handling by it self alone, which God-willing I shall perform. See afterward
the L. G. of Princes and Popes.

The Pourtrat of a perfect King.
We may also raise of this Text a description of a good King and an happy
Kingdom. A good King A perfect King.
God descriues in David, I have found me a man according to mine heart etc.
And that was in respect of his Election to the Kingdom, which was in mercy,
and had a preceding Election of Grace: In his Government, because Actor. 13.
he applied himself to Gods heart in following his will: And in his
Approbation, because God who chused him in mercy, and guided him in his
government, did accept his obedience, and set him up as a compleete pattern of
good Kings, whose greatest commendation is to walk in the ways of David my
servant.

This is Gods description of good Kings; but how Few good Kings.
few such have been in the world? There were none good before Christ but in
the line of David: For after the division of the Tribes under Rehoboam, all the
Kings of Israel were wicked idolaters; and of Judah only two were exceeding
good, Ezekiah, and Josiah; six were praised in part, and reprooved in part, as
Asa, Iosaphat, Ioaz, Amasah, Vzzah, and Iotham: And all the rest were idolaters
as the Kings of Israel. The praise of good Kings is, that they know the Truth,
and served God accordingly: They were zealous for his glory, destroying
idolatry, and holding In Israel Reges alios magis alios minus omnes tamen
reprobos legimus. Aug. Civit. 18. lib. 23.
it out of their Kingdoms; they maintained the worship of God according to his
Truth, and gave neither toleration nor liberty of false Religions to their
Subjects; but astricted them by Laws to worship him aright, and went before
them in a royal example. They sought not themselves, but Gods glory; and he
recompensed them again by his blessing on their persons and government, and
making their Names to flowrish in benediction. But the idolatrous Kings were
contrare; they forsook the true God themselves, and permitted a miscellanie
Religion to their people: Therefore his curse was on them, and their
government: He wrote their Names in the dust, and made them vile to the
posterity, as may be seen in Histories.

Here is a looking Glass for Christian Princes: Popish Kings though they be
in the Church, yet they are like the Kings of Israel in idolatry, as Jeroboam
with the Calves His Pattern.
at Bethel: But Kings in reformed Churches are like the Kings of Judah, who
have God among them in the Arc of his testimony, and true Religion; and it is
their safety, to follow David, Ezekiah and Josiah in the maintenance and
practice of true Religion. This is a better exemplar than the Cardinals: When
for a fashion he has set down the example of some good Jewish and Christian
Bellar de off ^rin^ lib, 2 3*
Princes, he subioynes the Legend of some canonized Kings, who got that honor
when Ignorance and Idolatry prevailed in the Church, That looking to that
Glass of the Popes forging, he may steal the hearts of Princes from God to
superstition. I would ask, if Joseph, Moses David, etc. before Christ, and
Theodosius, Tiberius the younger etc. were not as holy as Vences^aus,
Leopoldus, and other canonized Kings. If they were, wherefore are these
canonized and not the other?

A good King sets God before him as his end; and true His end.
happiness in his favor; he counts his earthly Kingdom neither his e^d,
nor a way to the right end, but seeks the Kingdom of Heaven above the other,
and that by the way of godliness and righteousness: It is a 1. In godliness.
well grounded Throne that stands on these two pillars: Godliness makes men
eternal; it is his Image that never dies, and makes their persons and works
acceptable to him; without it as no man can see him, so with it undoubtedly
they shall enjoy him for ever. No Jewel nor Dyamount shines brighter in the
Crowns of Kings than true godliness.

Righteousness is another Pillar, the proper work of the Throne, and Gods
work in Kings who sit in it; for 2. His righteousness. Prove. 21. 1.
the heart of the King is in the Lords hand, and he sweyeth it whither he
will: It is a just thing with GOD to maintain the Throne his own ordinance,
when righteousness his will and work do both live in it, and issue from it:
And what are good Kings on Thrones, but God in them judging the World? God
stands in the Congregation Psalm. 8^. 1.
of the mighty, and he judges among Gods: He delights to rest where he
reigns and rules with delight.

A righteous King sitting on his Throne is a more pleasant His Throne.
sight than Solomon's, and that more for his invisible Attendants than for his
visible. Before him stands Affability, 1 Kin 10. 18 19 Affability.
as a Porter, to give access to the plaints of the afflicted: Injuries choppe
the hearts of the oppressed, and they run to Princes for help: And they are
set up in their greatness, not to neglect the oppressed, but to hear their
complaints: It was a fault in the Kings of Persia not to admit any to their
presence, but such as Ester. 1. 2.
were called upon; it made oppressors bold, and the oppression of the poor
incurable: But it was commended in another King, who gave justice to an
oppressed Philip of Macedon.
woman, who told him freely, That if he had not leisure to judge, he should
not reign: And Traian was honored with a Statue, because being on horse, and
going to battle, he stayed till he did Justice to an oppressed Widow. When
affability as a Porter has made way to the oppressed, then love of the people
in the Kings heart, as a Master Love of his people.
of requeasts takes the complaint in hand, and calling Wisdom and Prudence
to counsel, they consult to do right according to the cause. His courage.


Before his Throne stand Courage and Clemency: Courage to proceed according
to Justice; and Clemency to temper Clemency.
some times the strictness of Justice: Clemency remoueth Severitie, least it
turn to Cruelty, and Courage remoueth too great Indulgence, least it breed in
People a liberty to sin, and contempt of Princes: Clemency can Sicuti est
aliquando misericordia pun^ens ita est crudelitas parcens. Aug. Epist. 54.
pardon small faults; but great sins and effronts of Authority would be
punished; else it is not Clemency, but Cruelty. On either side of the Throne
two Sergents stand, Power and Diligence: Power, to execute the sentence
pronounced, which cares as little the difficulties that may follow execution,
as Justice did the respect of persons: And Diligence does all with such
convenient speed, as the nature of the matter, and the honor of the Prince
requires: At the back of this Throne leans Peace and Prosperity, Peace
among the whole Body while every one gets his right, and is secured in it:
And Prosperity, as Gods blessing following that his own work, of a wife and
righteous government.

As a good King seeks Gods favor above all, so nixt He seeks the love of
his Subjects. Exodus 32. 32.
thereunto the love of his people: The heart is the Man, and among all
affections love caries the heart and captives man: Hatred and Fear are
troubling passions, and separate the heart from their object; but love applies
it self joy fully, and draws the whole Man to that it loves: The best
conquest of their love is by goodness Loves proper object; and there is no
heart so hard as to hold it self from these in whom true goodness shines:
We may compel men to fear, but cannot move them to love us, but by sweet
motives; the bond that comes by compulsion is unpleasant to the parties; it
is soon broken, and when it leaves off, is turned in hatred, but the band of
love is both pleasant and firm.

Fatherly love in a King to his people, and love in them to Mutual love
betwixt them.
him again is a sweet relation, and makes their mutual duties both easy
and pleasant: Moses preferred the people to himself: Spare them, O Lord, but
raze my name out of the Book of life: And David offered himself to be 2 Samuel
24.
punished for the people, I have sinned but these sheep what have they done?
Next to the love they send up to GOD, this descending love to their people,
makes them careful of their peoples good. When he loves his people he has
conqueshed their heart absolutely; for no affection either deserves or
finds more recompense than love: Thereby he is Master of their bodies and
goods, and Constantius justly boasted, that he had more money in his
Treasures than Diocletian, because he had his peoples favor.

Princes are oft-times unjustly hated, yet not loved except Tyrants tormented
with fear.
they love their Subjects; but if they hate them, and be terrible, they are
repayed in the same kind: Whosoever affrighteth many, is affrighted of many
again; for so God by nature has appointed, that what is great by fear of
others, is full of fear it self: The Lion that affrighteth all Beasts, is
affrighted at the crowing of a Cock, and cruel Beasts are amazed with cries
and sounds in the Forest* so what ever terrifieth others, does tremble it
self. A tyrants government r^steth not, and the fear he works on others,
returns on himself, and makes him a Center both of their hatred and fears;
who are affrayed of him: He is in a continual and dangerous, war, and
neither sure before, nor behind, nor on either fide; neither has he peace
within, because he is ever affrayed. Loving Princes dwell in peoples hearts.


But when Princes exerce their power in love, are easy for access, ready to
hear the plaints of the poor, they are loved of all, defended, and honored
as Gods Vicegerents: All men will desire a long life to them, and bestow their
own lives for their preservatio^. So he dwells in great safty, who dwells
in the hearts of his Subjects: As many loving hatrs, so many open ears to
hear, eyes to see, and hands to avoyde his grief, and procure his good: The
Bees defend their King, and count it their glory to die for him; so are loving
and beloved Subjects to a loving and beloved King. He is as a Center in his
Kingdom, and all gifts and callings as a circle about him; he sends out a
royal influence to every part of that large Circle which is augmented by his
love: And that influence and love does Regem suum Apes summa protectione
defendu^t etc Ambros hex. l b. 5. cap. 21.
civilic perfect the gifts of his Subjects: This is recompensed with the love
and service of millions of the people, who the more cheerfully bestow
themselves and their gifts for him, because of his love. It is pleasant to see
this mutual respect betwixt such an Head and such a Body; but more joyful
for themselves, to find it betwixt them. Peoples loyalde the guard of Prince^.


His love and royal virtues procure both the good will of his people and
Authority: The first is their strongest Affection, the other a great Opinion
of their Kings excellency, composed of reverence and fear of his offense: All
these preserve both the Persons and Majesty of Kings; and bar contempt,
which undermines the authority of Majesty and Empyres: Conspiracies are the
most fearful convulsions of a Kingdom, and there is no better humane guard
against them than the love of people; for Traitors seek this as a special
ground, if their treason can be acceptable to Subjects: But where Princes are
loved of their people, none dare conspire against them; because they will find
as many severe Avengers, as loving Subjects.

But we may take more briefly the description of a good King from S.
Austine, after his long discourse of providence over Kingdoms. We do not
count Christian Civit. lib. 5. cap. 24.
Emperors happy (says he) because they did reign long, or left their Sons
heirs of their Empire -- For such common blessings some worshippers of idols
have received, who pertain not to the Kingdom of God, to which these
Christians appertain: And this was done of Gods great mercy, least the
faithful should count th^se worldly dignities the chief good. But we call
them happy, if they govern justly, if they be not puffed up, with
flattering tongues and base attendents, but remember that they are men, if they
make that power a servant to God, to enlarge his worship: If in their own
persons, they fear, love, and worship God, and love that Kingdom of Heaven
most wherein they will have no Competitours. If they revenge slowly, and
pardon hastily -- If Leacherie and other lusts be so much the more restrained
in them as they have the greater liberty: if they had rather rule their own
lust than Nations: And if they do these things not for love of vain glory,
but the love of eternal happiness. If for their sins they offer to the true
God a sacrifice of humility, piety, and prayer. Such Christian Kings we say
are must happy.

An happy Land.
We may also raise hereof the description of an The hapines of a ^and.
happy Land; that happiness is not in the situation lying convenientlie to
the Sun, or to have rich Mines of gold and silver with all sort of rare
fruits and commodities, etc. The best soyles for the most part are inhabit by
worse people: Turks and Mahumetanes dwell in that Land which God gave as a
blessing to Israel; and Pagans have the choice parts of the world; to tell us
that the happiness of people is not in the goodness of a soil, and that the
godly have not their byding City on Earth: But that is Heb. 13. Psalm. 80
Malach. 1
the happiness of a Kingdom where the Sun of righteousness shines, and
the Mines and Treasures of the grace of Christ are discovered, where Christ the
desire of Nations, and the glory of Israel does gather and rule his Church,
where he sets up his Throne in the hearts of their Rulers, and makes them
to authorize by Law, and profess and practice in their own person the true
Religion: Where the people ladened with these mercies, know their time Luke 19.
and the things that concern their Peace. The glory of Canaan was not for
that it flowed with milk and honey, but for the Ark of God, that abode in it,
and the glory of Jerusalem was not in stately buildings, but because God
Psalm. 76. 1 Psalm. 132
was known in it, and said, here will I dwell.

This is the estate of every Kingdom where Christ rules by his Gospel.
Behold, a King shall rule in righteousness and Princes shall rule in Judgment:
And what shall be the fruit? The work of righteousness shall be peace, and
the effect Esaias. 32. 1. 17 Deuteronomy. 11. 12
of righteousness quietness and assuredness for ever. And my people shall
dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting
places: The eyes of the Lord is on such a Land from the beginning of the year
to the end. Happy Psalm. 144 15
is that people that is in such a case, yea, happy is that people whose God is
the Lord.

The Conclusion.
I Close with the two maine uses of this Exercise, to wit We ought to praise
God.
Praise and Prayer: Of Praise, to thank God, that he has given to the King his
hearts Desire and has not withheld the request of his lips: That he has
prevented him with the Psalm 21.
blessings of his goodness, and made him exceeding glad with the light of his
Countenance. That he has blessed these Kingdoms with a Prince, and apparent
Heir to these Thrones. God has verifyed on this I land that which Fables
fained of the happy or fortunate Isles; though we lie in a cold Climate far
from the Line, yet for our spiritual condition we are under a better line.
The Sun of Righteousness sends down his direct beams, and fullest
influences on us: No land for many Ages has had a more gracious, and benign
aspect of Gods favor, than this.

God has set over us a King that loves the Truth, professes it with us, and
in the Exercise of it, is exemplar to Scotlands Happiness.
Subjects. Cast your Eyes beyond Sea, and consider what Kings rule over
Christians there. The greatest of them strive with other, who shall be
greatest Slaves to Antichrist; they affect their own destruction in pleasing
him, by destroying their Subjects: There is nothing for Gods people, under
these three greatest Princes, but either the Imperial deformation rooting out
the Truth, where it has been; or the Spanish Inquisition, bearing it down,
that it rise not; or the French Massacres, destroying both Professors and
Profession: If the Saints under them were in our place, they would think
themselves after a sort in Heaven, in a Goshen for light and security, and in
Jerusalem for vision and peace. They have drunken these ten or twelve years of
the Cup of Wrath, and suffered all the losses of Wars: Their Men killed,
their Women defiled, and Countries wasted: If God (as he might justly for our
sins) would make us drink of that same Cup but one Month, after such a
calamity, we would count more of our Happiness, under the shadow of so good
a King than we do.

Our Land has not such rare Commodities as others, but yet the Tree of life
grows in our streets; and every shaking of it in the public worship of God,
sends down such fruits, as all the Indies can not afford the lik: Psalm. 147.
19 20.
The knowledge of God in Christ; Remission of sins; Peace of Conscience, and
other saving Graces, are better than all the Spicerie of the World. God has
showen his Word to Iaakob, his Statutes and his Judgments to Israel: He has
not dealt so with every Nation: For this happiness, we are a matter of Wonder
and astonishment to people beyond Sea, because of our great Peace, with
abundance of all things for Soul and Body: and only miserable in this, that
we neither know our Happiness, nor thank God for it, We are a part of these
ends of the Farth, which the ^ather gives Psalm 2.
in possession to his Son: And we find not since the Apostles time a Land
blessed with a more sound body of Doctrine, Bed Hist* Anglor.
than this, which God in mercy continue: We were as soon blessed with the
Gospel as any Kingdom, and our numerous and learned Clergy, sent out some
as Apostles, who turned to Christ some inner parts of this I land, and sundry
Countries beyond Sea: And since our returning from the Babylonish Captivity,
God has set up amongst us in Reformation a more glorious Temple than the first.

Happy is that Land, where the Sheep of Christ go out and Great Britains
happiness.
in, and none affrighteth them* Praise thy God O Jerusalem, praise thy God O
great Britain; He makes peace in thy Borders, and fills thee with the fat
of wheat: Who Psalm. 147 12 14.
will not desire to be sed for the p^ace for the fatness and Bernard. Sermon.
33 Deuteronomy. 4 7. 8
satieti^? Nothing is feared there, nothing is loathed, and nothing is lacking.
Paradise is a sweet dwelling, the Word of God a sweet food, and Eternity is
great riches. What Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as
the Lord our God is in all things, that we call upon him Deuteronomy. 4. 7. 8
for? And what Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments so
righteous, as all this Law which I set before you this day?

For you my Lords of Nobility, Council, and State is Speech to the Nobility,
etc.
matter of praise, because God has given you a young Master, and augmented the
matter of your Joy* in strengthening that royal Line: and of your peace, in
securing your States and Dignities, by the hope of that Succession.

For you also my Lords of the College of Justice, because To the College of
Justice.
God has joyfully begun this Summer Session, and turned this day that
begins the Term of Justice, in a sacrum Iustitium, or holy Vacancie, from
justice, and from the Bench, has brought you to the Church to praise him, and
to pray for the Spirit of Justice to our King, and Prince: That as God has
given a new Conduit for the Influence of Justice on this Land, you may partake
there of, according to your Place, and prove thankful to God and to your
Princes, in stablishing their Throne, by the Ministration of Justice; and may
be a blessing to this People, making them obedient to God, and their Princes,
when they are comforted by your righteousness.

For you also my beloved of this Parish, and others of To Edinburgh.
this City, God has given that Matter of Joy you have long desired. And at
what time came the tidings of it? Even after you had refreshed us your
Pastors, with your free offerings to the poor: You made us not ashamed of our
boasting of your Charity, but satisfied abundantly fourefold the necessity
that we commended to you: And while at night we were rejoicing in the Lord,
for that fruit of your Faith, God gladened us with the good tidings of the
birth of our Prince. It is ever seen, that when a People are zealous, and
cheerful in good works to honor GOD, he meets them shortly with a greater
blessing.

And let all the People count of this blessing, as of a Child borne in every
house of this Land, and praise God for this new matter of our daily Prayers:
For sex years bygone our Prayers had a want, because we had not a young Prince
to pray for: But now God has filled up that want, in giving us a Prince, to
pray for after his royal Parents.

The second general Use, is to pray to God: and that for We ought to pray.
our King our Queen, our Prince, and our selves: For our King, that the Spirit
of the Lord may rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the
Spirit of Counsel and 1. For ye King.
Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, that he may
judge not after the sight of his Eyes, nor reprove after Esaias 11. 2. 3
the hearing of his Ears; but may judge the poor with righteousness, and
reprove withequitie, for the meek of the land: That he would bless him with
Counselors about him, and judges with him, like Iethroes Elders: Men that
Cantic. 8. 6
fear God, hate covetousness, and seek Gods glory, and the well of King and
Country. That he would set him as a Seal on his Arm, and on his heart. That
he would multiplee Grace more and more on him, to verify the glorious Title
of Defender of the Faith, in maintaining the Psalm. 61. 6. 7 Psalm. 132
Truth, and repressing Idolatry, That God would cloth his Enemies with
shame, and on him make his Crown to floorish. That he would prolong the Kings
life, and his years for many generations, that he may abide before the Lord
for ever: and continue the meek race of the Stewarts.

To pray for our Queen, as the Jews did for Pharaohs 2 For the Queen. Psalm.
45.
Daughter: That she may forget her People, and her Fathers house; and that as
God has begun to make her a fruitful Mother in Israel, so he would increase
that fruitfulness, and make her prove newborn in Israel: And with this bond
of the fruit of her womb, that tyeth her to the King, and this I land; to tie
her heart also to the Truth professed amongst us.

To pray for our Prince: That the matter of our Joy in 3 For the Prince.
him may be constant: That God with the increase of his Days, would increase
his Gifts and Graces, and enable him for the Place he has appointed him; that
when his Father is full of good Days, he may succeed him in all these
forenamed blessings, as well as in these Thrones That so there never fail a
Man of that Line, to sit on the 1 Samuel 2. 12. 1 King. 2. 4 2 Chronicles. 6 16 Prover.
3. 1 Luke. 1.
Throne of these Kingdoms. That as Mankind is increased by his Birth, so the
number of the Faithful may be increased by his new Birth, in the ^awer of
Regeneration. And as God has made him a Son of our Desires, so he would
make him a Son of Delight to us and the Posterity, by growing in favor with
God and Man.

To pray for our Selves: That we may know the Time of 4 For our Selves.
our Visitation, and the things that concern our Peace, and prove thankful to
God for his great Mercies. We are like Jerusalem in the Happiness of our
Time, and as like her in not knowing of it: We are like that Fig Tree which
was long spared; and if we be unfruitful, still we Esaias. 5
are near to a curse: We are that Vineyard that was well dressed, but if we
bring not our better fruits, we shall be destroyed. For all Estates of this
Land, from the greatest to the smallest, do meet Gods mercy with ingratitude
and rebellioun. God has been passing through the reformed Churches these
years by gone; with a fearful, yet a just visitation: We are as guilty as
they, and yet God in a forebearing mercy is waiting if we will repent: If
Romans 2.
we turn not to him unfeignedly, let us resolve that the dregs of this Cup
are reserved for us: only let us take heed, and keep our Soul diligently,
lest we forget the things which our Eyes have seen, and lest they depart Deuteronomy.
4. 9
from our Hearts all the days of our life.

But let us not think, that our present business in this True thanks giving
is n^w obedience. Psalm. 68.
Church is sufficient, we must hereafter walk in a new obedience to God, who
ladeth us daily with blessings. This is our best thanksgiving, and a most
forcible Prayer, to obtain new blessings upon the blessings received; and with
all, it is a Seal that Gods Mercies are given us in Mercy. If our Thanksgiving
be a constant walking worthy of Gods blessings, then he will delight to dwell
amongst us, and bless us more; than shall we still be a matter of joyful
wondering to the World, and of comfort to our selves, when the blessings of the
Scepter of Christ, and of the well sweyed Scepters of our Princes are visible
amongst us, in Religion, Justice and Peace.

The Lord who has blessed us with this joyful Occasion, and brought us
together in this house, to testify our joy before Man and Angels, put this Day
amongst these white and joyful Days, that are marked with rare blessings, and
make it a period and beginning of a joyful reckoning of years to come. The
Lord make us constant in thankfulness, that his goodness may continue with
us: That the end of all his blessings may be his Glory, in the Salvation of
our Princes, and of our selves, through Jesus Christ our Lord. To this God,
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, be praise,
honor, and glory, now, and for evermore, AMEN.

FINIS.
A LOOKING GLASS For PRINCES and POPES.

OR A Vindication of the sacred Authority of PRINCES, from the Antichristian
usurpation of the Popes.

By the same Author M. William Struther.

August. Civit. lib. 4. cap. 7. Ipsi attendant speculum suum. Bernard Consid.
Lib. 4. Ipsi sint speculum, ipsi forma. Idem Lib. 2. Admove speculum, faedus se
in eo vultus agnoscat.

EDINBVRGH, Printeed by the Heirs of Andro Heart. 1632.

The Preface of the Uindication.
REligion is the sacred Bond between God and us: Papists are better seen by
their practice than controvesies
And the certainty of the Truth professed makes it stronger. In this
litigious age, Contentions have almost buried the Truth: And the inconsiderate
Reader of Controversies, shall neither find Papists in their diverse and
contradictorie opinions, nor himself. The best resolution for that certainty,
(next to Scripture) is not so much by the theoricke of controversies, as the
practicke of Now-Romes pertinancie: Therefore it shall be a price worth our
labor, to consider Rome as now it stands, and the graduall shifts whereby
she has driven her self to it.

Her present estate is a judicial hardness: In that most They are under a
judicial and heretical pertinacie.
obstinate pertinacie, as Saint Obstinatissima pervicacia Civit l. 2. cap. 1.
Austine calls it, that makes men defend error for truth, and pursue
truth for error: And all their business in writing, disputing, etc. is that
made presumption, (as Patianus Praesumptionis insanae est Facian ad Sympron.
says) whereby they seek only the victory in any cause: And like the old
Pagans, they choose rather to obtrude their own errors impudently, than
patiently to hear our Truth, as Cyprian said to Demetrian: Potius tua
impudenter ingerere; quam nostra patienter audire. As Copernicus in Astronomy,
and Paracelsus in Physic, loathing old Trueths laid their new Hypotheses,
and threw all things by the hair to countenance them; so do they in their new
broached heresies: And like Photinus (c) seek not to show a reason of their
doctrine to their hearers; but draw things that are simply spoken to the
coloring of their error, as Ruffinus Ruff. i^ Symbol.
speaks of him, Ut simpliciter ac sideliter dicta, ad argumentum sui dogmatis
traheret.

The first Ages delighted to comment Scripture: But They hane wedded themselves
to the Trent faith.
when Lombard gathered his sentences, their itching ingines loathed Scripture,
and commented Lombard: And when Thomas (the flower of the School) had
diggested his sums, they were made the Text, for commenting, and reading in
Schools: And the Canons of Trent are more holy than all; not to be commented,
least Truth break out amongst their hands, but to be believed and adored as
Oracles: So they stand now in the pertinacious defense of the Antichristian
Faith, canonized in Trent.

This is the present estate of the Romish Church, Their miserable shifts. 1
They shift Scripture.
whereunto she has drawn her self, by seven necessary (but miserable)
shiftings. First, at their great challenge by Luther, they began with
Scripture: Though Caietan lurked in the bushes of Schoole-divinitie, and
Prierias worbled in his Cases, yet Eccius Hosius. Pighius. L^n^anus.
and others appealed to Scripture. But when they had assayed, they found it
hurtful: I herefore they cast it away with contempt, calling it a nose of
wax, a leaden sword, etc. like the old Heretics, who (as Irenie ( b) says)
turned to the accusation of Scripture, when they were convinced by Scripture:
Cum a Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem earum convertuntur. Colloq. Ratis.
16^0.
Before the Colloque of Ratisbone, when the Protestant Divines intercommuned by
letter with the Jesuits, that they would agree on the places of arguments: The
Jesuits in their Preface declared that they would not stand to Scripture, least
(say they) we had lost our cause in the very entry. I his their distrust of
Scripture is a real confessing that their faith is not Scripturall.

Secondly, they came to Traditions; and because we 2 Traditions
stick to Scripture, they called us Scripturarij; to tell us, that ^ Prateo^*
b^res
they are Lucifugae Scripturarum, as Tertullian calls Heretics: And again,
Credunt sine Scripturis, v^ credant contra Scripturas Tertul. Pr^scrip.
. And yet they find no rest in Traditions: The indefinetnes of their number,
the confussion of their kinds, Divine: Apostolic, Ecclesiasticke, has
confounded them, who expressly labored to distinguish (c) Lindan Azer.
them. But Lactan. l. 5. cap. 20.
the first times reasoned not from their own asseveration, but by divine
testimonies, as says Lactantius, Non asseveratione propria, sed testimonijs
Divinis, sicut nos facimus.

Thirdly from Traditions of an uncertain Author, they come to Fathers, and
with a froggish and laterane coaxation, 3 Fathers.
do cry Patres, Patres. But Protestants have driven them from that retreat
also; for though in the Fathers some Liturgicall ceremony may be found, yet
in Dogmaticke points they are all for us: Neither can they make Lirinensis
Lyrinens commonitor.
triple trial, to fit their Tenets, that they were received ab omnibus,
semper and vbique. Fathers are worthy of respect, when they speak according
to our Heavenly Father: They gave that respect to their Ancestors, and craved
no more to themselves. Who ever shall read these things, let him not imitate
me erring, but growing to the better: Non me imitetur errantem, (a) Proleg.
retract.
sed in melias proficientem, says Augustine, even of his retractations Dur.
fol. 140.
. And they themselves condemn the Fathers, except they speak to their sense.

Fourthly, from Fathers apart, they come to Fathers met together in
Counsels: So Bellarmine every where 4 Counsels.
thinks it enough, In hoc convenient omnes Scholastici propter Conciliorum
authoritatem. But when these Counsels are searched, they are but late
Conventicles gathered for their purpose, as Dioscorus did at Ephesus* Irene at
Niece The Laterane Counsels: of Florence, Constance, Basile. And lastly, their
Trent Council by a preposterous order, giving authority to the former. They
contemn ancient and lawful Counsels, as Vives remarketh, Reliqua Vives in
August.
non pluris aestimant, quam conventus muliercularum in textrina vel thermis:
These are Councels to them (says he) which serve their turn, as for other
they count no more of them Conventions of Women, etc. 5 Popes. testimony.


Fifthly, they muster the Testimonies of their Popes, as the last and greatest
ground of their Faith: A matter more ridiculous than serious, to judge a
malefactor by his Popes judge and party*
own testimony: If they think them infallible, why give they them not the
first place? They are neither as Primipili or Triarij, but rather Rorarij and
Ferentarij amongst the Legions, more for number than for weight: But the wiser
^ort are ashamed to use these shadows in disputs.

Sixthly: When they find no safety in all these refuges, 6. Philosophy
they come to humane learning: And for this cause, the Jesuits (seeing their
Clergy ignorant) affected a Monarchy of Letters: As Jerome Hieron in Esaias 19.
said of the Heretics, who called themselves Reges Philosophorum, Kings of the
Philosophs. They are destitute of Scripture, and run to the supply of Nature
and Art. These old Heretics boasted of the furniture of humane learning: So
Novatian Venenata eloquenti^ ^acula contorquens. Cypr. Epist. 57.
threw the darts of poisoned eloquence, and was more hard by the perverseness
of secular Philosophy, etc. In like manner Aponius Apo^ in Cantic^.
descryveth them, that they turned the truth in a lie by sharp words and
syllogismes. And Jerome (d) tells, that the Htreticke, propter acumen ingenij
discurrit per testimonia Scripturarum, and labors by Sophistry to oppress
the Truth* And again, the good Christian, veritatis simplicitate contentus,
Haereticorum suppellectilem argumentorumque divitias non requirit: He is
Comment. in Amos. Ibid.
content with the simplicity of truth, and seeks not the furniture of
Heretics Papists confess a sympathizing with Pagans.

Humane learning is Gods gift indeed, but should not Polid. invent* lib 5. 1.
Lactan. 3. 1
be abused to impugn the Truth: And it is Gods will that naked and simple
Truth be clearly proponed, because it is sufficiently decored of it self,
says Lactance: And to that same sense Jerome, Nolim Philosophorum argumenta
sectari, sed simplicitate Apostolicae acquiescere Hieron* ad Ctesiph
. And Basile likewise, (b) Basil C^nc in Man Mar ^y^ ^
Nuda est veritas pa^rono non egens, ipsa seipsam defendens: Though with
Nazianzen he profited wonderfully in Philosophy at Athens, yet he calls it
an hyding of the Truth, to trouse it up in humane farding, ne contegamus
veritatem verborum fuco. Their new Philosophy


But they acknowledge their distrust of this refuge also: For
Transubstantiation is so contrare to sound Philosophy, (a) Scot. 4 distinct.
10.
that Scotus doubts against it, are neither solved by himself, nor any other,
as Quantum futurum cum quanto: Quantum fine modo quantitativo: Partem extra
partem; and tamen in qualibet part totum: Therefore they have devised a
bastard Philosophy, to color their bastard Divinity: That there is a
penetration of Dimensions; that one body of a numericall unity, may be in
innumerable places at once: that many compleete bodies may be couched under
Monsters in Philosophy
these same Speces; that they may be consumed, and yet abide; that in their
consumption they neither feel, nor are felt of the consumer; that one body is
continued, and discontinued in Heaven and Earth at once; that it has a
localitie and illocalitie; that an Accident can subsist without a Subject; that
a dimensiue Quantity is a Subject of the Speces; that there is a mixed
proposition, whereof one part is in the mouth, and another in the mind, etc.
If Aristotle, and old Philosops were in the world, and heard these monstrous
opinions in Philosophy, they would misknow their own Art.

With these weapons they have long mustered, and Their disputs are many.
their Armies are led with two Goliaths, Baronius and Bellarmine; from whose
first syllabs some have wittily found out BA-BELL: They have done what Nature
and Sophistry can, to oppress the Truth, and color heresy. Bellarmine
dogmatickly in great volumes labors in the perpetual Elench of the
authority of the Church. Baronius practickly in his Anachronismes,
Suppressions, Inversions of Order, Anticipations, labors in the perpetual
^l^nch facti pro ^ure: And all of them fill the world with large volumes,
Irene^.
vt stupefaciant ignaros literarum, as says ^r^neus Suarez with his tedious
Disputs has gotten the reward Cens. Paris. Val. Analys.
of fire to his treasonable Book. Ualentia thinks his Analysis can not be
loosed, and yet it is but a petition of the principle of the Churches pretended
authority. Gretzer has But now tastlesse and hurtful to themselves. Vasq de
adorat. 409.
casten himself off the stage by his scalding Uasquez with his blasphemous
worshipping of Satan is abhorred. Becane with his affected brittle subtilities
is tastlesse; he delights in his lame and pithlesse dilemmes, and like a Con
in a Cage moves much, but promoveth nothing, etc. If a man shall cast over
their Volumes, with Martial he shall offend at Homers (...): Nothing but
trivial iuff^ing, a thousand times refuted by Protestants, and as often reponed
by Papists: Some new quirk of humane Invention, and some new form or luster
put upon old damned heresies and exsibilate Paradoxes.

There Expurging Indices are Evidencies of their evil conscience in an evil
cause: they distrust all, and add, delete, change in books what makes
against them: They destroy Expurging Indices a mar^yring of Books. Sixti
Biblioth. praefat.
genuine books, as Bertrame calling it Oecolampadius forgerie: And set out
supposititious Treatises without number, and raze Scripturall sentences out of
the Indices of all Writers: Yet they stand not at these Purgations: Sixtus did
it with more judgment. Possevine with more diligence, and yet they are not
content with them: The purging of Doway and Spain, are not enough, but the
Vaticane must be added: And when Angelus Rocha has revised all, Ioannes Maria
must purge out more: But Bellarmine Thuan continuat.
lately urged a further purgation of Books against the Jesuits. Their new
faith is so ambulatorie, that No end of their purging.
it knows not where to consist. They are convicted by the testimonies of
their own writers, and therefore reject them, as Tertullian Tertul, de Test*
A^^* cap 1.
said of the Pagans. But let them purge Books as they will, their faith is
damned* and stobbed by so many testimonies, as they in revenge do pearce with
the Popes obeliske. It were good service to God and his Church, to gather in
one all these sentences which they have purged. And a work worthy of the
Church of England, who is most able for it. How ever they deal with Authors,
we say as S. Austine did to August. Epist. 156.
Donatists, Constantinus quidem defunctus est, sed eius Testimonium contra vos
vivit. These men are dead, yet their Testimony is quick against you.

Men would think, that with all this furniture they They shift disputs.
would be bold to dispute; But they are come now to shift disputs. So Salmeron
Salmeron. Tom. 8 Tractat. 1.
condemns disputing with Protestants: So Becan Manual. l. 5. cap. 12.
and Scioppius in the foundations of peace. Sciop. page 122.
Iansenius Alexipharm. 12.
gives us a floorish out of Tertullian, We need not to be curious after
Christ, nor to inquire after the Gospel. And Baronius Martyrol. praefat.
before him abusing Ambrose, That we need not accuse the Apostolic faith of
noveltie. But this we crave, is not a curious inquiring after Christ, but a
trial of their faith, if it be that Faith that Christ delivered to his
Apostles. They confess reallie, that it is not that same faith, while they
eschew the try all of Scripture.

This their shifting of Disputs is contrare to the ancients Contrare to their
former practice.
practice, as may be seen in Athanasius against the Arrians: Cyrillus against
the Nestorians: Augustine against the Pelagians and Donatistis. etc. And most
against their own Practice; for first when the Jesuits arose, they made
disputs their sacrum Asylum, or sacram Anchoram, and for this cause glutted
themselves with humane learning: But now in end they find their furniture as
stubble before the fire: For one place of Scripture rightly urged against
them, burns up all their baggage. This shift comes first of experienced
weakness in disputes, and next, of a confidence in bloody massacring: So
Austine noted these two: The first in the Donatists (e) Sed quia bonam (a)
August. praefat. ad Brevic. collat.
causam etc. Because they knew they had not a good cause, they first did what
they could, that there should be no Dispute, and that their cause should not
be handled all. The confidence (b) Contra Faust. l 14. cap. 12.
in other means he notes in the Manicheans ( g) Non enim disputare amant,
for they love not to dispute, but pertinatioustie to overcome any ways. In
like manner Mahomet Salmer vbi supra.
discharged all disputing in his Religion: And the Iconolaters (the Papists
fathers) refused to dispute with Orthodoxes. But if they be forced to dispute,
they fill all with clamours as Cyprian Clamosis vocibus personantes
notes of the Pagans, and boast of victory, though they be overcome, as
Pascentius and Maximus, two Arrian Bishops did boast, that they overcame
Augustine Possid. Vita August. c. 17.
in disputs. Yet they like some sort of disputs, such as they had with John
Hus, and Jerome of Prage, whom they burnt at Constance, and the like lately
with Padre Fulgentio, and Abbas Sylvius at Rome, though inco^stant Spalato could
not be wise by their example. This they have learned of the Arrians. For when
King Hunnericus called a dispute at Carthage, he began it with burning an
Orthodoxe Bishop, Cent. Luc. 5. col 30.


Lactance Neque congredi audeut, quia sciunt se facile superari* Lactant l. 5.
c. 1.
shall close this point, and lead me to their last refuge. Novi hominum
pertinaciam, I know the men's pertinacie -- They fear least they be convicted
and forced to yield, un to us: Therefore they close their eyes, least they
should see the light we offer to them: Wherein they show the diffidence of
their damned reason, while they will neither understand, neither dar dispute,
because they know they will be easily overcome.

Their seventh and last refuge is cruelty: The Ignatian 7 Refuge is cruelty.
fiery temper of the Jesuits: This Lactance ( a) notes Disceptatione sublata
pelliture medio sapie^tia, vigeriturres: They lay aside all reasonable dealing,
and take them to violence. And that because sententiam quam defendere nequeunt,
[c] Omnia in gladium resolvis. Cusan. Cribrat. Alcor 3. 8.
mutare erub^scunt, August. civit. l 3. c. 18
they think shame to change that opinion which they cannot defend. This they
have o^ Mahumet, and Cusane objecteth, that the sword was his greatest argument
wherein he resolved all ( d) And Baronius Macta and Manduca, kill and eat. So
Paul the fifth at his death recommended the inquisition to the Cardinals, quo
vno niti affirmabat Apostolicae sedis authoritatem Onuph. Vit. Paul. 4.
(a bloody pillar of a bloody Kingdom,) and not content to kill us by
Inquisitions, they draw on Princes to be their Burrioes: This is the fruit of
their fornication with the whore, in giving their power to the beast against
the Lamb. France serves them at turns, but when she opens her eyes to see
the Butcheries of her own to be the vantage of Spain, she relenteth, till a
new deceit set her on again: And yet because the truth shines greatly in
her, they incline more to the Bigotisme of Austria, and the wilfulness of
Spain, as bloody in zeal, as pertinatious in error. Their rising (at the
least in the Ambition of a fifth Monarchy) is a fit support for staggering
Rome. The Pertinacie of Heresy and fury of blind zeal, can have no other
arguments of defense, but Ureseca, burn and cut, as an absurd man wanting
reason, turns to passion and fury.

This proves the Pope to be his firstborn, who was a liar and murderer from
the beginning. The credulity of The Pope a liar and murderer John 8. 44.
his pretended Omniscience; has long misled the world: Now when they see, and
would refuse his lies, he uses the cruelty of his pretended Omnipotence, to
destroy them. He is now Abaddon, the author of bloodshed in Europe for many
ages.

Thus we have traced them in their degrees to their present hight, in the
hight of their Apostafie and cruelty, See the Treatise Chap. 30. 31
they seek the quenching of the light and destruction of the Church that
caries it: But in vain; For their malice shall stay them, and their mischief
shall fall on their own head: Their Apostafie kills themselves; for every
error craveth another error to confirm it: And every invention of a new
error, works in the inventer a new impression of falsehood, and a further
degree of departing from the truth. Aristotle most properly calls the parts
of time Arist. Phis. lib. 4.
(...) Apostasies or distances from the present instant. So they with time
depart more and more from God, and the primitive truth. This is the proper
notion of their Apostasy.

But though they both desert and impugn the truth they They shall never destroy
the truth, or the Church. Hilar. Psa. 63
shall never destroy it, for (says Hilarie) Quid ad Deum humana perversitas?
For what is humane perverseness to God? And going on, What can the ingyne do
against the Author of it? Albeit they seek the ruin of the truth omnibus
argumentationis quaestunculis, yet their falsehood shall fail by the clearness
of the truth. And thereafter: Let them search the secrets of Nature -- yet in
the intention of their work, they shall fail being refuted by spiritual
Doctrines. And Cyprian gives like reason on the passive part, that a false and
deceived Deficient, doctrin^s spiritu^ albius refutati. Ibid.
mind is confounded by sincere truth. And Hilarie in another part, The force
of the truth is great, and is daily the stronger the more it is assaulted.
For this is proper to the Cypr. de ietum.
Church, that it overcommeth when it is hurt. Hoc enim Ecclesiae proprium est,
ut tum vincat, cum laeditur. And we Hilar. Trin. L. 7.
say to them as Theophilus did to the Appollinarists: Tendant quantumlibet
syllogismoru^ suorum retia, and sophismatu decipulas: Let them bend as much as
they will, the nets of their Theoph. Epist Paschal. 1.
Syllogismes, and grines of their Sophismes, they but ensnare themselves. And
we advise them with him in that same place. Tandem desinant dialecticae artis
strophis, simplicia Eccliasticae fidei decreta evertere. That they would at
least desist to pervert the simplicity of faith by their Sophistry.

Satan knows their approaching destruction, and least Satan blind^th them to
their destruction.
the thoughts of it cast them in the dumps* either to repent, or relent, he
hardens them against it by 4. special means. The first is by delaying to
the last day, as Vega In Apoc. 14. 17 18.
Ribera, Suarez. Next by a simple denying as Malvenda de Antic. Lib. 4. c. 5.
who reproves the former for their opinion. Thirdly, by an odd conceat of
Alcaser In Apoc. 18 19.
the ^esuite, turning their destruction in her conversion to Christ, and that
she is Christ's Bride to be espoused to him at the last day. Fourthlie, by a
fleshly policy, which was suggested by Cardinal Soderinus Histor. Con. Trid.
lib. 1.
to Hadrian the sixth. They resolute to hold all fast as it stands, both in
heresy and tyranny, and to wait upon the end. So they are gone on in
duritiem cordis, as Bernard Bernard. con. lib. 1.
speaks, and whereas the dolor of their felt decay should bring out
sanitatem, as he calls it, yet it brings out nothing but insensibilitatem a
senselessenesse: For (as Aponius Can. l. 4. Theophil. ubi* supra.
says) Victi and convicti ad salutem non redeunt: And as was said of, old
Apollinarists, they will not amend after many admonitions but contemn the
medicens of Scripture, and dow not open their eyes to the clear light, This is
like their proxima dispositio ad ruinam.

If any do ask: How can they abide in darkness in They are as blind as their
idols?
the abundance of so great a light: Let him know they are not taught of God,
but of men: They have wedded them to their prejudices, and hold the Tenets of
their erring Church as divine Conclusions: God has given them over to a
reprobat mind, because willfullie they will wink, and not receive the love of
the truth. All religious adoration con^ forms the worshipper to that he
worshippeth. They have Psalm. 115.
gotten the fruit of their idolatry in conformity to their idols. They have
eyes and see not, etc. Even so are all that worship them.

They have purposelie multiplied controversies, to make Bloody Rome shall
perish in blood.
simple wits stand gazing at them as the people did at Amazaes corpse: But wiser
spirits petunt rei iugulum, they go through their questions to their policy:
They see falsehood in their tenets; silly evasions in their answers: And
Crambe repetita in their proponing. Under all these is a fleshly policy,
Revel 17. 6. Revel. 18. 4.
which their deep Politickes hide from their controversers: They set them ever
to work to dispute and write etc. And in the mean time laugh in their bosom
to see them so earnest in that which they know is but a cousening of the world:
They have turned Religion in a policy, and themselves in Politickes: Old
Heretics strove only for opinions, but they have a worldly state to
defend. They hate the true Religion as darkness does light, and are
irreligious in their own superstition: They use it not as a Religion but as a
worldly state, wherein (if they can be secured) they care not what Religion
prevail. To take up their present state otherwise, is to be blind with them.

These are their graduall shifts which an evil cause Their Apostasy.
and consceince finding want of reason, and wanting will of repentance has
driven them to; They are drunk with the blood of the Saints, and thirst more
till God destroy them. He has some Elect lurking among them whom he calls:
Come out of her my people: And in due time they will obey. As for others, let
them alone, they Revel. 18. 4 Matthew. 15. 13
are blind guides of the blind: And every plant that my Father has not
planted, shall be plucked up. Antichrist is planted by Satan in the efficacy
of delusion, and God will pluck him up in his final destruction. AMEN.

FINIS.
The Table of the Vindication.
THe Praeface of the State of Now-Rome and her seven miserable shiftings. 1,
Scripture. 2. Traditions, 3. Fathers. 4. Councels. 5. Popes 6. Philosophy. 7.
Cruelty. 1. 2 Chapter 1. Of her five periodicall estates. Pura. Ambitiosa.
Insidiosa, seditiosa, Pernitiosa. Chapter 2. The first part of this Treatise:
Usurpation it self. 1. The matter of it. 1. At Kings entry. 4. Chapter 3. 2. In
their administration. 1. In vile styles. 9. Chapter 4. 2. In Base offices: Of
kissing the Popes feet. 10 Chapter 5. 3. In their Laws. 14 Chapter 6 4. In their
censures: and excommunications, depositions, etc. 17. Chapter 7. This Usurpation is
the head Article of their Faith: 22. Chapter 8. Their end is a Monarchy. 25 The
second part of the Treatise. The noveltie of Usurpation. Chapter 9 1. The Negative
proof of it, not of Christ. 29. Nor the Apostles, nor Fathers, nor first Popes
etc. 30.
Chapter 10. Their exceptions against primitive obedience. 34 Chapter 11. 2. The
Positive proof of Noveltie. Hildebrands contention 39 Usurpation is
Hildebrandine doctrine. 46
Chapter 12. Eight causes of this Usurpation. 48 Popes holiness, is profainnesse:
51,
Chapter 13. The third part. Of their colors and defenses. 59 Professions for that
end. 1. Schoolmen. 2. Canonists. 61. 3. Casuists. 4. Orders. 5. Jesuits. 6.
N^reans. 65
Chapter 14. 2. Their Recrimination. 66. Chapter 15. 3. Their Tergiversations, and
Schifting. 72 Chapter 16. 4. Their Ludification of Kings. 1. Of pretended lo^o. 78.
Chapter 17. 2. Of fained Limitations. 80. Ch 18. 3. Of futill Distinctions. 90: Chapter
19. 5. Of glorious Titles given to Kings. 91. Chapter 20. 5. Of canonizing of
Kings. The fourth part. Of their madness* in Usurpation. Ch 21. 1. Their
ignorance of the powers. civil and Ecclesiasticke. 94. Chapter 22. 2. The fruits
of their madness. 1. irritation. 106 Chapter 23 2. Exact inquiry of the matter.
109 Chapter 24. 3. Discovery of Antichrist. 111. Wrong supputation bred their
fancy of Antichrist. 112. The Impyre is removed 113. Antichrist is come: And
the Pope is he. 122.
Chapter 24. 4. Of their destruction. Begun. Perfected. 124 Their oppression of
Protestants does hasten it. 129.
Chapter 26. Now-Rome is incurable. 131. Chapter 27. Of their treacherous practices.
First in France. 136. Chapter 28. 2. Their attempts in Venice. 142. Chapter 29. 3. In
great Britain. 148. Ch 30 The troubles of Europe are of the Pope. 152. He
intends the rooting out of Protestants. Their policy. 154. Perjury. 156.
Oppression. 158. Their matchless cruelty at Magdeburge. 159. They urged a
godless form of abiuration. 160. Their fleshly confidence. 160. Their
prophecy of our imminent ruin. 162. But let them take heed to themselves.
163.
Chapter 31. That Now-Rome will not reconceale. 164. They mind not common Peace
171. But our destruction. 170. No reconciliation A tolerable condescending. 171.
Conclusion. A conclusion Exhortatorie to Princes. 172. The Popes Dittay and
doom of God. 173. It is faceable to Princes. 177. Begun in part. And shall
be perfected in Gods time. 177.

Faults escaped of the Vindication.
Page Lin. Fault. Read 33 24 old of old 32 32 and Dele 41 21 great great part
47 34 Proscription Prescription 62 22 must be may be 80 27 a penalty
appealing to 96 18 her not her parents 261 28 but Dele Ibid. 31 biddes but
biddes

A LOOKING GLASS for Princes and Popes: OR A vindication of the Sacred
Authority of Princes from the Popes Antichristian Usurpation.
CHAP. I. In What respect this Usurpation agrees to Rome.
THE challenge which I made in my Sermon of the Popes Usurpation over Princes,
craveth a Page 98.
more full and press deduction, than a Sermon could suffer; which now in this
subsidiarie discourse (by Gods grace) I intend to perform.

And first, we shall consider on What Age or respect Onus Ecclesia Episcop.
Chemensit 1. Ecclesia pu* ra.
of the Roman Church, we fasten this Usurpation; and then the Usurpation it
self. For the first the Church of Rome comes in five several periods though
some have casten it in seven.

In the first three hundredth years she was Ecclesia pu^ 1. Ecclesia pu^ ra.
Ante Concilium Nicenum exiguu^ aut ^ullus respectus habebatur ad Eccl Romans 2
Ecclesia am bitiosa.
ra, a pure Church; professing the Truth purelie, and the most part of her
Bishops sealed it with their blood in Martyrdom: At what time little or no
regard was had of her, as their own Aeneas Sylvius confesses.

In the next three hundredth years finding rest from persecution, she became
Ecclesia ambitiosa, an ambitious Church, tickled with pride, and desire of
Usurpation.

Then Leo the first roared, and stretched out his skirts; and Innocent and his
followers incroached on the Affricane Fathers; but when she found her self
respected Council. Chal. Act. 16.
for the privilege of the City, the Mother and Seat of the Empire, the
number of her learned Clergy, and multitude of Martyrs; she began to usurp
upon other Churches: Then she thrust her hand in every business, and turned
all meddling to her gain: The brotherly correspondence of other Bishops by
Letters, was turned in arguments of Supremacy and jurisdiction: The imploring
of help against Heretics, in formal Appellations; Her advise given to them
was counted absolute commands; and her arbitrarie decisions of questions
submitted freely to her, were called Decreets of an ordinar Judge. Baronius
Anachronismes gave a luster to these forgeries in the eyes of the ignorant; for
every where in the first Ages, he records things as then done, which the
Church knew not for seven or eight Ages. Cyprian clears this for his time,
writing to Cornelius, That thy brotherhood may be informed. This Vt
fraternitas tu^ instruatur. Cypr. Epist 42. Cor nelio. 3. Eclesia insidiosa.
Council. African. 4.
dasheth their tyranny, for fraternity excludes Supremacy, and Instruction
destroys their pretended Jurisdiction.

In the third period she was Ecclesia insidiosa, lying in wait to effect that
supremacy, which before she affected; for though she got a great effront of
the Affrican Fathers, yet (in a Roman pertinacious humor) she urged the
purpose, till she got the name of universal Bishop: And rather then they want
it, Boniface the third will take it of Phocas a Parricide: They saw the Impyre
weakened by the incursion of Barbarians and Factions within, and stirred their
time for their purpose. 4. Eclesia seditiosa.


In the fourt hundredth years, she was Ecclesia seditiosa, a seditious Church;
for having trodde down the Church, there remained nothing for her Conquest but
the Impyre. And Satan involving all in the darkness of ignorance and
Superstition, fitted the minds of ^rinces and people to be abused: Then
Hildebrand brake the Majesty of the Impyre in Henry the fourth, and
succeeding Emperors, which to this day it could never recover. 5. Ecclesia
perniciosa.


In the fifth three hundredth years she is Ecclesia perniciosa, a pernicious
Church: She will neither reform her self, nor suffer Reformation of her
Heresies and wickedness: In which respect she is become the habitation of
Revel. 18. 2. 4
devils, and the hold of every unclean spirit, and God calls us to forsake
her, Come out of her my people.

In respect then of her sedition and pernitiousnesse, she used this
Usurpation, and bears the name to be called 2 Thessalonians. ^
Popish: Popery (in it is proper Nation) is a pest in the Catholic Church,
and a plague of God sent on them who would not receive the truth to be saved
thereby: And therefore God gave them over to this strong delusion: It is not
the Cypriano gloriossimo Papae Clerus Romanus Cypr. Epist. 26. Gregor. 7. Romae
Synodum habuit etc. Baron. Martyrol. lanuar. 16.
Catholic Church but a Faction in the Church: Neither is it a Religion, but a
Schism and an Heresy. taking the name from the Popes, the head and the heart,
of that heretical and schismatic Faction. They grant themselves, that the
Name Papa was first common to any reverend Clergy Man, thereafter it became
peculiar to Bishops as may ^e^ seen in the writtes of Cyprian, Jerome,
Augustine, etc. But in the end Gregory the seventh held a Synod at Rome, and
statute ut nomen Papae, that the name of the Pope should be the only name of
the Christian world: And that Gregor. 7. di ctat. 11. Vestan. d^ osc. Ped.
Pont. c. 17 Azor. part. 2 col. 94^. Bellar. Tom. 1. prafat. Lorin. in Act.
Apost. Baron. Mar tyrol. October. 16 Christianosque appellari, and censeri loco
summa dignitatis esse puta bamu^. Nazian. M^nod. Chr. Homil. 33 in. Acta.
Francisc. B^zius de Monarch. p. 1. Continuat. Th^an.
no man should take it to himself, or give it to other, but hold it proper to
the Bishope of Rome. And though Bellarmine be offended that we call them by
the name Papists: yet others are not ashamed of that name, but glory in it as
Lorinus: We are neither afraid nor ashamed to be called Papists: And
Baronius more fully: The Heretics can not honor us with a greater Title of
glory than when they call us Romans and Papists -- Let these be our praises
while we live, and after death our Titles upon our g^aues that we are called
Romans and Papists: But Nazianzen says of himself and Basile, that they
counted it their greatest honor to be called Christians: And Chrysostom
says that Heretics tak their name from the Haeresiarch. This Name also
distinguish^th them among themselves: For a Papist properly is he who beside
the superstition of Rome, burns in a blind zeal to maintain the Popes
authority: And moderate men who are not zealous, are called by them profane
and impious Politickes: And in the time of the League: France was cast in three
factions: The one was Hugonotes, or Protestants, the other Catholics, and the
third were Politics, who were neither Protestants nor Catholics, but
moderate Papists, and good Patriots: But as P^cianus said to the Novatians: I
accuse not the name in you, but the Sect; so we accuse not so Pacian. Epist. 1.
much the name of Papists, as their factious disposition and proceeding. This
usurpation then being the work and character of Rome, as they are papalized,
let us consider the Usurpation it self.

CHAP. II. Of the matter of this Usurpation, And first at the entire of Princes.
IN the Usurpation it self, four things are to be considered: First, the
matter wherein it stands: Next, the Noveltie of it: Thirdly, their Defenses:
And lastly, their folly and madness in their whole course and Fruits.

For the Matter of this Usurpation, it goes in two; at the Entry of Princes,
and in their Administration: At their Entry, they clame an absolutehand over
them, as though Kingdoms were their gift, and that because of their Election,
Unction, Coronation, and Oath.

Their Election they clame absolutely: Though it go now by Electors, yet they
will have all depending on them, so John. 8. in the Election of Carolus Calvus;
we have elected Baron. An. 876. n. 6 Ibid. n. 9 Arbitrio papae imperium est
collatum. Cregor. 7. lib. 2. Epist. 13. Facultas eligends Imperatorem, etc.
Aphoris. Car. 19.
justly and approven, etc. And their Analist lets in great Letters,
elegimus merito and approbavimus, and he puts his gloss to it, that the
Impyre is given at the arbitriment of the Pope, and Gregory the seventh more
clearelie: Thou must acknowledge that thou have the Scepter of the Kingdom by
the benefit of the Apostolic and not of the Kingly Majesty: And lest it be
ascryved to the Electors, the Cardinals of the Consistory have lately
published, that the Electors power to choose the Emperor, flows from the
authority of the Apostolic Sea. And more clearly: It is of undoubted right,
that it appertains to the Pope alone, and not to the College of Electors, to
cognosce and decerne of the affairs of the Impyre. When the Authority of
Gregory presses them to the contrair who says, That power over all men was
given to Maurice the Emperor, and that the Priests were committed to him: They
gave us strange glosses: That Imperatori potestas caelitus data est, H. E. a
Deo sed per Ecclesiam and Romanum Pontificem, that is from God by the Church
and the Pope of Rome who confirms, Azor. part. 2 lib. 10. cap. 6 in fine.
Ideo Imperator a Pontis^ce Diademate decoratur. Aphorism. 16. ^
anoynteth, consecrateth, and crowns him. By this gloss the Emperor holds
his Crown of the Priests committed to him.

Their next clame is from the Unction and Coronation of Princes. But that
Ceremony (a)conferreth not Authority upon the person, crowned and anointed,
but declares him to be set a part for the office, and is rather a Ministry,
than an absolute Superiority. Unction is not essential to Kings, neither was
it from the beginning, for Iustine 2. is called the first anointed Greek
Emperor, and Pipine in France, and Edgarus in Scotland; and yet many good
Princes were in these Thrones before them; without that Ceremony. And the
Impyre rightly inacted it to be laes-Majestie: If any Man thought that a chosen
Emperor was not an Emperor before his Coronation, Albericus apud Martam de
lurisdict. 1. 17. Number. 30. They see that the Patriarchs of Constantinople have
crowned Emperors as well as the Romani P^ntifices in cor^nandis Imperator.
etc. Constantinop. Baron. An. 87 9. n. 9.
Pope, and therefore lest the Pope lose his privilege, they make the Patriarks
Coronation to be only a naked Ceremony, but the Popes to be Operative and
confer authority, we have no ground of this distinction, but their naked
assertion. But Bellarmine speaks more truly, when he is correcting the
fervor of his Dispute. Though Samuel anointed Saul at the Commandment of
Bellar. recog. page 59.
GOD, yet that anointing was rather a praediction, than a tradition of the
royal power. And again, Samuels anointing of David, was a designation and
praediction, but not Cerem. lib. 1 sect 5. Pontificial. Rom fol, 55 Francisc.
Leo Thesaur. for, Eccles. cap 1 n. 22. It. cap. 25. n. 13.
a conferring of royal Authority. Sure I am, they can not ascriue more to the
Popes anointing of an Emperor, than to Samuels anointing of Saul and David, at
Gods express Command. But if their Coronation and Unction give authority to
Princes, it is treason on their part to trod under foot these sacred Heads,
which they have crowned and anointed.

Thirdly they claim it, by the Oath of Princes, taken at their Coronation;
which is not of obedience to God, but of Fealty and Obedience to the Pope So
says Marta Iurisc. part. 1 c. 18. n. 12* and n. 18.
Marta that it is manifest the Emperor is Feudatarie to the Church, by the
oath of fealty, which is a sort of servitude to the Pope Imperatoris juramento
fidelitat. etc Vastan. de os^u. ped. p. 93.
. And Vestanus testifies, that Princes are astricted by their oath of
fidelity and obedience, whereby they may be compelled to obey the Apostolic
Sea: And more fully he shows both the ground, and the end of this Oath.
When Religion decayed, and Men inclyned to impiety, it became the Pope Decuit
To manum Pen tif^^em juramento fidel and obed. sibi Re ges obstringe re -- vt
il lorum arroga^tiam and teme ritatem inhi beret Ibid. page 97. Proverb. 8
Ceremonial.
by the Oath of Fidelity, and obedience to bind Kings unto him, both that he
might see for himself, and that he might bridle their pride and rashness. For
this end they blasphemously apply to the Pope these words that are proper to
Christ, per quem Reges regnant. So in effect Princes are but the Popes
Vassalls, to reign precario, and no longer than he pleases, or rather as they
please him. This Barclaius objecteth, and Bellarmine would mitigate it, but
their practice says the contrare: And Suarez Suarez de fens. lib 3 c. 22.
number. 9 Vicarius Christi habet domi nium in Vassalum suum. Baron An* 701 number.
16. 17 Et An 1097 n. 18 1^. etc
tells, that the Vicar of Christ has Dominion over his Vassal; And Baronius
affirms, that the King of Spain is the Popes feudatarie for the Kingdom of
Spain, and his Vassal for the Kingdom of Naples, whereupon he makes his
long digression of the Monarchy of Sicile, to prove this Superiority. But
Innocent 4. speaks like a Pope, Do thou not know, that the King of England
is our Vassal, yea our Servant? This exacting of the Emperors Oath was far
from Sergius the second, who swear obedience to the Emperor Lotharius: But of
the Nature of this Oath, we shall speak hereafter in the Conclusion God
willing. In the mean time it is remarkable, that the Maintainers of
Equivocation, and loosers of the Obligen ent of an Oath, do here urge the
force of an Oath, when it makes for their vantage.

They boast also of the Translation of the Emp^re, Bellar de transl. Imperij
as an unanswerable argument, to prove their Superiority: But the Pope had no
other part therein, but a consent as a special member of the Republicke of
Rome: For if he had a full power, he needed not Charles, nor Pipine, to help
him against the Longobards: None can better clear this Dresser. de translat.
Imp.
than Frederick in the same Contest with Pope Hadrian, Thou say, that I came
at thy calling: I grant I was called; but give the reason wherefore thou
call me, thou was oppressed by the Enemies, and could not help thy self
by thine own (b) Implorationem potius quam vocationem hanc di^ xerim. Otto*
Frisin degest. Frederic. lib. 2
power, or the Greeks cowardice: Therefore the power of the Francks was
sought. This was rather an imploring of my help than an calling.

But Leo crosses their late claims, and grants that Martian Martianu^
Imper. a Deo electum esse. Bellar. Rom Pont. Lib. 5. cap. 3. Potestas --
Dominorum meorum pietati coelitus data est. Ibid. Casaub. de li bert.
Ecclesiast. Cusan de concord. Catholic. lib 3. c. 1. 23. etc. Bell. Recog. pap.
52. Nomen Imperatoris potest and forte debet deleri.
the Emperor was elected of God; and Gregory to Maurice, That power over all
men was given from above to the piety of his Lord. Princes also
not-with-standing of his Usurpation in the beginning of their edicts call
themselves. N. By the Grace of God, King of such a Kingdom. and not by the
gift of the Pope, as Casaubone observes: And Cusan has so fully refuted that
Claim in this errand, as no man needs to add any thing. Bellarmine
obiecteth to him, that he erred for want of Books to inform him: But Cusan
might more justly reply, that if Bellarmine had either eyes to read, or
conscience to judge, according as Books informed him, he had not perverted
the Truth as he did. The point of Election vexes Bellarmine; therefore he
tells us, that in their Canons, Hadrianus, and in Synodo, The Name Emperor
^may, and perchance should be delete. Thus they may elide the Truth of all
Histories: Such doubting and staggering shifts became not an old Cardinal, and
Contraversar in the head Article of his Faith.

It is clear then, that their Election is but pretended, their Coronation and
Unction are but ceremonies officiously obtruded on Princes, to snare them in a
base Subjection. The pretended Oath does more oblige Kings to correct the
Popes enormities, than to maintain his Tyranny. And their alleged
translating of the Impyre, is a crafty ingyring themselves on the prevailing
side. And so none of these Claims give them authority over Princes.

CHAP. III. Of their Usurpation over Princes in their Administration: And first
of their disdainful Speeches.
THis much for their Usurpation over Princes at their entry: Follows their
Usurping in their administration, which may be seen in four, In disdainful
speeches: Abuse of their persons in base offices: Usurping over their Laws in
a directive Power; And censuring them by a coactiue power. Disdainful Speeches
are the first fruits of their pride, and contempt of Princes: So they call them
Dogs or Curres to the Pope the great Sheepeheard: If these Dogs (says
Becane) be Becan. controvers. Anglic quaest. 3. ^. 14 15.
watchful and trusty, they must be ready at the Sheepeheards hand. This is
no other then what the Pope did to Franciscus Dandalus the Venetian, when he
made him like a Dog eat crummes under his table at Lions. And Scioppius
Schiop Ecclesiast. cap. 147. Ecclesia est mandra, etc. -- Carolus Magnus haud
paul mai^r aut sapientior Asinus fuit. Barron. ann. 1073 n. 7 Idem. 1076. n.
8. Barron 1112 n. 17. Platina, Vit. Gregor. 7.
compa^eth them to Asses, carrying burdens at the Popes will, and calls
Charles the Great a great Ass: But their Analist abounds in reproaching the
Emperors: He calls Henry the fourth Rex Apostata, Exemplum Regibus
Henricianae haeresis labe conspersis, an Apostate King, and an exemplar to them
who are guilty of the Henrician heresic. Likewise a contemner of God. And
again obstinate and perjured and that like Herod he persecuted the anointed
of God. And when they had stirred up against him his Son Henry the fifth,
who betyme plied not their courses as they would, they paid him also with
reproaches, and their Analist calls him in Patrem Carnifex, his Fathers
Burrio, and sacrilegious, a Traitor, a Monster, a Tyrant. Gregory the seventh
calls Henry the fourth Membrum Diaboli, a member of the Devil: And Vestanus
utters his spleen Vestan. p. 75. ^n. 551. n. 2.
also. Fredericus Oenobarbus bellua horrenda fuit. And Justinian for curbing
Vigilius, both for his prevaricating in the Truth, and defending of Nestorius,
is called by Baronius mad, possessed with an evil Spirit, and carried by
Satan. So Richeomus the Jesuit ^aileth against the Greek ^m* perours, for
their zeal against Imagerie: Leo Isauricus (says he) perduellis haereticus
-- Constantinus re and cognomento Copronymus Leonis Isaurici Patris nequam,
Richeom, Expost. Apol. cap 22.
nequior filius -- Leo Quartus Copronymi foedus foetus, mali vtique Corvi,
malum ovum,

Herein they tell of what Spirit they are, when they despise Dominioun, and
speak evil of Dignities, and no better behavior can follow so disdainful
speeches: Words are a mids between Estimation of the Mind and actions: If they
be good, they argue a good Estimation preceding and promise suitable actions to
follow: If they be ill, they argue an heart full of contempt, and promise
nothing but outrage: Experience has proven this to be true.

CHAP. IIII. Of their abuse of Princes in base offices.
THeir second abuse of Princes in their Administration is by employing their
Persons in base service, Stapham equi Papalis ^enere debet. Marta ^uris. 1.
cap. 18. n. 18.
as to hold the stirrup when the Pope goes on horse back, or comes down. To
lead his bridle Deinde accepto equi fre^^ peraliquo^ etc. Ceremo. Romans fol.
26. page 2.
for some space: And the Pope (forsooth) must refuse that service in show, and
yet yield to it in end. This is hypocrisy with pride, for they do so
earnestly exact it, that if the Emperor go not to the right stirrup, they
will chyde him, as Hadrian the fourt did to Federicke the Emperor: To hold the
water and towell to his hands: To carry dishes from his Kitchen to his Table:
But the Emperor shall have a privilege, for where Kings must go into the
Kitchen, he shall receive Ibid.
the dishes he caries, at the door. To sit on his knees when he gives the
cnp to the Pope, As Otto did to Urbane, Marta Iuris. 1 18
who of purpose neglected the Emperor, and suffered him to sit long on his
knees, till a Cardinal admonished him of that Iuel. Defens. P. 235
oversight. These things are so odious, that Harding is a ashamed, and denies
them. But they are registrate in their ceremonial and pontifical. I would
gladly understand to which office of the Apostolic Church, the 1 Cor. 12. 12
Master of ceremonies, is to be referred, or in what primitive rytes from the
Apostles time shall they find such abuse of the Lords Anointed? This question
will be answered by silence.

But it is a greater abuse to make Princes kiss the Popes -- Cuius vestigia
adorat -- Matuan.
foot; it might pass with Cardinals, who are his creatures, and (since they
left off preaching) seem to have no other use for their mouth, but to kiss
his feet at all occasions: And there is nothing more frequent in the
ceremonial, than Reverentiapro more facta, that is to Ceremonial. passim.
say, The Cardinals kissing his feet before the people: I know not whither
Adulation be baser in them, or affectation of vain glory be vyler in him.

But it is odious that he holds out his feet to be kissed of Emperors, and
yet Rome that does all things under show of Reason (as Vives says scoffingly)
by Vestanus, Imprimis Pontificium humilitas, commenda^i debet, etc. Vestan* de
osc, ped. Pont. cap. 18. page 14^.
gives us two reasons hereof. The one is the Popes humility and devotion, who
knowing that the people will kiss his feet, has put a cross on his Pantoun,
that their adoration may be given to the cross of Christ, and not to him.
That is but a scoffing, for the foot is not a place to put the cross on, and
the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian were more religious, who discharged to
paint the cross on the ground, least it should be trod upon: He admits
men to three kisses, pedis, pectoris, and oris of the feet, the breast and his
face. If therefore he would honor the Cross, why puts he it on his
foot, and not on his breast to tell his love to it? or on his face to tell his
account of it: And the Greeks are more religious than he, Zo^aras*
for though they take not that Adoration, yet they set it on their face or
Breast.

His second reason is a mocking of men, as his first is of Christ: That since
the Popes office is to teach the world, and the feet of Preachers are
beautiful, Romani Pontifices ex* pressam Apostolici muneris imaginem* etc.
Vestan. ibid.
they cannot beautify them better, than by put putting the cross on them --
for the spirit and grace descends to the feet -- and to make their steps
stay in the way. This is a fiction, for neither has the Pope that office of
universal preaching, neither discharges he it in any one Church: and the
beauty of the feet of Preachers is not by the sign of the Cross, but by
their heavenly commission, their fruitful discharge of it, and a godly life.
But the secret of all this business is this, he is an enemy to the cross of
Christ, and by that seeming honoring of it upon his foot is tredding it under
foot indeed.

But he comes nearer the point at length, that whereas the Popes received
white shoes from Constantine, I am linte^ calceamenta in usu Ecclesia Romans non
sint. etc. Ibid. page 148
they have taken purpour or skarlet shoes in their place: And what is this?
but to tell the world that Rome is the scarlet colored Beast drunk with the
blood of the Saints; and this is the more because they acknowledge such
kissing of his feet to come of Diocletian, who thought himself a god, and
craved divine honors: And though that his wickedness (b) Diocletian^ quidem
improbitas, etc. Ibid. cap. 2 p. 14.
was, (a) damnable (says he) in craving of it, yet the custom is not to be
damned that gave it: This is all one as to condemn Herod who took divine
honors, but not the people that gave them. Diocletian then is the father of
this pride, and it is worse in them, than in him; for he being an Emperor,
took it of his Subjectes, but they being Churchmen exact it of Emperors.
They should remember their own gloss. The Pope is successor to Peter (a)
Papa est successor Petri piscato ris and non Augusti Im* peratoris. Psalm. 68.
23.
the Fisher, but not to Augustus the Emperor. If not to Augustus, far less
should they succeed Diocletian.

Beside reason: Scripture must also be abused to color this wickedness, that
thy foot may be dipped in blood, and the tongues of thy Dogs in the same.
Tum pedes sanguine ^ingunt^r, etc. Vestan Ibid p. 154.
Then the feet are dipped in blood (say they) when they are decored with a
cross of Christ, then the tongues of Dogs are dipped therein, when
Heretics like dogs lick the Popes feet. But Augustine exponeth that
blood, of Martyrs, and these Dogs of painful Pastors; which pertain
nothing (b) -- Sic convenientius ut arbitor intelligitur pes tinctus in
sanguine. Aug. Psalm. 67. Esaias 49. 23.
to the Pope, for he massacres Martyrs, and does not preach at all: To this
same end they abuse that Prophecy; Kings shall be thy nourcing fathers, and
Queens thy nourcing mothers, they shall bow down to thee with their faces
toward the Earth, and lick the dust of thy feet: Prophetia^ illam imple^a^
esse Imperatori^. and Regi bus etc. Suar Des^ns. Lib 3 cap. 3. cap. 24 ^, 17
This Prophecy according to the Letter is fulfilled in the Emperors and Kings
kissing the Popes feet with their faces toward the ground: The like has
Eudaemon Ioannes Eudaem. Johan. Paral. Tort^ cap. 8. Acts 16 Acts 10
the Jesuit. But this is a great change, and far from that which Leo the
third did, after he had crowned Charles, and made him Emperor, he would
worship him before the people, that they might know the greatness of the
imperial Majesty. Haymon. apud. Bozium de signis. This is proper to
Heretics who steal the glory of God to pervert Scripture for coloring that
sacrilege.

But Marta Marta de iuris part. ^* c. cap. 46.
helps him, and would prove the lawfulness of it from the Iaylors falling
down at Paul and Silas feet, and Cornelius falling down before Peter, Pipin.
An. Do^ 752, Marta ibid:
but there is nothing for kissing of his feet in these Texts: and it is a weak
proof to allege Abdias Babylonius, a fabler, whom he grantes, is ab Ecclesia
reprobatus, rejected of the Church. And the antiquity of the practice, he
finds no sooner then Pipine, Alexandri. 3. factum commendari potest, etc.
Vestan. p. 75
and Charle-maine: Fables, and the color of antiquity serve these men who are
Rex Regina* rum. Tholos. Syntag. 18. 1. 11.
destitute of ancient truth: But we shall help them in fathering of this
adoration aright, on Darius who called himself King of kings, and cousing of
the gods: and Cleopatra, who would be called the Queen of queens: These are
the parents of their pride, and would be adored.

Thirdly, they use greatest degree of their pride in trodding on the necks of
Emperors, as Alexander the third did to Fridricke Barbarosa, at Venice, That
is a more commendable fact (says one) and more just, than the trodding of
Ecebolius, because it was against a most cruel enemy of the Church, and
Alexander (b) did well that he insulted with his heels against that horrible
Beast: While heaven and earth are astonished at that pride, they glory in it.
And of this sort was that pride of Celestine the third who did cast the Crown
off the head of Henry the six, with his foot, as though the Crowns of
Emperors served for none other use, but to be foote-bals to Popes. It is good
for Kings who kiss his foot, that they are able again to rise or walk: For
the trees of the wood of Loretto, inclined so low to welcome the Virgins
Chamber coming Horat. Turs de Aede Loret. Lib. 1. cap. 6.
over the Hadriaticke Sea, that they neither raise again nor inclined to the
House when it was settled behind them. Tyranny in Barbarians cannot exerce
greater indignities against Princes, then this humility of the Servant of
servants.

CHAP. V. Of their third usurpation over Princes: In their Laws.
THeir third vsurpatio^ over Princes is in their Laws: God has invested Kings
with a Nomo-theticke, power, to make laws within their Kingdoms, but the Pope
takes on him to Expone, Mend, Alter, and Repeal them at his pleasure, and
that is the common doctrine of the Schoolmen: As for their Potest Pontifex
illas emendare, Suarez. etc. Defens 3 22. Ibid. n. 15. 16
Execution, he may stay their use, or set it to some profitable end for the
good of the Church, and he power of both resideth in the Pope: And for this end
absolutely he takes on him, to direct and command Kings in the use of their
power against Protestants: If they obey him, he casts them in danger, and
hatred of their people: If they disobey, he has a cause of Censure against
them, to suspend or depose them, for if the secular power be denied or
neglected, the Seculars may be excommunicate Denegato brachio seculari, etc.
Mat Iuris. part. 1. cap. 5 1. n. 1.
. This is also enjoined to their Inquisitours, to compel Kings and Princes to
recall their laws, that are against the Inquisition. And because Eymericus is
too general in his decision, therefore Pegna is more particular in his
Commentar, that commoun and fundamental Laws and Customs what-so-ever of
that kind are null, and of no effect Eymer. Director. Inquis part 3. q. 34.
Fegna Comment 83.
. So Bellarmine, Although the Pope be not a politic Prince, yet he may
confirm or infirm the laws of Kings Quam^is Pontifex, etc. Bellar. Romans lib.
5. cap. 6. Baron ann. 878 n 22. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
. So then Princes can have no Laws in force, if the Pope mislike them; neither
dar they refuse to make such laws, as he thinks good for the Church, that
is to say, for the upholding of his tyranny, though it were with the ruin of
their Kingdom.

Their Analist gives this in a word, Potest Papa in Regesius dicere, he is
set up with full power to judge them, and their laws: And though he be that
lawless Man* yet he takes the Laws of Countries, the raines of government
in his hand, as though he were the Law of Laws, and Reason of Reasons; for so
Hildebrand Quod illi soli ^icet pro temporis. etc. Hildebrand Dictat. 7
professes, that it is leasume to the Pope only to make new laws according
to the necessity of Time.

But no wonder he use such power over the Laws of Princes, since he has no
constancy in his own laws: for neither Canons of Councels, nor of his
Predecessors or his own can bind him, but upon any occasion he will alter: As
it is said of the style of the Court of Rome (that it varyeth every year) so
we may say of the Popes laws, Regula Canc. Stylu^ curiae Romanae variat.
quotannis. Ab eadem sede Apostolica, etc* Baron. 878. Baron: A^n. 547: n. 50.
Idem Anno. 553. ^. 231
that they are changed, and privileges destroyed, diminished, and augmented at
their pleasure. The Apostolic sea may make all these alterations, according
to their custom. This is the liberty they take over the opinions of others:
The like Uigilius took of his own opinion, and that in fundamental points
concerning Nestorianisme. For as he saw either danger or peace, he changed his
sentence, and Baronius (whose task amongst other things is to defend the Popes
greatest faults, and prove them to be perfections) says, that Uigilius after
great consideration strove diversely: Et cur ei non licuit, mutato rerum statis,
mutare sententiam? This is their constancy, even when they define out of
Peter's Chair.

This usurping over Kings concerning laws, is crossed by Pope Nicolaus,
writing to Michael the Emperor* that Christus distinxit, etc ne ^ut Imp. iura
Pontifecis, etc. Bella Rom Lib: 5 cap. 5
Christ distinguished the acts, offices, and dignities of the Pope and
Emperor, that the Emperor should not presume to usurp upon the Jurisdiction
of the Pope, or the Pope upon the Emperors jurisdiction. When that Pope did so
rid these merches, it is manifest, there was no such usurpation, as he
condemns in terms, and that the latter Popes in their usurping, are gone as
far from the modesty of their Ancestors, as from reason and conscience.
Princes may be content with that tyranny over their laws, seeing he does so
to the laws of God: He dispenses Gomes* Regul. Cancel fol 83 2. Thessa: 2. 8
Tholos. Syntag. Lib. 47. cap. 20. n. 8.
above, and contrare the Apostle, and sells pardons of the notour breaches of
the moral law, because no canon can bind the Pope, says their Canonists.
This proves him to be that lawless Man: And another Phalaris boasting that he
can not be subject to laws. This is the loosing of the sinews of Government,
that as a Beast he may rage a^ random.

CHAP. VI. Of their fourth Usurpation, In censuring Kings.
THeir fourth Usurpation over Princes is in Censures: They are not content with
a directive power, but will have a coactiue also, to compel Princes to do
what they will, because the one power without the other is of no effect: Vis
directi va sine coactiva inefficax est. Suarez. Defens. lib. 3 c. 23* n. 3
And because that the Christian Church were not conveniently furnished, neither
were it sufficiently provided, if it had not a power to compel Rebels, that
will not obey censures. This Ibid. n. 18
is in effect Bertrandus blasphemy, who said, that the Lord would not seem
discreet enough, except he had left a Vicar behind him, who might do all Nam
non videretur dis cretus Dominus fuisse etc Bertrand. de Origin. Iuris. quaest*
4. Bibliothec. Pat. Tom. 4 Col. 105.
things. And Rodericus has the like, that Christ had not provided well enough,
for the World, nor for the Church, if he had not left so eminent a Vicar on
the Earth. This is no discretion to speak so blasphemously of the wisdom of
Christ: they choose rather to blaspheme, than recall their errors. (d)
Roderic. Zamor. spec. lib. 2. cap. 1


This coactiue power has two branches: The one to deprive Kings of the use of
their Authority by suspension: The other to deprive them of the property of
it, by Deposition. Duobus modis potest Rex co^tumax, etc. Suarez. defen. 6. 6.
13
But Deposition is no Ecclesiasticke punishment, but an Imperial; as when
Traian took the Crown from the King of Armenia. And they know that
excommunication a censure merely Ecclesiasticke, can not extend it self to
the deposing of Kings: Yet the Pope (say they) by his transcendent power has
annexed Deposition to Excommunication, as a convenient punishment; for though
it exceed the Nature of Excommunication, yet it exceeds not the bounds of
the Popes power. Esto excedat. etc. Suarez. defens. 6 6. n. 16. 17
His exorbitant power then finds a right where no right is. And prian
affirms and Erasmus marketh it out of him: That by Church censures, none is
so noted as to be destroyed. Cypr. epist. 51
The Church should censure Ecclesiasticklie and leave civil censures (such as
is deprivation of Kings) unto the Magistrate.

Upon these grounds come the absolving of people from their Native alledgeance
to Princes, and their rebellion against them: The giving of their Kingdom up
to be invaded by neighbor Princes, or such as have any Title to it or power
to conquer it. So Suarez, Suarez. Defens Cath. lib. 6. sect. 18
If the Pope depose a King, he may be expelled or killed by them who have
commission of the Pope: And if he command the execution of it to none, then it
pertaines to the lawful Successor etc. And again. After the sentence
pronounced he is deprived of his Ibid. sect. 24
Kingdom, so that he cannot possess it by a just Title: Therefore*
thereafter he may be handled like a Tyrant, and consequently killed by any
private man. These positions are more bloody than Dracoes Laws. And we shall
have the Pope himself saying by Bellarmine I shall make him Facio vt ille qui
tibi Rex erat, non sit tibi Rex contra Barclaium. page 259
who was thy King to be no King to thee. And though absolution from
excommunication should relieve them of all things that follow thereupon, yet
they have forged that distinction, to absolve and reconceale the person to the
Church* yet he shall not be restored to his Kingdom. So Franciscus
Veronensis, Hunc etia^ ingratiam recep^ -- non ^at men* etc. Pla* tin. de vita
Gregor. 7
Albeit the King were absolved by the Pope, (a) Jesuit. Sicar. part. 2, c. 8.
p. 73. Neque etiam a Papa absolutus Rex potest esse
yet he cannot be a King. This they have learned of Hildebrand, who after he
had absolved the Emperor from his excommunication, he held him still as
deposed from the Impyre; and caused choose Rudolph in his place ( c) I have
received (said he) that man in favor, and given him only the Communion, but
have not restoreed him to the Kingdom, out of the which I threw him in the
Synod of Rome. This is a taste of Popish wrath, to keep hatred after
reconciliation, and deposition after Communion, he is as void of the meekness
of Christ in the first, as he is full of the Serpents cruelty in the second.
But may not humanity, and Mediation of other Princes plead favor for him that
is censured? No surely; For neither the Penes Impera torem -- non amplius stat
Palatinu^ Haeresiarcham, vel haeredes^^* ponere -- ^^lustris Cardinales
v^ani^^ter jurarunt, quod Pon tif. Max. ^evocare non possit. Aphoris. Card. 27.
28
Emperor nor King of Spain may meddle (say their Cardinals) with the
restitution of Prince Palatine to the Electorate and his Lands, because to
seek these things is no other than to cast down the Apostolic seat from
the rights of her Majesty, ( d) And least the Pope prove tractable these holy
Cardinals will bind his omnipotency, with their own oath, that he should
change nothing that is done. Here is barbarous tyranny bound with roapes of
sand: They vent their malice and folly, but God has begun to behold and
judge that tyranny, and possiiblie will restore him without their consent.

Lastly, if Kings by their power or love of their people be secured from
foreign violence, they have their last refuge to cause kill him by stobbing,
In vitam ejus grassari, quacunque ar te licet. Marian, de Reg. lib. 1: cap. 7
poison, or powderplots: And that not only Protestant Princes, but even of
such as are Papists, as the world saw in Henry the third of France, for after
excommunication, any man may take his life by any means whatsoever.

But this cruelty must have a warrant, and Scripture shall be thrown to
favor it, for these words, Peter, kill and eat, give power to the Popes to
excommunicate, depose and kill Kings, if we trust Baronius, for Peter's
Ministry, (a) Duplex beatiss. Pater ministerium Petri. etc. Baron in vot. ad
Paul. 5
is two fold (says he) to feed and to kill -- And he is commanded to kill
them, that is to resist, to fight against them and to defeat them that they be
not at all: And because the Notion of killing sounds harshlie, he will give
us a charitable Commentary of it, that killing ought to be in great charity:
That the thing killed be eaten, to wit, by Christian charity to hyde it in
his bowels, and so that killing is not cruelty but Piety: I doubt if the Pope
will count it either Piety or Charity, if he felt such a killing: And
Bellarmine is as gross though in fewer words. For it is the duty of the head
(^aith he) to eat, and by eating to send down meat into the Stomach.
Pulch-dici* tur ei^ macta and manduca, etc. Bell. Rov^ 1 cap. 22
This is a strange liberty in glossing Scripture, and to turn Peter a fisher
of men in a Butcher of Kings, and the Pope in a Polyphemus to devour men. It is
like the Jesuit Alcasers conceate on the Revelation. He saw how that Book
tortured (c) Alcasar in Apoc. c. 18 Ibid. Notat. 7
the Church of Rome, therefore he cast it in a new mould, and exponeth her
destruction. Cap. 18. of her conversion to Christ, and the fire of Gods anger
that destroys her, to be the flame of Gods love, turning her to
Christianity. A fancy contrar to sense and reason, for this destruction is
threatened as a plague to Rome, and not promised as a blessing. So these men will
never want a color for their cause so long as they play the Qu^dlibitars, to
draw every thing out of any thing: But this gloss is co^trare to the Text,
which speaks only of the conversio^ of the Gentiles, and the Fathers exponded
this eating of the Churches turning the Gentiles to her self by Baptism, so
Augustine Et ait Petro, occide, and manduca* occide quod sunt and fac quod tu
es, Aug.
He said to Peter kill and eat, that is, kill them as they are corrupt, and
make them the thing that thou art: And this is contrare to Baronius, for the
end of his eating, is to destroy them alluterlie, but the end of this eating,
is to save them by grace. And Baronius himself in cold blood and free of
prejudice before the question arose betwixt the Pope, and Venice. What that
heavenly vision meant the event declared so that we need no humane
interpretation, for it meant that the Gentiles Nimirum eo mysterio Ec lesiam,
etc Ann. 4 1. n. 6
should be turned to the Church by Baptism: And their own Onus Ecclesiae
tells us from what Spirit such glosses, and practices come, it is not
pastoral love, but a divellish malice, [f] Diabolic^ maliciae est, etc. On^.
Eccles. 17. Cusan. Epist. 2
to scatter, kill, and destroy: This liberty of glossing is that which Basile
and Nazianzen call duleuein Hypoth^sei, to serve their turn, and to make the
sense of Scripture currrent with the occasion or time, as Cusane affirms.

But such dealing Christian Princes are in the worst cas^ of any men: Pagan
Princes are without the Popes jurisdiction and free of his censure Pontificia
potestas, etc. Suarez de fen. 3. 26. n. 8
Kings under the Law had authority over the high Priest, but now the Pope
clames more power, than the high Priest had: And though Subjectes of any
quality be excommunicate, they are neither cast out of their possessions nor
killed by virtue thereof. Bellar. Romans Pont. lib. 5. c. 10
They say by word, that when a King becomes Christian, he loses not his
earthly kingdom whereunto he had right, but acquireth a new right to an
eternal Kingdom. If it be so, as it is indeed, how is it that under the
Pope Kingdoms are looseable, only because of Christianity? They fall here
in that same inconvenient they would eschew, that Christianity is hurtful to
Kings, and Grace destroys Nature. Alioqui obesset regibus Christi be neficium
etc Bellar. Ibid.
The cause of this difference is, that they are Kings, and by their place come
in Competition with him who will be absolute Monarch over all. For the Pope
(says Suarez) -Suarez. defen* 3. 27 Th. Aquin. Ibid.
has the height of both powers, and is both high Priest and a temporal King.
This is a stumbling block to hold infidel Princes from Christ: The Turks
stumble at popish images: and at the Siege of Vien when their Canon brake in
pieces, the images that were set on the walls, to ke^pe the Town, they cried
with disdain, Take up the Christians gods: Erasm. Enchirid.
Their Transubstantiation is another stumbling block, when in one hour, they
will create, adore, and eat their god: And that made Averroes to cry, The
Religion of the Jews is -- Religio Christian^ru^ impossibilium est anima me^ a
cum Philosophis.
for Swine: The Religion of Mahumetanes is for Chidren: The Religion of
Christans is of impossibilies: Therefore Anima mea cum Philosophis, my soul
with the Philosophs. So this excommunicating, and killing of Kings, makes
infidel Princes abhor Christianity, whose first reward under the Pope would
be this base abusing. Therefore the Turk holds him with Mahumet, and though
he honor his Muffti, and use his counsel in great matters, yet he keeps
him always subject to him in Civil things.

CHAP. VII. That Usurpation now is the prime Article of their faith.
THis was some-tymes no Tenet of Doctrine, no not a Problem in the Schools;
yea when it began Hac sol^ novitas, non dicam haeresis, etc. Sigibert. Ann.
1088.
Sigibert called it an Haeresie* It was not so much as res fidei, a matter of
faith, but now it is made de fide, an article of faith and that not a commoun
one, but caput fidei, an head article of faith. It is both their negative, and
affirmative (c) Paganitatis crimen incurrit. Pelag. 1. Artic. 7* Qui
Papaeprimatum negat peccat in Spi. sanctum.
confession. Negative: If this proposition be denied, that the Pope may depose
S^ haec pro positio negatur, fides Catholica abi^ratur, Suarez Defens. 6* 8*
heretical Kings, the Catholic faith is abiured, said Suarez. And who deny
this, falls in Paganism, and in the sin against the holy Ghost, said
Alvarez. Pelagius: It is their affirmative confession, because this is the
maine and principal point of faith, says the Cardinal Bell. resp. ad Apol.
p. 7 In hoc cardo totius controversy vertitur Suarez. defen. 321. 3. Eudaem.
Apol. Garnet. c. 5
and the chief hinger whereupon all the contraversie turns: And under the
counterfitte name of Skulkenius, he says, that this Papal power is the
hinger, the fundation; and in a word, the sum of Christian Faith. And
Cardinal Peron in his diswasiue oration to the communalitie of France; calls
it the greatest matter, whereupon the safety of all Christendom depends In
qua salus totius orbis Christiani vertitur. Con tinuat. Thua^. lib. 8^
. By this they measure their trusty Professors, what ever men hold or deny in
other points, so that they maintain this, all is well. But if they oppugn
this, though they be sound in other points, they are persecuted as Heretics
Onus Ec*les. c. 15. ^. 13*
. They charge us falsely, that we make our doctrine of Antichrist an express
article of our Creed; but they hing all their Creed, and Faith upon it. And
upon their grounds it may pass, since they make the Pope their Church. They
object (says Gretzer) that we (g) Gregor. Defen. Bellar
call Papam Ecclesiam quid tum? non abnuo. What of that? I deny it not. And
Ualentia In secunda secunda.
more posedly Nomine Ecclesiae intelligimus caput Ecclesiae, by the Name of the
Church we understand the head of the Church. Since therefore they make their
pretended head the Church, no wonder that the greatness of that Head be the
greatest articl^: yea, the sum of their whole Faith. And Baronius Baron, 849.
n. 17
a firmeth, that without obedience to this Head, neither Faith, nor good works
avail: And again Ann. 504. n* 1. and 506. n. 11
that even Arrian Princes prospered, when they obeyed the Pope. This Head is
All to them: their Faith their Creed, the rule and cause of prosperity, to
bless Heretics, if they obey him, to damn the Faithful, if they disobey him.

But seeing they will have it an head article, we ask in what Creed they
find it? It is neither in the Nicene, nor Athanasian Creed; neither in these
larger forms, as Bulla ^ij 4 de form, Iurame^t
Jerome wrote to Damasus, or Augustine to Laurentius, or Petrus Diaconus;
neither in the Creed of the Apostles, which (credibly) was written before
Peter's supposed coming to Rome, and contains nothing of his Supremacy:
Therefore they must come home to their Trent Creed, canonized by Pius the
fourth.

This is their idol of Ecclesiasticke liberty, wherein though they speak
diverselie, yet all runs to a lawless license: Sometimes they restrain it
to Canonicke election of Prelates: Some times to the investures of benefices and
immunities of the Clergy: but Aventine Tempus hoc opportunu^ ratus etc Avent.
lib. 5 page 56 9.
descriueth it more partiticularlie that Hildebrand was desirous to shake off
the Emperors yoke, break his authority, and turn all power to himself,
and so to confirm the principality of the Pope. That there was nothing
better, than to take away all fear* and be affrayed of no man; and that he
might enjoy the Ecclesiastical liberty, and have such an Emperor, whose
forces he feared no, as one that did reign at the pleasure of the Pope. This
is the first branch of it in his Security: The second is, in being terrible to
others, that as he feared not the Emperor, so although he injured him, yet
the Emperor must be affrayed of him Etiamsi injuria vel ipsum Casarem
affecerit etc. Ibid p. 564
. And Gerochus Romani rationem actorum reddere nolunt etc. A vent. l. 5. 563
an eager defender of Hildebrand descryveth it more shortly. The Romans (said
he) usurp divine honor, they will give no reason for their doing, neither
suffer they any man to say to them, why do ye so? But use that verse of the
Poet, so I will, so I command, and let my will pass for a reason. But
Hildebrand expounds it himself most clearly, to be a power to take away,
and give Impyres, Kingdoms, Principalities, and what ever mortal men may
have. Imperiae, -- and quicquid habere mortales possunt, auferre nos posse
Plat. vit. Gregor. 7
And what these proud words means, he exponeth it in his twenty seven
Dictats, the hammers of all lawful authority. And Vendramenus the Venitian
defines it libertatem quodvis agendi and rapiendi impune, a liberty to do and
pull what they please. But seeing they must have this Title of Head in their
own sense, let them have it, as Aquinas calls the Antichrist perfect, or an
Head, quo modo dicimus perfectum latronum, as we say, a Brigand is perfect:
But there needs no comparison where there is an Identitie. Tho. 3. sum. 3.
48. 8. Caejet. ibid.


Their Church cannot be perfect in faith, that is ever parturiens, bring out
new Articles of faith. Their Regulars have lately affirmed. Quod Regulares
sint de herachia absolute -- articulum fidei esse puto. But the Parisian
Censur. Paris in prop. ex H^ bern. Anno 1631.
Divines have censured it thus. Author novum eumque falsum fidei articulum
fingit. And that same Sorbone, gave the like censure against Becan, Bellarmine,
Suarez, etc. in the point of the Popes headship. There is as much truth amongst
themselves as to refute their new bred Azor. Instit part. 2. l* 5. c Alvar.
Pelag de planct. Ecclesiae fol. 7 col. 4. Ibid. fol. 2 -- In omnibus. Per
omnia. Ante omnia. Supra omnia.
Articles of faith. Asorius is sufficient: Facta pontificum rem fidei non
faciunt* faciunt tamen probabiliorem sententiam. If the Popes doing make not
rem fidei a Matter of faith how can it make a thing de fide an Article of
faith, and that a prime one.

I will close this point with Alvarez strange positions of this head. Maioritas
Papae that the Popes greatness is in all by all, before all, and above all
Christians, This might suffice, but we shall have more. Papa est Deus
imperatoris, the Pope is the Emperors god. And yet more blasphemouslie, sicut
Deus, as God cannot set a god above himself, so the Pope cannot set an equal
to himself. These and other like blasphemies they suffer to stand in print,
albeit they purge out better things by their Indices Expurgatorii: And when
Paul the fifth was lately called, Vice-Deus a Vice-God by* Thomas Carafa and
Benedictus, and offense was taken at these Titles by Plessie, and other
Protestants; A^^^ 160^
the Consistory took it in their considerations to moderate them: But the
Pope stayed all moderation, and said, That no more was in these Titles, than
agreed to Peter's successor. Thus their Head is far from found judgment,
when he will suffer no mitigation of the blasphemous titles of his Headship.

CHAP. VIII. That the end of the Popes Usurpation is his Monarchy.
HIs end in all this Usurpation is; he will, he must be a Monarch: At the
beginning he was subject to Emperors as well as other men. Pontifex ijs
subjectu^ e^at non minus quam cateri* homines. Bell. Romans Pontif. 2. 29.
As the Popes submissiue and humble Letters to Princes bears, as shall be
seen hereafter. Next they aspired to an equality, as Symmachus with the
Emperor Anastasius* Itaque non dicam superior, cer^e aqualis honor est, I will
not say, it is a superior, but certainly it is an equal honor. But they
knew that Equality of power cannot well stand* therefore they ascended [b]
Symmachus Biblioth. Pa^r. Tom. 3. col. 195.
in end to a Superiority. So Gregory the seventh to Henry the fourt. And
Hadrian to Friderick, who was angry that he preferred his name to his: This
was far from Gregory the first, who reproved a noble woman for calling her
self his hand-maide. Gregor. l. 9. Epist. 28
For this cause they are not content with the Myter as Churchmen, but wear
the Crown, which they call Regnum. Innocent. 3. Sermon. 1. Sigibert^an 550
And Hildebrand has decreede, Quod solus Papa potest vti imperialibus
insignibus: That the Pope alone may use imperial Ensigns: And he has a
triple Crown, to tell that he is greater than all the Kings of the Earth in
glory and authority. Merito tri plicem* corona^ capiti aptavit etc Vestan*
page 186
This they make plainer by a strange collation, making themselves to be all,
and Kings but as ciphers: For temporalis potestas est in Rege, ut
administrante: But they put it in the Pope in five respects: Bellar, Romans Pont.
l. 5. c. 5. and 7
The first, as in conferente, by Election. Next as in confirmante, by
Coronation. The next three, as in iudicante, dirigente, and corrigente, or in
respect of his administration; And what is that one small entres, in respect of
these five, in the hand of an usurping and emulous power? And Marta Marta
jur^sd part* 1. c. 21. n. 29. Ipse est quasi Rex Schacharum.
calls them, but Ciphers indeed affirming that the Greek Emperor is but as
the Kings of the Chesse, having nothing but names and titles without the Pope.
That is, except they hold and keep their Crowns of him, they are but as
Chesse-men to be placed or displaced at his pleasure.

But how can he clame a Kingdom as Christ's Successor, seeing Christ said to
Pilate, My Kingdom is not of this world? And when the people would have made
him a Io. 6. August. ibid. Tract. 25. Am l. 5. Epist. 33
King, he fled, and hid himself. And when Satan offered him all the
Kingdoms of the earth he refused. The Pope must seek another Precedent then
Christ, to prove the lawfulnes of his Kingdom. And another author than God, to
wit, the Prince of the World whom Christ refused, But the Pope has taken him
at his Word, and fulfilled the condition of worshipping him; in respect 1 Cor. 8
that idolatry whereof he is the Father and Foster in Europe, is a
worshipping of devils.

Their own confession is sufficient for us: Christ as a mortal man had not a
temporal Kingdom, neither has the pope as Christ's Vicar any such a kingdom.
Christ^^ non habuit vl^ lum temporale^egnum, etc Bellar. Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 4
In respect then of all this proud Usurpation against Gods word, right, and
Conscience, it was no wonder that their famous Painter Raphael Urbinas painted
S. Peter, and S. Paul too rudie, and being asked, why he did so? He
answered, That he kept the decorum of his craft, for he was assured that
now they were blushing in Heaven at the wickedness of their Successors on
Earth. And a Friar, preaching before the Pope and his Cardinals, when he saw
their pomp and glory, said nothing in the Pulpet, but repeated these words
Phy Peter* phy Paul: And being demanded what he meaned thereby? answered,
That he thought Peter and Paul were silly men, who ran through the world
preaching in great distress, whereas their Successors equalled and excee^ed
Kings in ease, wealth, and honor. But if that Pope had known the late
Divinity, he might have answered, that scoffing Friar with Bellarmine Bellar*
Recog. page 21 Pascere est re^ gi^ more imperare.
That to to feed Christ's Flock is not to preach like Apostles, but to rule as
Kings: Therefore Spalato calls it miri^icum pasce a wonderful pasce that
admittteth so many diverse and contrar senses. It is to them as the
Philosophers stone turning all metals in gold: There is neither Heresy nor
tyranny, but it is turned in truth and equity, so soon as it is touched with
this wonderful Pasce.

They mind nothing but a Kingdom, therefore the Miter is called Regnum and
Peter's privileges, Petri regalia. This is the extract of old Rome, who Romany
proprium est libido dominandi. Aug. ^ivit. 1. 33 Ibid. lib. 1. c. 1
were carried with desire of Government, and yet that same desire ruled over
them, and made them slaves: So the later Rome are slaves to their own pride,
and verify Chams curse in the Pope, Servant of Servants, while his ambition
commands him. Herein he loses more than he gain^th, while he turns
from Spiritual things to temporal and falls in that shameful change,
whereof Bernard speaks, Turpis est mutatio a coelestibus ad ter rena Bernard
Cant ser. 35
that to change from heavenly to earthly things, is vile. He knew the Roman
pride by their pulse, when he feared that the desire of reigning would pervert
him Bernard. Consid. lib. 3 Matthew 6
. In their speculations, they make the spiritual state a substantive and the
temporal state, an adjective upon Christ's words, ista adijcientur vobis, these
things shall be casten to you. And Carerius thinks it a good argument, for
exalting the Pope above Princes: But here they turn the Adjective in a
Substantive, when they lay a^side Spiritualitie for Temporalitie: And Alvarez
Pelagius Alvar. Pe lag. 1. 62. fol. 58. Planum est in terdicitur do minatus.
said, that as Christ had Divinity and Humanity so the Pope had Spiritualitie
and Temporalitie. Why then forsakes he that Divinity, and turns all
humane? Bernard told, that Domination was forbidden them: And Ambrose Purpura
Imperatorem decet. etc. Ambros. lib 5 Epist. 33 Anima humana etc. August.
Epist. 1. 19. cap. 5 Th^los. Syntag. 1827
that the Purpure set the Emperor, but not the Priest: And in another place,
that Impyres were rather given by Priests, than usurped. Saint Austins
Allegory of the Moon agrees to them: The foolish is changed as the Moon,
for when man's soul falls from the Sun of Righteousness, it turns all
its force on earthly things: Let them ly still on the earth, to the which they
cl^ue.

But if he must be an Emperor, and so called, let him have it in the true
Notion. Pliny says, that he is an Emperor who has slain many with his
own hands. And Cicero conformely, that he is an Emperor, who has killed one
thousand, or two thousand with his own hand: And Uarro defines an Emperor,
who oppresses his Enimyes. According to these notions we grant him to be an
Emperor, for after Uarro, he oppresses all his Gainsayers, and over-reacheth
Pliny and Ciceroes definition, because he boasts of it, as a privilege,
that he may carry Dist^ 40 c. 5 S^ Papa.
millions of Souls to hell without controlment. Herein he is worse than the
Frank^ arbitrians; for they plead liberty to run to hell alone, but he
caryeth millions with him. Such a roving comes of his pride, but Gods
providence made them choose such an instance of the carrying of so many Souls,
that they might reveal the Truth in the fume of a volant discourse, for he
does so indeed as he boasts. But he shall find an answer from Aponius,
Ante Tribunal aeterni Iudicis, tantarum animarum sacrilegio condemnabitur: He
shall be damned for the loss Apo^. in C^^t lib. 1 Aug. Civit. 4. 23.
of so many Souls, before the Tribunal of God.

Saint Austine notes, that old Rome did not count felicity for a Goddess
before Lucullus time: when their civil happiness got a deadly wound, by
Sylla and Marius strife, they smoothed that real misery, with that imaginary
Goddess. So when Hildebrands pride had overthrown the peace of Church and
State, he soothed all with the name of a Kingdom, and Ecclesiastic liberty.

The second part of this Treatise: Of the Noveltie of their Usurpation:
CHAP. IX. And first the Negative proof thereof.
THis much of the Matter of Usurpation: Follows -- Ante p^a ^eam hester number
-- ^qua^ ipsanovellitas Praxea h^ster ni -- Id esse verum, quodcunq^e primum
and adulterinum quod cunque posterius. Tertul. advers. Prax. cap. 2
the noveltie of it. Our Lord Jesus Christ prescryved against the Errors of
Scribes and Pharisees, by this that ab initio non fuit sic, it was not so from
the beginning: And the Apostle Jude following that rule, calls the Christian
faith; fidem semel traditam, faith once delyvered; that needs no addition of
new articles. And the Ancients used this praescription against Heretics, who
could not plead antiquity, and praescription of time. So Tertullian ( a)
after that he had set down the sum of faith. That this rule ( says he)
has run from the beginning of the Gospel, even before former Heretics,
much more before thee Praxeas, who was yesterday: Both the latenes of
Heretics, and the Noveltie of Praxeas a yesterday-man will prove. Whereby it
is equally prejudged against all haeresies, that that is true which is first:
And that is false that is last. And Hilarious Quicquid a^ud te est pra ter vnam
fide^ persidia, non fides est. Hilar contr. Consta^.
against Constantius, what ever is with thee beside that one faith, it is
perfidie, and not faith. They know the force of this prescription, and for
eschewing of it, maintain both a current, or ambulatorie faith, and an
unbounded power in their Church, to expone Spal. lib. 7 cap. 12
Scripture according to time, Scriptura secundum cur re^te^ vniversalem ritum
exponendia, Cusan. Epist. 2 ad Bohemos
and their Mitigators help them in this strait with their new Maxim, that
haeresis non est in excessu, sed defectu, that haeresie is not in excess, but
defect, as though it were not an heresy to have mo Gods, but to deny the true
God: Or as though it were no deformity to a man's body to have three or four
hands, but only to want one.

By this rule of prescription, we find their Usurpation to be a Novaltie, and
that both negatiuely and positiuely. Negatiuely, because it was not so from the
beginning, for a thousand years, as shall be seen in this induction. First,
not before Christ, for then the high Priest (though a Type of Christ) and
bearing the Vrim and Thummum was subject to their Kings. Secondly, not in
Christ's time; for he used no such temporal power, as they themselves
confess. In his Mothers womb he sub^ected himself to the Emperors edict,
and went to Bethleem, Luke. 2
and in that one Act fulfilled both his Fathers prophecy, to be borne in
Bethleem, and obeyed the Emperors Edict, in going to his Family to be taxed.
After his birth, he yielded to Herod's cruelty, who sought to kill him and fled
to Egypt, whereas he might have destroyed Herod, if he pleased: He was
subject to his suposed Father, and commanded to give to Caesar the things of
Caesar's, and paid tribute to himself.

Thirdly, not by his Disciples, for they followed his example and command:
Paul* commands every soul to Romans 13. 1. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14
be subject to superior powers: Put them in mind to be subject to
principalities and powers: And appealed to Nero, though he was a tyrant: And
Peter from whom they fetch all this power, commands us to be subject to
authority for the Lords sake, whither it be to Kings as supreme: And all of
them submitted themselves to Princes, they neither inveyed against them,
neither stirred up people to rebel, but patiently suffered Martyrdom.

Fourthlie, not the Primitive Church, though we take it for the first Ages:
They followed Christ and his Apostles in doctrine and practice; They suffered
persecution, and did neither practice against their persons nor their estates:
So Tertulian: Christians were never found Albinans, nor Nigrians, or Cassians,
etc. -- A Christian is enemy to no man, farrelesse to the Emperor, whom
knowing to be appointed of God; it is necessar that he love, reverence, and
honor him, etc. Christianus null^us est hostis, etc. Tertul. ad Scapul. c. 2
And again, we incall the eternal the true and living God, for the saftie of
Emperors. And thus these Fathers did both to approve themselves to God, and to
clear the Christian Religion from the calumnies of Pagans, who charged it with
sedition and rebellion: Nos pro sa lute Impera^orum, Deum in vocamus aeternum.
Apol. c. 30
But these godly Fathers let them see that Christ commanded his people
subjection and obedience to authority. And so a zealous Papist Gregor Tho los.
de Repub. l. 26. c. 7 n. 10 Christianos se ab eo dicerent appellari, cujus sit
Hoc pi^ssimum dog ma* vt Magistratui parea^t. Ibid.
remarketh that from the death of Christ to Diocletian, for the space of three
hundredth years, albeit the Christians suffered innumerable and cruel torments,
so that twenty thousand were killed at once, and some times whole cities
destroyed, yet it is no where red that Christians (albeit equal in number and
power) did attempt any thing against the Laws, or the Magistrate, or his
Security, or any ways rebelled, and by this argument show that their Religion
should be embraced -- And that they were called Christians from him whose holy
precept was this to obey the Magistrate. And Tertullian long before him. We
are forbidden to wish ill, do ill, speak ill, to think ill of any Malevelle
-- eo forsi^ an ma jus nec in ip sum qui per Deum tantus est. Tertul. ^pol. 36.
-- that which we may not do against any, far less may we do against him
(to wit, the Emperor) who is so great by Gods ordinance.

Fiftlie: Not the Fathers of the following Ages, who though they used popular
comparisons of the Pastoral and princely calling, that the Pastoral excelled
the other as far as the Soul did the Body; Gold did Lead; and the Nazianzen.
Chrysostom. Ambros.
Heaven did Earth. Yet they never dreamed of the Popes abuse of their
comparisons: But in their practice (how ever the Truth held in the callings)
Nazianzene, Chrysostom, See hereafter, chap. 21
and Ambrose, were most obedient to Princes, Ambrose alone will serve in the
two great instances of censuring the Emperor, and answering his unjust
command: For the first, he abstained Theodosius rather than excommunicate him:
For the second, he refused to render the Churches of God to the Arians: In the
first, he Rogam^s Auguste non pugnamus.
did not depose Theodosius, or absolve people from his obedience as Popes do.
In the second, he did not fight, but pray and request.

Lastly: Not the Popes of the first Ages, for they all gave odedience as
Bellarmine confesses. When the Emperors were Heathen, the Pope was not their
Judge but contrariewise subject to them in all civil causes, no les than other
men. Quo tempore Principes erant Ethni^i etc Bell. Rom Pont. l 2. c. 29
And after that Emperors were Christians, the Popes gave them that same
respect. As Leo the ^, zealous enough for greatness, writing to the Empr^s
Pulcheria, I entreat thee that thou would daigne to present our Supplication
to the most clement Emperor. Supplicatio onem nostram etc Leo epist. 26.
And again, to Eudoxia, I have most humbl^e supplicate. Suppliciter postulav^.
^de^ ad Eudoxia^
And to Martianus ( d) (e) Omnibus modis paren^^^ est piet^ te vestra. Leo.
Epist. 44
By all means we ought to obey your Piety. And he praises his zeal for the
Christian Faith, and that he found a princely affection in a most Christian
Prince. He craveth also the gathering of the Chalcedon Council, Epist. 7
and that he would compel a Bishop to return to the profession of his faith*
(f) Epist. 58
( e) And that he would use his power in matters of Religion Epist 75
In like manner to Leo the Emperor. I received the Letters of your Clemency
which I am willing to obey. Epist ^5
And acknowledge in a word, that per vos in totius Ecclesiae salutem operatur
Spiritus Sanctus. Epist. 78 Serenis^me Domine quod ad me att^net jussionibus o
be^^entiam pr^beo. Lib. 4 Epist. 32 Lib 7 Epist. 1 Si c^de hominum v^ndica re
me voluis sem. Aut haec non legunt, etc Erasm in scho ^d Ctefiphon O^^m aurei
sacerdotes ligneis ministra bant vasis. etc Gratian de Consecrat* Can Vasa in
quibus. Gratian ca^s. 23 quest. 5. c. 24. Hieron tit. c. 2 Qui non est
subiectus - in nullo fidem bonam extendit.
That by you the holy Spirit works for the saftie of the whole Church. And
Gregory the first, to Mauritus: Most glorious Lord, so far as concerns me,
I give obedience to your commandments. And speaking of the Longobards, who
were but usurpers: If I would have revenged my self by the slaughter of men,
the Longobards this day had not been extant. I must say to usurping Popes, as
Erasmus did to the Sophists of his ti ne concerning Ieromes grave censure of
such, who spiced and powdered divinity with Philosophy. Either they read not
these things, or else prefer their own opinion unto Ieromes. So say I, that
the later Popes, either read not these speeches of the old Popes, or else
prefer their judgment to theirs.

Why then have the later Popes departed from the example of the former and
better times, and of their own predecessors? They can give none other reason,
but to acknowledge their Donatisme or Anabaptisme. Therefore as their Canon Law
spoke of the Eucharist, old golden priests did minister in treene vessel, but
treene priests Minister in golden vessel: So we may say, that of old golden
Popes were subject to Emperous: But now idol and treene Popes usurp on
Emperors. If Gratian affirm rightly out of Jerome that to obey Princes is a
demonstration of faith, it will follow that the Popes Usurpation over them, is
a demonstration of persidie. The old Popes spoke, and did like Protestants and
Christians in this point: But the later Popes have taken up an Antichristian
style and practice.

CHAP. X. Of their exceptions against the Practice of the primitive obedience.
THis practice of the former times torments them; and therefore they preasse to
elide it by five shifts. The first is, That the Apostles and Fathers of the
first times had the same right, but lacked power to use it, and were affrayed
to make sturres in the Estate. Quod Chri stiani olim no^ deposuerant Neronem,
-- id fuit quia deerant vires temporales, etc. Bell. Rom Pont. l. 5. c. and
contra Barcl. cap. 6
I might answer Bellarmine with his own words: That it is rediculous to give
a right, and not a power to use it: Bellar. Ibid. Ridiculu^ est tale ius
dedisse, and non facultatem vtendi.
And the forenamed blasphemies of Suarez, Bertrandus, Rodericus, serve to
stop their mouths. But I answer directly: That this exception is false in
it self; for these first times had sufficient power to repress enemies, but
had no will. So Tertullian Externi s^mus, etc. Tertull. Apologet. 37.
We are strangers, and have filled all your places, your Towns, Yles,
Castles, Villages, meetings, your Camps, Courts, Palaces, Senate and Market. We
have left to you the Temples only -- If we had taken from you such a
multitude, the loss of many Citizens had confounded your Impyre, and had
punished you with destitution. Doubtless you had been ashamed at your
solitude. In like manner, Eusebius Eusebius. hist Eccles lib. 8
tells that innumerable multitudes of Christians assembled every where, even
in the time of Diocletian. And in another place: That Diocletian and Maximinian
saw that almost all mortal men forsook the worship of the gods, and joined
themselves to Christians. And most clearelie Augustine. Et haberet agmina
populorum, etc. Civit. lib. 22 c. 6. LudViv. ibid fuisse.
Although Christ's city had infinite multitudes of people, yet she fought not
against her wicked persecuters, etc.

And Iulians instance is peremptory, both for the obedience of Christians, and
their power: For the first, he was an Apostate; he persecuted the Christians,
and specialie Athanasius, whom he called, the enemy of the gods, Julian page
259 and 258.
he charged the Religion with madness, that it destroyed all, Ibid. 159
He discharged Schoolmasters to expone Greek Authors to Children, unless
they would worship these gods whom the Poets and Philosophers did worship.
Ibid p 304
As Augustine observes. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 5. He took away violently the
Christians riches, and said sco^finglie, he would help them to obey their
wonderful Law, in making them ready to go to Heaven. Page 300
He mocked the people of Alexandria, that they were so far degenerate as to
serve the Hebrews, whose fathers in Egypt were slaves to theirs. Page 300
Here was a matter to provocke the Christians. And next, for their Forces,
they were most powerful, for Constantius before him, had cassered all the
heathen (f) Pagani di cti quasi eode^ font potantes, Baron* Martyrol. Ianuar.
21
from the wars, and settled thein Villages, or Pages near unto wells, wherefra
they are called Pagani or Pagans unto this day. So they had force enough, when
the remnant body of the Army were all Christians. And for Captains, they had
Iovian who succeeded him, and Valentinian whom he banished, for refusing to
offer incense to idols, and other religious Captains to set up against him,
and yet there was not in all his Reign Julian.
any such atempt; They bare their cross patiently, and left the flying cloud
to Gods punishment.

Next, this exception charge the Primitive Church with many faults: As
Ignorance, that they knew not their right: And Feebleness, that they drust not
use it: Of Prevarication, that they neglected to plead that greatest Article of
Faith, And of Infirmity, that they neither knew the right, nor had power to
maintain it. And so puts it many degrees behind the Church in latter times.
And if they commend their wisdom in ceasing from the use of their power, for
fear of sturres, that convinces them, for there was as great sturres in
Hildebrands time, as would have been before, if Christians had used their
power. And what sturres see we presently in Europe for the urging of their
Monarchy? It were wisdom in them to follow Augustines counsel, which they
have put in their Canon Law. Non potest esse sa lubris correptio, etc. Au gust
contra e pist. Parmen lib. 3 c 2. Canon. Non po test. 23 quaest 4 Eudaem Apol.
Garnet p. 170
that Correction cannot be profitable, but when he who is corrected has not
a multitude joined unto him This shift discovers them that they want not
will, but power and occasion to work mischief, and that the peace they gave
to Princes and Protestants is but rebus stantibus ut nunc. Some times they
turn their f^ct in a right, some times their power, and so proclaim to the
world, that cruelty not equity rules them.

Their second shift is, that these first times called them more to Martyrdom,
than to repress Princes, Ea tunc erant tempora vt potius ad Martyriu^ sub
e^ndem, etc. Romul. vel potius Bell co^tra Barclatu^. c. 6
But that convicteth them also, for if these ancients did well in suffering,
rather than to raise vproares: Why do not they the like? It is only their
earthly mind that teaches them this Martyrifugium by Regicidium, to flee
Martyrdom by massacring Kings: And by their own confession they choose to be
milites potius quam Martyrs, Souldirs rather than sufferers, and so have
neither that same Religion that these Ancients had, nor that same disposition.

Their third shift is from Merit: That these Ancients were not oblidged to
obey infidel Princes, so that their obedience was meritorious, and that they
who did the work manfully in resist^g Princes, do no less merit: Et si
maxim fuit opus meritorium, ad id tamen non tenebantur. Jesuit. Si carius. c.
12.
It is a strange n^erite that has such a latitude in one thing both to obey
and disobey: And more that the command to obey these Princes, was not ordinar
to bind at all times, but extraordinar as the command given to the Israelites,
to borrow silver and gold of the Egyptians. But the Apostles give commandments
for obedience, binding all persons, and at all times: Mandatu^ per ^eremiam vt
subij^iant se Regi. etc. Ibid. cap. 13
And it is as strange how they who boast of Merits, and have devised Counsels
to enlarge the matter of Merit and Supererogation, do shift so great a
command of patient suffering, where according to their Doctrine, they may have
great Merit.

Their fourth shift is, that there was no matter, or subject of the use of
their power, because then there was no Christian Emperors. Suarez. de^en 43. c
23 n. 4 Non fuit materia vsus.
But Bellarmine refuteth this, because there was then Philippus a Christian
Emperor: Lucius a Britain King, and Donald the first Christian King of this
Nation Bell co^tra Barcl* c. 17
There was no such processing of these Christian Princes as now. Shall we
think that infidel Princes were a guard to these Christian Princes? Or rather
that Rome is now become insolent to abuse Christian Princes more, because their
number is now greater in Europe.

Their last shift is made by Alcaser the Jesuit. That these Fathers did
dissemble in a private habit. Dissimula tioni se accom modantes and tempori
ser vientes. Alca ser. Apoc l. 19
This is like Bellarmines censu^e of Gregory the first, that his subjection to
Maurice the Emperor was partly compelled of humility. partly of necessity,
and that it was not of due, but compelled. Obedientia quam S. Gregor. Mau ritio
exhibebat non fuit debita, sed coacta Bellar. recog. p. 25. 16
Waldensis also has the like censure of him, that he honored the Emperor,
but by way of complement, and for the fashion. This is worse than any of the
former shifts, to damn the Piety and humble obedience of the Ancients, under
the name of dissimulation.

They rub on these Ancients their own doubleness, who like Solomon's whore
can suffer the Babe to be divyded, and that not in obedience only, but in
religious worship: For Pope Pius 5. sent Medalls to the English recusants,
with this Circumscription, Da mihi fili mi cor tuum, and sufficit, My son
give me thy heart, and it suffices. He gave them liberty to be present at
the exercise of our Religion, Regem sibiver bo ^euus praeposuit Waldens. lib 2.
art. 3. cap 75
if they kept their heart to him and his Mass. Herein also they trod under
foot the Godliness of Gregory, the first to hold up the pride of Gregory
the seventh, and to preoccupie the Reader, least the grace of these ancients
should condemn the ambition of their Successors. If Gregory's obedience was
but dissimulation, how deeper hypocrisy is there is, who borrow his style of
Servant of Servants, and yet trod upon Princes? If for his learning and piety
he be called Gregory the Great; what degree shall they have, who in
Ignorance, Pride, and profainesse, are contrare to him? Herein also they show,
how little they count of Fathers: They cry every where in their wrytes,
Patres, Patres, the Fathers, the Fathers, and yet they accuse them of
dissimulation, praevarication, etc. Cham covered his Fathers nakedness; but
they call that nakedness in Fathers, which is their glory; and declare what
Duraeus spoke of their doctrine, Neque enim Patr^s censentur, cum suum aliquod
quod ab Ecclesia Duraeus lib. 5 page 140
non acceperunt, vel scribunt, vel docent: That they are not to be counted
Fathers, when they write, or teach any thing of their own, which they have not
received from the Church of Rome. In like manner Gretzer speaking of Bertrame,
He who feeds not the Church with wholesome food, is not a Father, but a Non
pater sed Vitricus est, Gretzer* de lur prohibent. lib. 2. c. 10.
Step-father. This is it that Gregory Mutis a mici, ^oque^tib^^ adversarij Quo
modo po test malus litigator lauda^ re judices qui bus ^udicanti^ b^^s ^ic^us
^st.
says of Heretics, that are they friendly to them that are dumb; but
enemies to them when they speak. We need no more proof of their contempt of
the Fathers, than Sixtus Senensis Bibliotheck. But I close this point with S.
Augustine against the Donatists, How can an evil pleader praise the Judges, by
whose just judgment he is over come?

But they might borrow a better shift than these from Gratian: Gratian.
distinct. 63. C. Qu^a.
speaking of the Election of former Popes, done by Emperors, but now by the
Popes creatures in the Conclaue: That the Church has authority to abrogate
such customs as in former times were without fault, but afterward turned to
error or superstition. So be like the subjection of old Popes (as the brazen
Serpent) was turned in abuse, and therefore must be turned in rebellion. And
Azorius tells as much, that Gregory called Mauritius his Lord, and was
subject to him not of right but of force, sicuti Paganis olim subiecti erant
Sacerdotes Christiani. Azor* part. 2. lib. 10 c. 6. in ^ine.
In the mean time we have gained this point of them, that in the first Ages
their Usurpation was neither in doctrine nor practice: And that we who obey
Princes prove the successors of these pious and obedient Fathers, While they
prove successors of the Heathen Priests, who on every miscontentment cutted
off their Princes.

CHAP. IX. Of the proof of their positive NOveltie: Or of Hildebrands
contention.
Follows that we prove positiuely the Noveltie of this Usurpation, which we
affirm to have begun with Hildebrand: They call it old indeed: This
Theology of the Jesuits is not new, but most ancient: Theologia haec
Iesuitarum, non est nov^, sed antiquissima. Bell. Apol. c. 6. page 90.
And the Jesuits in their Apology again the Behemians, rest not on that
indefinitenesse, but affirm their Doctrine to have stood 1610. years. Lau.
Aust. page 44
But when he comes to muster his forces to prove that Antiquity, he
begins at Gregory the seventh Primus ig^tur prodeat S. Gregorius 7. Bellar
co^tra Barcla^ um page 6
who entered to the Popedom about the 1073. and so at the first encounter he
passes a thousand years and more: He stumbleth in the threshold of his
dispute, and sees not a contradiction in that his first reason; primus prodeat
septimus, first let the seventh come forth: The seventh in order argues not a
prioritie, but a posterioritie and a noveltie. Though he had begun at
Gregory the first, it had not proven true Antiquity, yet seeing he passes
sex Gregory's in silence, he tells that they were named by that watchful
name in vain, in betraying the Ecclesiasticke liberty, and that [c] Lego* and
relego Roma norum* etc. Lib. 6. c. 10
this seventh Gregory, did first a wake to defend it.

The next proof is Otho Frisingensis, I read and read over again (says he)
the doings of the Emperors, but I find none of them excommunicate or deprived
of their Kingdom by the Pope, before Henry the fourth. This Bellarmine Bell.
co^tra Barcla^um
presses to refute, but in vain: For Onuphrius Primus omnium Rom Pont Gregor.
7 etc. O^uph l. 4. de Car. creat. Res ante ea secula inaudita.
as zealous for the Pope as he, and a better antiqua^ie confirms it,
Gregory the seventh, the first of all the Popes, trusting to the forces of the
Normanes, etc. Beside the custom of the Ancients contemning the authority of
the Emperor, was so bold as to excommunicate Caesar himself, and deprive him
of his Kingdom. A thing not heard of before that time. And where their best
reason to prove the practice of it before Hildebrands time, is taken from some
practice against Arcadius, Anastasius, and Leo Emperors. Onuphrius shows the
vanity of that alledgeance in calling them fables not to be respected. In like
manner Eberhardus, as he is alleged by Aventine. Hildebran. priv^^^ specie
religionis An tichristi imperij fundamen ta jecit. A ve^t lib. 7 p. 684.
Hildebrand before an 170 years, was the first who laid the foundation of
Antichrists Impyre under color of Religion.

Baronius also confesses as much, when he prefaceth that contentioun:
Gregory (says he) began Gregorius ^ constantianimo etc. Baron. Spalat. lib.
6 c 7. ^. 59
a controversy with a constant mind, (although he knew all Christian Princes
would be his a iversaries) yet with a mighty Spirit that could not yield,
he enterprised a matter very hard, and which could not be compassed by
humane power. If it was so hard a work, (as he truly calls it) then it was
not ancient, for long practice would have made it easy. Lessius Apud Wi
thring* discuss. p ^90.
would make us believe, that Kings and Emperors followed that doctrine without
any doubting. But Azorius Magnam semper fuisse ^^^er ^mperatores, etc. Azor*
part. 2 apud Witbrig page 65.
contradicts him, affirming* that there was ever a great controversy amongst
Princes, and the Popes concerning their power in depryving King^. So Azorius
expounds the cause of Baronius difficulty, to be the opposition of Princes.
And Baronius confessed difficulty proves the noveltie of the matter: He
insinuates also the same in his Votum, to Paul the fifth, against the
Venetians, when Exulto spiritu, videns etc. Baron. vot. ad Paul 5
he testifyeth his joy, because Exulto Spiritu videns -- vindices collapsa
libertatis.
he saw in Peter's chair another Gregory the seventh, or Alexander the third,
who were the chief defenders of Ecclesiasticke liberty.

But the contentioun it self will clear the matter: for Contention of
Hildebr. with the Emperor.
there is not in all the story a more remarkable point, than this fearful
collision of these two powers, in Henry the fourth, and Hildebrand. When they
respected others in love, they were comfortable to other, as in Constantine and
Sylvester, Maurice and Gregory, etc. But when they rubbed one other, both
Churches and Policy smarted. They had sundry other rubbes in former times,
but never one like that. The Emperor thought that the question was no less,
than the standing or ruin of the Impire, Imperij enim velonium no tollendi*
etc. Onuph. vit. Gregor. 7
. And Gregory thought likewise of the standing, or ruin of the Church. The
Emperor pleaded Prescription, because from the days of Charles the great,
under threescore Popes and more, it was in use: And Necessity because by
loosing the Investures, he would lose a great of the Impyre; for when Charles
the great got that privilege, the Pope and Prelates were poor: But thereafter
both Kings and Emperors enriched the Church, because they had the investiture
in their own hands. Besides when Princes had investitures, scarcely could
Prelates be kept in Subjection; but if they were put in the Popes hands, they
would make many Enemies in the Impire: so Onuphrius stateth the question.

But in the multitude of so many Historians affected to one of the parties,
this much may be gathered; That the Emperor beside his personal faults gave
occasion to Hildebrand, to make some stir Episcopatus totius Germaniae in
aula sua partim venales* partim predae expositos habuit. Calvin. Inst. l 4 c 10
n 33.
. He abused the power of investiture, in passing by the voice of the Church,
and giving Prelacies and Dignities to the unworthy, whom flattery or
bryberie; or such by respects commended unto him He gave them as rewards for
bygone service, or engagements for service to come. And at his Court, Church
benefits were either saleable, or exposed to prey. Hereof Hildebrand took
occasion to work, that he had long desired, he made a strong faction both of
Church men, and Politics against the Emperor, and drove him in that strait
Plat. vita Gregorr. 7.
to make such a foul agreement at Canusium, as no man can patiently read of,
and thereafter put all Europe in dissension and blood.

They divyded the truth, and each of them had both The quaestion betwixt them.
right and wrong on his side: The Emperor had right to the Investitures, but
erred foully in their abuse; and brought in ignorant and fleshly men, in the
chief places of the Church, who overthrew both Religion and State: The Pope
had just cause to quarrel that abuse, but no right to clame the investitures,
and far less to oppose seditiously, and trod down the Emperor. This was a
consequent of too large dotations: The Dotars were Patrons of the Church rent,
and some, abusing the Patronage, did mar the spiritualitie of the entry of
the Pastors: So the Benefice drew the office after it, and the Investiture the
Daughter of Donations bred this strife, and corrupt entry in some. But wise
Princes have made some provision against such corruption, in giving the Church
her place in election, and it is best when Church and Patrons go together. The
mystery of iniquity was then coming to rypenesse, and Satan had provided
one to hatch that egg of Antichrist, whose seeds were laid in the Apostles
times, and that omnious accident in Rome of a Bird that laid an egg with a
Serpent, was so expounded (...) l. 5
by many, that the Apostolic Sea had hatched the Cokatrice egg, and brought
out a Serpent to destroy the Impyre.

We may pass the things imputed to him by his enemies: Benn^ Cardinalis.
Sigibert Gemla^. Matthew. Paris. Waltran.
As his fornication with Mathildis, the great vrger of Chastity, to be
familiar with that Countess, (lik Cremensis the Popes Legate, urging Chastity
in a Synod at London, was found at night in a Borthell) Or his impiety, in
casting the Hostie in the fire: Or his Nacromancie, whereof he gave a proof
in that Response: That an unjust King would be killed that year; he took
this to be Henry the Emperor, but it fell on Rudolph the Usurper. But even
his friends Lambert Ge^ochus. Binius. Baronius. Platina.
charge him with great sins: As his dissimulation, stirring up Rudolph in
Germany, while Henry the Emperor was at Rome, fulfilling his enjoined
penance. Naucler. Generat. 37 Abbas. Stad. Anno 1076
His idolatry in incalling the Apostles and blessed Virgin, and commanding
them speedily to execute his decreete against the Emperor. Platin. Gregor. 7
Aventi^. Platin.


When he saw that this made him odious to men; he devysed some courses to
mitigate their hatred: He sent Apologeticke Letters to excuse him to all men,
and pretended the zeal of God, in defending the liberties of his Church, which
was nothing, but a fleshly pride of his own broyling Nature. He took the
lesson from Stephanus, (e) Inductum est, vt Romans ^ontif etc. Azor part. 2 lib.
5* c. 43
who sat a little before him in the Chair, being a Brother of the house of
Lorraine, and offended with the Emperor, for hurting of his House, he took
that Gentilitious enimitie into Peter's Chair, and made it Peter's quarrel: And
his Successors finding it there, followed it out as the cause of the Church:
Even as they took in the Arms and ^nsignes of their Families.

Next, he pretended great purity and holiness and urged the Chastity of the
Clergy: This was a fair color both to cover his too ^reat homlinesse with
the Countess Machildis, and to make the world think that all was good that
came from such an one; but it was a liberty proclaimed to Church men, for
sundry of them yielded to want one wife, that they might meddle with many.
Hereby Europe was filled with troubles, and the Sacraments V^ liceret sexcent
as ^n^re. ^vent 7 Naucler. Ge norat. 36. 37
ministered by married Priests were trod under ^^ote. This was to urge and
promone the doctrine of devils.

But his third and most politic devyce was the holy war, which justly may
be called, a profaine war. He made fair pretexts to recover these places
where Christ was borne: Vbi Christi^s operatus est salute^^ in medio terrae.
Bin tom. 3. part 2. col. 418 Baron. Anno 1 ^5 n 34
And lived and wrought our salvation. And to make the matter more plausable,
they fained that Petrus Eremita got a Letter from Heaven, B^n. vbi supra.
Buron. ibid. n: 34. 51 Tyr* de bello sacro. lib. 1. ^ 11. and 12
written by Jesus Christ, to stir up Christians to that war, though others
are shamed of that fiction, and said, He got it by Revelation.

The motives were as powerful ^o a superstitious Age. They offered to all that
would go to that war. First, Security from all troubles under the
Apostolic protection Secondly, Exemption from all pennence. B^n. vbi supra.
Buron. ibid. n: 34. 51 Tyr* de bello sacro. lib. 1. ^ 11. and 12
Likewise the going to that war shall be reputed for all Penance. Thirdly*
Rem^ssion of all their sins. Sub Ecclesia defensione* etc. Bar. 1095 n. 41. 50
For their wages who are in that war, they shall receive pardon of all their
sins. Item illud pro omni pae^^tentia repu^ tetur, Council. Claramont. Can. 2.
^yrius lib. 1. cap. 15 B^n^us vbi supra. 416. 419. 683. 687.
Lastly, Life eternal what ever their former life has been. Pro stipen^
d^^, etc Bar. 1095. n. 41.
This he learned of Mahumet, who bade his fellowers defend his Religion by
force, promising Paradise to good warriors, whether they were killed or not.
Fructum ^terne mercedis senon dub^ ^a^t habi^uros.


In all this business of the profaine holy war, they obtained their ends
both over Church and Policy: Over the Church; they sought to establish their
Monarchy over the Patriarchs of the East, as they had done in the West. Over
the Policy; because they diverted peoples minds from prying in their
tyrrannie over Princes, and gave them another matter of talking. They found an
errand to send away the most wise and valorous Spirits, of whom they feared
greatest opposition at home, as Gottofred the chief Counceller and commander
of the Emp^rours Ar^ies: That emptying the land of such spirits, they might
securely encroach on empty Kingdoms. And all ran to their maine purpose,
to prove their supperiority over Princes, in that they urged them to Council*
Late ^an. sub Inn^ cent 3 apud B^n. 696
vow a journey in Syria, and forced them to obey under the fear of
excommunication: And so in this new devised fansi^ of an holy war usurped an
absolute dominion over their consciences and crowns.

At his death he repented the wickedness of his course, as Sigebert Sigibert
Anno 1076. Matthew. Paris. page 16
and others testifies* when he was at the last gasp, he called to him a
Cardinal whom he loved much, and confessed to God -- that he had sinned
greatly in his pastor all charge -- and by Satan's instigation had stirred up
hatred and wrath against mankind -- And therefore sent the foresaid Confessor
to the Emperor and Church to get pardon. Not withstanding of this declaration,
yet they deny that Repentance Baron. An. 1085. n. 24
saying, That Sigeberts lie of Gregory's repentance, for persecuting of the
Emperor, is elided, Comentum Sigeberti de paenitentia Gregorij, de eo quod
Henricum fuerit persecutus, eliditur: And they affirm that he dyed ratifying
his former violence. This is the imp^nitent and pertinatious humor of the
Roman Church they will neither repent themselves, nor let it be known that
their predecessiours repent their wickedness; least they should grant the Pope
may err and their Successors be forced to forsake the wickedness of their
Ancestors.

As they cannot show us a Practice before Hildebrand so Matthew. Tortus.
not any sanction of counsel before the Laterane, in Innocent the thirds time,
Bellarmine calls it maximum and celeberrimum concilium, because it was all
for the Popes Monarchy: Bellar. Apo.
But that statute proves the noveltie of usurpation for if it was a constant
practice before, what needed it then a sanction: But the truth is, the practice
was new, and craved a confirmation by a posteriour sanction. A lawless
practice craved a lawless order, first to do, and then by law to confirm it
as right; a direction which Machiavell gives to his tyrant. That Council
ought to be called as well as the other (...) or a council of Brigands wherein
they were both judge and party, to confirm their own tyranie.

This was a fit time to work such wickedness, because great darkness had
over whelmed the Church in those Ages, And their Cardinal Ecce s^culum
inselex. Bellar. Chronol. ann 970
cries out on these times, Behold, an unhappy Age, wherein are no famous
Writters, no Counsels. And Sigebert expresselie, Haec novitas nondum in mundo
emerserat, Sigibert ann 108^. Baron. ann. 859. Idem. 845:
This noveltie was not as yet risen in the World. And when Bardas had erected
Schools in Constantinople, they could not find so many learned men as to
teach in them: And in a conference between the Greek and the Roman Church
many things were done ignorantly and confusedly, because there was but one
Interpreter, for all the Colloquutors. The Histories then written were full of
visions, aparations of spirits, translations of Relicts, to tell that the
Religion was dead in the living, when the living were seeking piety and
devotion from the dead.

Therefore this doctrine is justie called by the judicious, K James Eliensis.
Casaub. Spalato.
Doctrina Hildebrandina, an Hildebrandine doctrine, because Hildebrand was the
perfecter of it: And though they would fetch it from former times, yet they say
as much as we, when they Baron. Martyrol. Maij 25.
call him the most keen defender of Ecclesiasticke liberty. And Onuphrius
Totius libertatis defesorem vnicum Annot. Plat. ad Gregor 7. Vestan. de ose
ped. cap. 17
calls him the only defender of all the Ecclesiasticke liberty. And when
as a Dictator he set down his Dictatus, as a platform of that tyranny, he
declared that it was his own device.

We need no more against them than Baronius Baron. ann. 1097. ^ 21, 28 29. 30
arguments in his long digression against the Monarc^ie of Sicile: From the
weakness of the Charter, From the noveltie that it was unheard in the Church:
That the Authority of the Apostolic Sea was pretended against itself: That
there could not be two Monarchs in the Church, because of a deformity of that
body: All those arguments do militate more for us against the Popes
Monarchy. But Tertulian his challenge is pertinent for us. Where is Religion?
Where is Reverence aue to the Auncieunts* You have every way renounced them.
You praise ever Tertul Apolog. cap. 6.
Antiquity, and yet ye live newly. Whereby it is manifest while ye depart
from your forefathers institutions, that ye do keep the things which ye
ought not, since ye keep not the things which ye ought.

I close this point of the Noveltie of their Usurpation, with Vos dicitis
licet, etc. Optat M^leadvers. Par menian. lib 5
Optatus Milevitanus, as he spoke of the Donatists question: Ye say, it is
leasome, we say, it is not leasome, between your leasome and our no leasome,
the minds of people stagger, so say we to the Papists. Ye say, the Popes may
depose Kings, we say, he may not. Let Scripture be Judge between us as the
only Testament of our Father, as that same Optatus speaks: And ex
abundanti, we offer the challenge not for six hundredth years only as
reverend Jewel did in Dogmaticke points, but for a thousands years. Ye have
neither Dogmatical positions, nor assasinate practices before Hildebrands time.
Neither have ye sanction of Councels before that Laterane Council under
Innocent the third. This is far from true Illud veri^ us quod prius, etc.
Tertul. advers. Marcion. lib. 4.
Antiquity, for that is true that is first and that is first that is from the
Apostles: And that Martyr Mih^ antiquitas Jesus Christus Ignat ad Philad
said right, Christ is my Antiquity, But least they be thrust from all notion
of Antiquity, we shall grant them such as the ^esuite Turselline clames to
the transporting of the Virgins Chamber from Nazareth to Dalmatia, and from
thence to Loretto: He calls that fablous miracle, an ancient faith. And yet
when he comes to [d] Tam vetustam fidem. Tursell. hist, Lauret. praefa^
the proof, he finds nothing of that transport in the first and thirtteenth
hundredth years: Such Antiquity is but Noveltie, We have proved our
proscription against [e] ^bid lib. 1. c. 2. and 6.
this Noveltie, that ab initio non fuit sic, It was not so from the beginning.
If Panciroll had meddled with divine remarkes, he might have put among his
Vetera deperdita the humble obedience to Princes lately left off by Popes; and
their proud Usurpation over Princes among his nova reperta.

CHAP. XII. Of the causes of this Usurpation.
IT is a matter of astonishment to judicious men, to consider either the
insolency of Popes in affecting; or the weakness of Princes in suffering
such Usurpation; and some ^esuites also have professed no less, Fatues fuisse
veteres ^^^eratores, and ^^perij nostri ordinis ^ui sibi tanto eum dedecore or^
sublini a Papis sustini^ r^nt. Jesuit a ^ud G^^dast. Replic.
that old Emperors and states of the Impyre were foolish, Who suffered their
mouths to be wyped by Popes: By this wondering they make a greater wonder to
the world, because they maintain and pursue that same quarrel, at whose
iniquity they wonder: But the reasons of it are these especially.

First: an universal corruption in all Estates, and every one winking at the
sins of other: Princes preferred ignorant and wicked men to be Popes and
Prelates: And winked at the corruptions they brought in the 1. Corruption in
all estates.
Church, in Doctrine worship and manners: And Popes on the other hand winked
at the grievous sins of Princes: The Popes to make them strong against
Princes gained their Clergy, not only by pleading their Immunitie from
Princes, but likewise giving them Impunitie for their scandalous lives: And the
Clergy finding that fleshly liberty under the Popes, assisted them against
Authority: So that when good Princes intended to reform abuses in the Church,
they found the faction of Pope and Clergy so strong that they could neither
vendicate them selves, nor the Church from the tyranny of the Pope. As Princes
then were not tymouslie zealous of Gods glory, so he suffered Popes to tread
their honor in the dust.

Next, Satan's malice, who seeing what good the spiritual 2. Satan's malice.
and temporal powers wrought into man, and how their concord made a bar
against him: Therefore he divyded them, and turned the pride of his suppost
against the ordinance of God in Princes.

Thirdly, the decaying estate of the Impire offered occasion 3. Decay of the
^mpire.
to the Pope, which he greedily embraced: It was then come to a great
weakness, when Rodolph of Suevia was able to make a faction against the
lawful Emperor: And that small remainder was obnoxious to the Pope, by his
pretended power over their entry. Princes also were taken up with great and
heavy wars, and had no time to think on the Church, or redress it: And the
Pope with his Clergy on the other side turned these distractions in
opportunities, to do what they pleased. Besides the long, and far absence of
the Emperor from Rome, gave 4. The Roman ^eper. ^
the Pope liberty to misguide all at his pleasure. For when the lik Ambition
breakout in Michael the Patriark of Constantinople, a little before Hildebrands
time, the Greek Emperor dwelling in Constantinople, did soon crush the eggs
of that usurpation: But the Emperors abiding in Germany, made the Pope a free
working at Rome.

Fourthly, we may find some cause in the Roman Libido dominandi ^ne rat
vnivers^ populo Romano. Aug. Civit. 1. 30.
temper, which was ever set for pride and domination as Augustine marketh; that
the lust of governing was in the whole people of Rome: And Bernard Quid tam
notum saculis quam protervia and fastus Romanorum? -- Gent ensue ta paci tumul
tui assueta -- vsque adeo subdi nese^a nisi cum non valet resistere. Bernard de
consid lib. 4
more fully, what is more known to the World, than the pride and partnesse of
the Romans? A Nation not acquaint with peace but with war: A Nation fierce
and intractable; that can not be subject, but where they can not resist. And
the Greek Church objected ever to them, supercilium Italicum, the Italian, or
Roman pride: And the African council in Augustines time, Typhum saeculi,
fleshly and worldly ambition. They have this temper from Romulus, and not from
Christ, for a thousand years it ever vexed it self in affecting a Monarchy:
But when a period was fixed to the Monarchy, that pride ren ained, and changed
only the object and ran out first upon a Kingdom or Hierarchy until
Hildebrands time; and thereafter iovned both in one, in affecting an
Hierarcho-Monarchie: You shall as soon twinne a Roman and his life, as
twinne him from his ambitious aspyring, and usurping humor.

Fifthly, too great respect superstitiously given to the Pope: For he had now
seized himself as God, in the house of 5. Superstitious respect of the Pope.
God, and possessed the consciences of people by ignorance and superstition, so
that all his words were as Oracles to them, and therefore as in Religion they
thought he could not err, so in policy they thought all was right that he
did; and to assist his most ambitious incroaching on Kings, was nothing less
than to honor Christ himself. Moreover of these grounds, he made himself a
party in the Impyre, by fostering factions amongst Princes, and while they
weakened other, every one of them depended on him; either for fear of hurt,
or hope of gain. He had also his Cloisters, Convents* and Chapters; as also
many Garrisons in the heart of Kingdoms, and his volant forces of preaching and
begging Friars, who are now both succeeded, and exceeded by the Jesuits.

Lastly the great difference between the policies of Princes and Popes. In
the Impire the government was ever 6 Unequal policy in Church and ^mpyre.
raw and green, and as mortal as the person of the Emperor. He was not ever
of one house, and when he dyed, his counsel seemed to die also; his designs
and proiects, with all the means, for prosecuting were buried with him: A new
Emperor had a new Council, and a new council had new grounds to lay, new
ends to intend, and new means to choose: Their wits were taken up with the
noveltie of the preferment of their Master, and the first occurrent
difficulties, and got not liberty to pry in the deep of the Estate: So they
were ever Novices, and Strangers in arcanis imperij and if any of them saw any
thing therein, touching the Popes tyranny, they durst not enter into that
quarrel, wherein so many excellent Princes were overthrown; but choosed by
obsequie to provyde peace for themselves, and favor to their heirs. But
Popery was sweyed with a constant and standing council, Popery a constant
plot.
though an Hildebrand, and Alexander dyed, their intentions and designs dyed
not, but that same end remained, and the platform of their courses was
followed out by their successor, in whom also their decessors lived All things
mortal in the Impire but in a sort immortal in the government of Popery made
the one to outreach the other, as far as it did out-liue it. A Pope might
die, but his consistory dyed not, nor the mystery of iniquity, nor the odd ^ Thessalonians 2
knacks of knaverie to perform it. Therefore he is called a Man, the Man of
sin etc. not for unity of number, but of mind: A succession of Men of one
intention, one course: Having one work or mystery in hand, whereof the seeds
were in the Apostles time. It grew secretly in following Ages: It was
perfected in Hildebrand thereafter discovered by the Gospel, and decays till
it be destroyed.

Besides these reasons, two other things advanced this Pretended holiness a
cause of the Popes greatness.
tyranny: Pretended holiness, as a specious color, and Excommunication as a
terror. For Holiness: the Popes gave themselves out to the world, as most
holy, and men counted so of them: when they were holy indeed, they neither
exacted adoration of Princes, neither usurped; but o beyed them: But being
mo^strously profaine they boastof holiness and oppressed princes. There is
nothing now but his Title Sanctissimus, most holy; and as though that
Superlatiue were a Diminitiue of his worth, he must have it in abstracto,
sanctitas, holiness it self. Men would think that he claimed this name, in
the proper notion of infused and habitual holiness* in his person* as a
special Grace of the holy Spirit: But their wickedness does witness so
against them, that they take it in another Nation* and expone it of a
comparatiue, a respective, a t^ular and putatiue holiness.

First, A Comparatiue holiness: Because he is holy in respect of people: But
this is both a base clame, for him hat will be called a Vice god, a god on
^a^th* the head of the Church by whom she has influence: And it is false
Bellar. Chro ^ol 126.
also, because many Princes and people both, were holyer than usurping Popes as
Bellarmine confesses.

Secondly, A respective holiness: In respect of their Office, For there be
two sorts of gifts of the Spirit says Becane? Beea^ O pus Tom. 5. p. 500.
Duplicia sunt dona Sp. sancti -- ad secundum genus pertinet illud quod
agnos^imus in Pontifice.
One for salvation in true righteousness, and holiness: The other is given to
help others to salvation and holiness and this is common both to good and
evil; and of this kind is that holiness we acknowledge in the Pope: And when
Gardius objected to him, that some Popes were ignorant and flagitious, he
answers that, Non ^mpedit assistentiam and directionem Spir* sancti. Ibid.
Matthew 7. 23
that did not stay the assistance of the holy Spirit in those things that was
necessar to the Popes holiness, because Balaam was a flagitious man and these
workers of iniquity, to whom Christ will say, I know you not, depart from me.
This is true indeed, we hold him at his word, for it is a poor pleading, to
sure no more holiness for their Pope, than to Balaam or false prophets.

Thirdly, A titular holiness, given for a title, and Antiqu^ est consuetudo*
vt R. P. dicatur sancti^simus, and beat^ss^ mus Azor. Moral part* 2. lib. 5. c.
vlt. col. 941.
made passant through long custom: ( a) As the Emperors were called Augusti,
from Augustus* and Optimi from Traian, though they were infortunat and
diss^lute as Nero, Heliogabalus, and Galien, etc. So because some Popes were
holy* that ^a^e passed as a Title to their Successoures, without any respect
of their personal* qualification. This Azo^ius confesses that it is an ^l^e
custo^e that the Pope be^alled most holy, and most blessed, etc. So he
contenteth him with a custom.

Fourthlie, A putatiue or presumed holiness* when men think him to be holy,
though he ^e a monster indeed: So Hildebrand in his own cause. Meritis be
at^* Petri ind^bitanter sanctus effici tur* Gregor. 7 dictat 23 Sufficient quae
a loci decesso* re praestantur. Gratian. distinct. 40. Non nos
If the Pope be Canonicallie ordained vndoub^dlie he is made holy by the
merits of S. Peter. And who can doubt s^id Symmachus. ^ut he is holy whom the
top of so great dignity extolleth. In whom if they lack merits of their
own, the merits furnished by their Predecessors will suffice. For this place
either exalts them who are excellent, or makes them excellent who are
exalted. Let the World judge whither they or we put pillowes of se^uritie
under men^ head since they come so easily to merit. But their Council of
Basile is ^u^^icit reputare San ctum vnde no^ refertur san ctitas ad eum, sed
ad ast^mationem subaitorum Apud Bin par* 4 colum. 367
more clear, and gives us three sorts of this putati^e holiness. The first
is of his State that he be reputted holy, so that holiness is not referred
to him, but to the estimation of people, as honor is in honoran^e non in
honorato. The second holiness is religious. The third is the holiness of
public Justice. But the Pope as Pope is the highest degree of all these
sorts, therefore he may be called most holy* albeit he be of a wicked life, so
long as he is not judged to be so, but tolerate by the holy Church. This like
their State-sanctitie or holiness of their religious orders, which is contrair
distinguished to true holiness* Bellar. de Monach. lib. 1. cap. 2.
For a man may be truly perfect and not in a religious state, and in a
religious state, but not perfect. I admit their distinction, but why tie they
Evangelicke perfection to that state, except they mean such a perfection as is
their holiness, and that is but a fancy? They monk the Imputation of Christ's
righteousness, when the godly apply it by ^^ith, Christ allows it* and the
Father imputes it: And ^et they content themselves with a putatiue holiness
borrowed of man, and i^puted by ^an: So in their Priests absolution of the
penit^1nts and in this their holiness of Popes. Em. Sa* Aphoris ^it. absolu^to


It argues an evil cause, in so great a clame, to be content with so base a
portion: in the strife for a Monarchy, they outrack all the notions of the
words that signify power, Supremacy, etc. But in the clame of holiness they
Octava nota sanctitas doctrine. Bellar. de nota Eccl. c. 11 Idem recog. page 51.
decline the proper Notion and retrinches all to a Titular and putatiue sense.
This makes their Patron when he disputs his eight note of the Church, to wit
holiness, to shift it from persons, and apply it to doctrine. And in another
place to crave no more respect to their Pope, than Caiaphas had, though he was
a false Priest and wicked, and such respect as Judas had among the Disciples.
This is a great change, that he who t^rusteth himself above Kings, yet among
the Clergy is content to be ranked among Caiaphas and Judas.

This their not our wickedness seems to be the secret Change of their name.
cause of the change of their Name, when they enter the Popedom. The most part
begins at Sergius the second, who being ashamed of his name ( Swynes-mouth)
called himself Sergius. But Baronius ascriveth it to Sergius Bar an. 844. number.
1
the third, Who being first called Peter, would not retain that name, for the
reverence he bare to S. Peter: But here is the mystery, they have no part of
the holiness of S. Peter. and therefore tak not his name: And moreover, among
all who took other names, as of Paul, John etc. yet never one took the name
of Peter, albeit some had that name before their Papalizing, as Innocent the
fourth, formerlie called Petrus of Tarentasia, and Paul the fist, formerlie
called Petrus Carafa. This is not of humility, but of conviction of
conscience, not taking his name to whom they are opposite.

So long as Sancta Catholica stood in the Creed, there Romes holiness is
profainesse.
was some holiness amongst them, but since they thrust Romana on it, they have
lost holiness: Roman holiness is but by Equivocation, and in end resolves in
monstrous profainnesse for at Rome it is all one to be called a Christian, as
in other places to be called an Ass. The head of their Church may be a
Monster and to be a member of that Church, faith and inward virtue is not
required, but only a Subjection to the Pope: Non requ^^^ vllam in ternam
v^rt^ te^ sed tan tum externa professionem etc Bellar de Eccles. milit. lib 3.
cap. 2
So their Church in the head and members are by Equivocation, their holiness by
Equivocation, and all of them in the Church, but secundum apparentiam
exteriorem and putative: Campian needed not boast us, ad Ecclesiae nom^n rostis
expalluit. Campiaem Rat. 3.
As though it were to us as G^rgons head, to make us astonished, but if they
have any remnant ingenuitie, they should be ashamed of their excrementitious
Church, for they crave none other place for it, but as hairs, and nails, and
evil humors in the body. Nostra defi^^^^^ compre hendit capillos vngues,
malos humores, Bell vbi supra. Civit. 1. 33
and their excommnnication is not a curse, but a blessing, to be separate from
such a Synagogue. All here agree, such an head, such members: And this was the
fruit of their Monarchy; when the Romans wanted Carthage, and other emulous
Republickes they ran headlong to all ^vices, and stantibus maenibus mores
rueba^t, while their walls stood strong, their lives we^e diss^lute. So when the
Popes had trod down all competitours, they loosed themselves to all
profainesse.

Herein they seem to walk in an evil Conscience, both in plunging ignorant
men, and flattering the Pope. They plunge the ignorant, while they affirm,
that the salvation of all Christians depends on the holiness, virtue, and
example of the Popes. In eorum sanctitate sa lus omnium Christianoru^ posita
est. Ve stan de oscul. ped Po^t. p. 153.
And Salianus an Jesuit writting to Paul the fi^t, says, Ut per unum te and
in communione tantum tua, vis omnis, ac vigor gratiarum and sanct^^atis in
omnia membra diffundatur. That Christ has thee for his Vicar, and as the
neck, under such an Head, that by thee alone* and in thy communion only, all
power and vigor of grace and holiness may be diffused through all the members
of his most sacred body. Neminem ^oss^ etiamsi ve^^t ^ubesse Christo -- qui
non su^est ontifici, etc Bell. ubi supra* cap. 5.
And to this s^m^ sens. Bellarmine affirms, that no man (although ^ee would)
can be subject to Christ, and communicate with the heavenly Church, except
he be subject to the Pope. Vnam ^s^nctam De Eccles 3. 9
this is more than Boniface his extravagant, for^ that did only tie men to be
subject to the Pope, but this binds Christ also that he cannot communicate
his Grace, but by the Popes Mediation. And in a word, an exalting of the Pope
above God and man. But since he says, that Christ the Head of the Chruch, is
sanctus sanctorum, I demand what necessity has he of the Mediation Be.
Man^, 1 4
of an usurping Pope, who is profanus profanorum. But Becane is more
circumspect, than Salianus and Bellermine, while he draws the influence of
that Head no further, than the external government.

Their flattery of the Pope is clear, for they know his wickedness should
be abhorred, and yet they will defend it: And Canus Oculos nos erudi^os habe
mus. l. c ult*
(otherwise modest) will tell us that they have learned eyes, and cover the
Popes faults as Shem and Cham did Noah's nakedness: But that is impudency and
not modesty: For Noah's nakedness came of infirmity, and was private within
the Tent, but the Popes wickedness is affected, and scandalouslie open to the
World: It were good for the Pope and them both to use Bernards liberty, in not
sparing the Pope but telling him his faults freely, that God might spare him;
but herein they are more like Varro Haec Var r^ non credidit, etc August.
Civit. 18. 10
who dissembled the vallenies of the gods, lest he should believe things
unseemly to them.

But if they must be called holy, let them have it, in that sense, as Paul the
fourth called sanctissimum officium inquisitionis, most holy office of the
inquisition Oruphrius in vita Pauli 4.
. Or as Tertullian Archi gal lus ille sanctis simus. Tertul. Apol. 25. Matter
magna sacris suis non magnitudine numinis, sed crimini^. August. Civit. lib. 5
cap. 26.
scornefully calls Archi Gallus Cybel^ Priest sanctissimus, whose service was
so abominable, that reason was ashamed to express it. because that goddess
was great not in the greatness of goodness, but of wickedness. Or shall we
say, that they make that title sanctissimus, to signify contrare things, both
most holy, and most profaine, as the Hebrew Kadosh is holy, and Kadesh is
scortum mus culum: All holds in the Pope, safe only that contrate
significations in the Hebrew are of diverse things, bu^ here both agree in
him, the good notion putatiuely, but the ill both really and properly.

They might have lurked long under this ambiguitie, had not their Analist
Vidisti du^ extrema Ep^ scopum sanctis simum* and pon tificem perditissimum Ba*
ron. an. 960. number. 7.
discovered all; for where as others have made real profainesse, and titular
holiness compatible in the Pope; he has set them as two extremes and
cont^ares, and ascryved true holiness to Dunstane, and profainesse to the
Pope; to tell that holiness is more to be found in others than in Popes, yea
that Popes compared to them are but Monsters.

To close this point, their holiness is the Court holiness of Rome, which (as
Bernard Totum ho^ nor^, nihil san ctitati datur. Bernard. consid. lib. 4.
speaks) gives all to honor, but nothing to holiness; and so they fall
under his just censure in another place: That it is Monstrosa res gradus
su^mus, and any mus infimus etc. Ibid l. 2
a monstrous thing, to see in one the highest degree of the Church, and
lewdest life. And I would advise them to follow Ambrose Nomen congruat actions*
etc Ambros de dign. sacerd. c. 3. Upon in Cantic. lib 1 O miseranda^ Ecclesiam
tali creditampa ranympho. Bernard. Consid 3. Al^ac. de reso*
direction, to show what they are rather by action than profession, that their
Name agree with their life, and their life answer to their Name, least it be
a vain name, and an odious crime: Least it be an high honor, and a deformed
life; least it be a divine profession, and an unlawful action, -- because as
there is nothing more excellent than a good Bishop, so there is nothing more
miserable than a scandalous Bishop; for great sublimitie should have great
circumspectnesse. Let him read his dittay and doom from Aponius: If he
neither live holily, nor teach right, he shall drink the bitter fruits of his
wickedness: And I must say of his Church with Bernard, O miserable Church
committed to such a Paranymph; and with Cardinal Aliaco, It is lamentable when
the Church of God is come to this estate, that it is not worthy to be ruled,
but by reprobates.

The second furtherance of their tyranny was excommunication of Princes: It
had a show to cut them off from the Church: Excommunication the terrible motive
of their greatness.
but was more terrible by the consequence in loosing people from their
obedience. The old Romans were not so cruel, for when their Laws of twelve
tables appointed punishment to every crime, yet to impretie they appointed
none, but referred the guilty to the revenge of the Gods: The Azorius.
greatest force it had, was from Princes themselves: For as every one was
ambitious, or greedy of his neighbors Kingdom, he sought no more but to be
an executioner of the Popes curse, for so he found a title to the Kingdom,
that was exposed to prey, and to conquer it by the Subjects, who were ready
either to forsake their native Lord, or take arms against him: As the Subjects
of Navarre beyond the Pyrenes, at the excommunication Oration ingenua ad Regem
Christaniss.
of Julius the second, deserted their native King, and took them to the King
of Castile. So Princes for their private ends gave strength to that blow of
excommunication, and made it a matter of ruin to them all. This was his
policy to bear down Kings, by yoaking them by the ears, and making them
break one another. He overthrew them whom he hated; and engaged the other
who was his instrument, to himself for the benefit of an ill conquered
Kingdom. Here were both craft and cruelty: they not only stirred up other
Kings against the excommunicate King, but also his own Subjects, who should
have been his guard: They possessed their superstitious credulity, to make
them think him execrable, and that it was good service to GOD to cut him
off* Herein the Pope proved a Monster, in blowing at once both hot and cold:
cursing good Kings; and with an Apostolic benediction, conferring their
Kingdom on some other King: This is to have the horns of the Revel. 13. 11
Platin. Aventin.
Lamb, but to speak like the Dragon. Thus Hildebrand verifieth what was said
of him: That he was terrore pot^^ quam Religione magnus. Great by terror
rather than Piety

The third part of the Treatise, concerning their crooked courses to uphold
this Usurpation.
CHAP. XIII. And first of their Professions institute to defend it.
FOr upholding their Usurpation they use four special things: First
Professions for defending it. Secondly, Recrimination, charging us with their
own crimes, Thirdly, Tergiversation, in contesting. Fourthlie. Ludification
of Kings. For the first, Satan knew this Monster could not subsist alone, and
that truth could never countenance error; therefore as he begot it on man's
fleshly wisdom, he set that same wisdom to foster it when it was
brought forth; and so according to the several times, made that Antichristian
Church to erect such professions as could best maintain it. These are
Schoolmen, Canonists: Casuists: The Hypocrisy of Orders: And lastly the
Jesuits.

The first are Schoolmen, a sort of Theologues slavishlie addicted to the
Pope: For after that darkness had covered 1. Schoolmen.
the Church, and a new light of learning seemed to break up, it was worse than
the former darkness, as Error and Heresy are worse than simple ignorance or
a a man after long sickness changed from a light fever to a frenzy. It is
true, they have some good things, as distinct Notions; exact distinctions and
words though rude, yet very significant; but it is as sure they spilt
Divinity, and turned it in Philosophy; and like Nadab and Abihu brought
uncouth fire in the Sanctuary In divine things they disdained either to
think or speak with Scripture Os consecratum est Evangelio, and nihil crepat
ni si Averroem, vel Aristotele Erasm Annot ^. Tim. 1
and made their mouth consecrate to the Gospel, to sound nothing but Averroes,
and Aristotle, as Erasmus wisely marketh. And Canus Plerique ab Aristotele non
aliter pen dent atque ab oraculo. Ca nus l. 10. c. 5.
follows his steps. Marie now depend on Aristotle no less, than on a
divine Oracle -- And we have heard of some Italians, who spend as much time on
Aristotle and Averroes, as others do on Scriptures, and trust them as much as
the Apostles and Evangelists. They inquired all things curious^ie, and
determined boldly, affecting more to close with the Philosophers words than
with Christ, and that with endless ^angling: For quo plus est eiusmodi
questiuncularum, hoc plus etiam subscatet Erasm. vbi supra.
-- Etiamsi millies mill milla produxeris. The more petit questions they made,
the more questions ever grew, whereof though a thousand times a thousand
thousand were determined yet more were behind. They made Divinity like cornered
Spectacles, through which one thing seems to be forty or thirty according
to the number of the corners, so that a man putting his hand to take up that
one thing, knew not how to find it among so many speces. So the (c) Verum est
vnum falsum vero multifidum Nazian
truth that is in every thing, but one indivisible point was lost amongst so
many Questions. Non sine manifesta suspicione adu lationis. Eras. vbi supra.
Their maine end was to hold up the Pope in his tyranny, and that by base
flattery I am vero de Romans Pont, potestate etc. Eras vbi supra Bellar. contra
Barcla^u^ p. 27
They disputed more of his power, than of the power of God; and questioned, if
he had a twofold power, and if he might abrogate that which was decreede by
the Apostles: If he might coin a new Article of faith. If he had a greater
power than Peter, or equal. If he might command the Angels. Hominem acerrimum
op pressum fuisse suae civitatis consuetudine, ac legibus. Civit. l. 6. c. 2
etc. The Pope was their god, the current oppinions of the time was their rule:
And natural reason and Philosophy was their grounds. He had them at hand, to
turn his fact into a right, and to determine all questions in his favor: And
these seventie Divines re^koned out by Bellarmine, were all of that sort, and
defenders of this Usurpation. We may say of them all, as Augustine did of
Verro, that these quick and skilled men were oppressed by the custom and
Laws of their own City, in so far as being preoccupyed by an evil time,
they went the way of the common error, and though they would father their
fashion on Augustines disputs, specially against the Priscillianists, yet it
is nothing like: For every where he presses Scripture: But they disdain it
as trivial, and delight rather to say, At contra Philosophus, than contra
Christus.

They were not all alike, but time brought out three distinct Classes of
Schoolmen* The first like Lombard had some Scripture: The second had less
Scripture, and more Philosophy: The third was worst, that neglected Scripture,
and had nothing but a mass of Philosophy and humane Possevin Ap p^rat. C. Mar
Victor. Possev. Ibid. Bonaventura.
subtilities; They could not have sound Divinity who (as Possevine witnesses
of Marius Victorinus) were wholly taken up in profaine lear^ing, and ignorant
of Scriptures: And if any of them joined knowledge with affection, and turned
Theorie to Piety, as Bonaventura did he was contemned of the rest, albeit
Gersome, Trithemius, and others call him a most compleete Divine. But
notwithstanding these differences, they went all one way to Bin. Tom. 1. page
239.
maintain the Popes tyranny. The most of their business was as Constantine
speaks of Arius inanis dissoluti otij certatio. The vain iangling of
dissolute idleness. But all their work is the building of Babel; they hurt
Rome more in their doctrine, than they help their government, for scarcely is
there any point controverted, wherein they plead not for us.

The second sort of defenders are Canonists, and these 2 Canonists.
more shameless flatterers of the Pope than Schoolmen: They made Laws of
their own, and wrested all to the wrong end: As a Tyrant when he has
oppressed a Kingdom, abrogateth the ancient laws, and makes laws for his
[b] Machiavel. Princeps. cap. 6.
own behoue to approve his tyranny, and secure his possession, (a) So did the
Pope by his Canon Law: they gave it a proud name, as though it were a ruling
Law: Their Catholic faith is Roman heresy, and their Canon Law a Roman
rule. So long as they lived Ecclesiasticklie, Gods word sufficed them for a
rule of Faith and manners, and the Canons of Councels for government: But when
they turned Monarchs, they would have Traditions and Schoole-divinitie for a
rule of Faith, and a Canon Law for Government, So Lancelotus Libris ^^ris Pont
diligenter intuentibus, facile apparebit eos ad quandam imitationem, etc.
Lancel. Inst. ^ur. Can. proem.
confesses, That it is made to the imitation of the civil Law; for as the one
depends on the authority of the Emperor, so the other on the authority of
the Pope. Few things they have from Scripture, more from Fathers, and more yet
from Councels, but most of all from the Popes own Letters.

After many compylers, as Cresconius, Isidore, Hincmarus, Ivo, Burchardus, and
others whereof their Analist Baron a^. ^ 6 5. n. 4. 5. 6
writteth at length. Gratian put forth his Decretum; thereafter came the
Decretals far worse for these wings put to his Decretum, carried them
downward to an earthly Monarchy. But the Clementines, are cruel, and the
Extravagants are extravagant indeed, and lay the grounds and process of a
bloody inquisition. Francis. Peg. disp. de aut. extr^.
And lastly, the seventh of the Decretals Constit. Pontif. edit. a Petro Math.
is worst of all. Gratians Decreit, pointed at his Monarchy as a thing that
must be: The Decritalls urge it as a thing must be: But this last sets it
out with an absolute power. But what ever their Laws bear in their sense;
they can turn and expone all to the Popes behoue. Even as Martinus the Iurist,
who for to please Fridericke the Emperor, Radiu. de gest. Fred.
declared that by Law, all the goods of the Insubrians pertained to him in
property, and therefore got his palfrey. So the Canonists expone all Laws for
the Popes end, and put all under his foot, and so they get Benefices. They
follow the Schoolmen in their confusion, and their resolutions agree as well
as Clockes in a City.

The third sort of defenders are Casuists: Conscience is 3 Casuists.
the most authoritatiue power and act in man, and therefore must be taken in
for their defense. The Pope saw that men's minds might be possessed with
Schoole-divinitie, and with the Canonists in the outward iudicatory, there
la^ked only the captivating of their Consciences in foro interiori; therefore
the Casuits were erected. They run the same way with their Brethren to
maintain the popes usurpation, but with a more press strain, giving him
power to bind and loose in Heaven, Earth, and Purgatory what he will: They
make people so pliable by superstitious credulity, that what he binds or
loses, bids or forbids, etc. All flows from a plenitude of power, and
is ratified of God in Heaven. They abuse the name of Conscience in their
profession, yet they rack Conscience more than direct it, and a man after
reading shall come more perplexed from them, than when he began. Summa
Angelica. Summa summarum. Tolet. Instruct Sacer. Vivald. Candel. Sayri casus
Consc


In all their large Volumes (wherein as Sheep they follow the beaten rod of
the current opinion) there is little that smells of Conscience* or that
serves to keep it, but rather to destroy it: And for instance; if we look
to their cases and resolutions on the fifth and sixth Commands, they are like
Dracoes Laws, and on the seventh Command they are more vile than Arrius
Thalia, or Sotades filthy poesy, Malven. de Antichristo lib. 1. cap. 12.
and seem rather to be written by Sannio or Messalina in the Borthell, than
by Christian Divines under the vow of Chastity. Caie^. de Delect. mo^osa.
Gerson. de mollitie. Casuist. Tit. de debito conjugali.
It is a wonder how either they had hearts to think, or mouths to speak
such villainies. But their maine drift is to hold up the Popes tyrrannie in
absolute power of judging, dispensing, absolving, reserved cases, etc. and to
set his Throne upon the consciences of men.

Fourthlie, because people are not aye capable of the subtilties of these three
squadrons of defendents, but crave some visible thing, therefore the iugling of
the last 4 Religious orders.
orders, was brought in, specially of Franciscus Hypocrisy, and Dominicus
cruelty, who lik Pandarus and Bittas at the Port of Aeneas Town, held up the
tottering Laterane Church. He inri^hed them by spoiling the secular Clergy
of Tithes, to make them a counterpose to the Clergy, and as Garrisons
entertained by Princes against themselves: Their Hypocrisy served much to
luster his wickedness, for what could the world but think all was good stuff
under so glistring colors. They gave out their Monasteries as as many Armies
to fight against Satan, and by their merits and supererogation to help men to
heaven: But in effect they were the Popes spies and Garrisons. First to eat up
Kingdoms, and then to hold them in his obedience. This their politics Nostro
hoc s^ culo tam multae sunt religiones a Pontisi^ cibus confirma tae, etc. Can.
lib. 5. c. 5. fine.
do, But the wiser sort thought, this folly and hurtful to their state: So
Canus says in their name: In this our Age, there are so many Religions
confirmed by Popes, that who ever would defend them as profitable, or necessar
to the Church: He may justly be convicted of imprudence, if not of
foolishness.

Lastly, the latter times has drawn them on their deepest devyces:
Valdensis, Wickliffe, Hus etc. gave them 5. Jesuits.
great blows, and their former provision, sufficed to make some defense; but
Luther and Calvine came with the great ordinance; and have battered their
Walls, therefore they took them to a new sort of Soldiers: These are their
Triarii or Soldiers of trust. The Jesuits Thuan. hist. lib. 1^0 Hasenmull.
hist. ^es^itic. Arnold^ orat. lesuit. Lubin. praefat. ad Philippen.
Ignatius Schoolers; who like another Atlas puts their shoulders under
staggering Rome. They are the last order, but the worst, and have extracted
from the rest all that may complete them for this great service. They have
borrowed subtlety from the Schoolmen, Impudency from the Canonists, a
cauterized Conscience from the Casuists, Hypocrisy from the Franciscans,
cruelty from the Dominicans, And because these are not sufficient to perfect
them, they have taken from the Mahumetanes Assasinisme, to kill and destroy
Princes,. The Romans affrayed of Porsenna, sent out Scevola either to kill him
or boast him to p^ace: So the Popes fearing the power of Princes, houndeth out
Jesuits, either to cut them off, or make them pliable to his tyranny.

This order perfecteth his tyranny, for after Hildebrand, they held the^ with
excommunication, deposition, etc. But since the Jesuits arose, there are more
Princes stobbed, than in sex ages before; and all these Wars in Europe, since
their rising, and this fearful combustion these last twelve years, are of
their plotting. Their hand is most about Princes, and States, and make their
Crowns, liberties, and lives problematicke: They lay them at the staike at
their pleasure; and being impatient of their life, do consult Satan about
their death, as Cotton did of Henry the fourth. Such consulting Tertullian
called divelish in the Pagans, Magos consultat de capite Caesaris. Tertul.
Apol. 35.
Their fourth vow Ignat. Epist. ad Lusi^anos.
proper to them alone, proves them to be the Popes Devotists, as Mutius,
Curtius, and the two Decij offered themselves for their country; so have they
bound themselves to do, and suffer all for the Popes Grandeur. This Gregory
the thirteenth observed, when reading the Jesuits Annals, and seeing what
pains they took* cried out, I have so many thousand Tot sunt mihi milli^
Clericorum, sed soli Iesuitae omnes superant, etc. Lucij. hist. Jesuit p. 144.

Laur. Austriac. p. 49 Antonius Gallon. de ^ita-Philip. Nerij page 200.


Clerks; and yet the Jesuits overcome them all, in stablishing our Kingdom;
therefore they are worthy to be entertained above the rest: Heerevpon he
augmented their privileges, and exalted them to hold up the Popes dignity:
And the Jesuits in their Apology against the Bohemians declare, se velle
totum orbem Rom Pont. subijcere, that they would subdue all the world to the
Pope.

And least Ignatius Soldiers be not sufficient to keep such a breach,
Philippus Nerius (whether of emulation like Themistocles burning for Miltiades
victory, or of a blind zeal) did institute his congregatio Oratorij, that
has brought out unto us most rigid zelots: Of this sort was Baronius, the two
Bozij, etc. They are more myld in carriage than the Jesuits, but more
peremptory (if more can be) in maintaining the Popes power. They condemn the
moderation of their own Accomplices, and count them Heretics, and profaine
Politics, who mitigate any thing; sometimes these distinctions of Iuris
divini, and humani, directly and indirectly, etc. had some use, but now they
have casten them over the bar, and propone Gul. Barclai^s contra Bell. cap. 13.
their tenets in broad terms of a power divine in original, direct in use,
and absolute in kind. It is like that Ignatius and Nereus Scholars, are
stryving who shall most indeere the Pope to themselves by their service; and
sure it is, that Sixtus the fifth was more pleased with the Nereans, than with
the Jesuits, as shall be seen hereafter. All these are but fleshly
subsidies to maintain an earthly Monarchy, and do rather procure, and
hasten its ruin, than hold it up.

CHAP. XIIII. Of their second Coverture: RECRIMINATION.
THeir second Coverture of this Tyranny, is Recrimination: They charge us with
their doctrine, and treasonable practices; and like the old Pagans, crimina sua
nobis obijciunt, as said Tertul. Apol. Salmeron Non audiunt Principes
seculares, nec Imperatores, Salmer. tom. 6. Tractat. 23.
has it summarlie, that we obey not secular Princes and Emperors: And
Scribanius Societati h^retici sua appingunt scelera. Scriban. Amphitheat. lib.
1. c. 10
The Calvinists (says he) lays over their own wickedness upon the
Jesuits, for al^^ the troubles of France are to be ascryved to them. But
Richeomus Omnes Gal li^ calamitates, etc. Richeo^ Expost. Apol. cap. 26
the Jesuit most fully, that all the calamities of France are brought in by
the pestiferous doctrine of the Protestants: And that the doctrine of Luther
and Calvine armeth men, and powseth them to wickedness and treason: And
Jesuit Lutheri, atque Calvini disciplina suapte natura ad scelus ar^ mat atque
impellit.
Fisher is so bold, as to attest King James of happy memory, That their
doctrine was not so prejudicial to Princes, as the opinion of most of the
Calvinists. This is their calumnious disposition, whereof they gave a proof at
the Massacre of Paris: when under color to make a perfect peace, they drew in
the chief Protestants to Paris, Thuan. Hist.
and murdered them treacherously: They dispatched letters to foreign
Princes, bearing. that the Protestants had conspyred against the King; and what
he did, was done upon his own defense. But they were soon ashamed of that
color, and dispatched a Post to the Pope, Oration Sixti 5 Antisixtus.
to feed him with the news of that cruelty; and his gratulation in the
Consistory tells who were the Authors. Thuan relates, and abhors both
this calumnious Rex alia habuit crimina praemeditata, etc. Cardinal Lothar.
apud Goldast. polir. page 1139. Genes. 31. 32
dealing, and the Massacre it self: And the Cardinal of Lorraine confesses,
that the King had other crimes premeditate, to make the Hugonets cause
abominable. But we say to them, as Jacob did to Laban, search our stuff,
even all the doctrine of the reformed Church; and show what positions or
practice they find like their bloody doctrine. Some Humanists and Poets, or
others, have spoken some things, that may be so thrown; but it was in the
Hypothese of some particular abuse, and not the doctrine of our Church. But the
killing of Kings amongst them is disputed, determined, and put in execution:
And when a treasonable plotte was ready, their Jesuits and ^riers vented in the
Pulpi^s bloody Sermons, both to encourage Thuan. Continuat.
the miscreants who attempted treason, and to mol^fie the minds of people
about parricide: And Ravilliacke being posed what moved him to his parricide,
answered, The preachings of the Jesuits and Friars against the King.

Beside their express Tenets of that doctrine, they have also some other
points to maintain it ( for no great heresy can be alone) but has a
brotherhood with more heretical points, which have a concatenation to maintain
each other: So this point of killing Kings has auricular confession: The seal
of confession: and Equivocation 1. Auricular confession.
to defendit. Auricular confession is a secret and sure way for consulting with
a Priest or Jesuit, upon the matter of ^reason, and to press his Conscience
with a necessity to do it.

The pretended seal of confession makes the Traitor 2. Aequivocation. 3.
Seal of confession.
bold to reveal himself to his Confessar, because of secrecy: It secureth
also the Confessar, that though he be privy to Treason, yet he shall not be
punished because he must not break the seal of confession. This is a maine
point of that mystery wherein though they differ Malder. de sigillo. c. 2
among themselves (as Panormitane calling it, but Iuris Ecclesiastici, and
Malderus, Iuris divini) yet all of them agree in this: That neither the Pope,
nor Church may cause the Priest to reveal it: Maldonat. summul. page 310. 317.
Casaub. Epist. ad Front. Duc.
No not though the world should perish, as Binetus the Jesuit affirmed to
Casaubone. And another Jesuit being privy to Ravilliacks treason testified,
that God had given him such a gift, that so soon as he heard of any
treasonable matter in confession, he forgot both the persons and purpose.
Tertulians speech of the Heathen Altars fi^teth them, inter aras lenocinia
tractari: But we may add that they treat not only of filthynesse, but also
Tert. Apol. C^vit. 2. 22
Treason, so that S. Augustines speech is likewise true, that men discedunt
peiores ab eorum sacris, they depart worse from their Sacraments, than they
came to them. So their Sacrament of pennence is a Machiavilian devyce, to
plotte practice, and keep treason secret, in alibertie of consultation by
auricular confession, in pressing their conscience with the equity of the
fact, and encouraging them to do it under opinion of satisfaction and merit.
France had a proof of this under Henry the third: The Jesuits in their
confessions, urged men to join them to the League against their King, and
refused absolution to such as they found Oration vera and ingenua.
steadfast in loyalty to him: And as their own Author says, Two hundredth
Jesuits did more hurt in few months, than an hundredth thousand men could do:
And they caused such as they absolved to swear. that they would neither
acknowledge Henry the third, nor his Successor forlawfull Kings. And then all
must be confirmed by taking their Eucharist. Lud. Lucij hist Jesuit p 368.
So they abuse their Sacraments: Penance serves to plotte treason and
practice it securely, and the Eucharist to harden them in that wickedness.
Casa^b. ad Front. ^17 130 and 136


Equivocation is a shelter for the traitorous accomplices that he shall not
reveal them, but illude the Judge by Ambiguities and mental reservation: So
Licet ei vts aequivocations dicendo non fe ci and ipse non habuisse accomplices,
etc. Tolet. de In struct Sacerd. l. 5 c. 58 n. 7
Tolet affirms that 4 Aequivocation.
the guilty Person may use Equivocation, and say, that he had not accomplices,
albeit he had them -- And he must be wily to speak according to his own
intention, as to say, I did it not (understanding with himself, in the prison)
and I had not accomplices in other crimes or such like. This is a point most
defended by the Jesuits, and that to serve their turn for particide, as their
Barnesius Barnes. toto lib. de aequivocatione.
proves in his large Book which he has written, fathering Equivocation upon
the Jesuits as their proper Art. And some others confess, that it is the Art
of our Jesuits to deceive Magistrates in their Oaths. Sacerd Vis bic^n. Epist.
ad Catholic.
Ars est nostrorum Iesuitarum ut in iuramentis suis Magistratibus illudant:
Seeing therefore the reformed Churches has no such Doctrine as Equivocation,
auricular confession with the seal of it (which are the maskes of
King-killing) their Recrimination is calumnious.

Their practice also proves this, in that fanaticke dementation of some whom
they either find or make for such a mischief. If they find one ladened with
grievous sins, that craveth great penal Injunctions, or Melancholicke in
complexion, or hardened in a blind resolvednesse to be a Scholar in that
School, where caeca obedientia blind obedience reigns, the^ they work on him
by their speech and illusions in their Chamber of meditations, to make him
think it his happiness to do such things as they injoyne, though it were to
kill a Prince, and withal to be secret and dye silent. This they have learned
of the Assasines Goldast. Replic. c. 1. ex Tyrio and Paul. Venet. Princeps c. 10
and for their choice of the instrument, Machiavell has taught them that
Caedes quae ab obstinati and obfirmati animi proposito accidunt, evitari non
possunt Machiavell. the slaughter coming from the purpose of an obstinate and
obfirmed mind cannot be eschewed, and of Seneca: Qui mortem suam con^
tempserit tuae dominus est. Senec.
That he who contemnes his own death, is Master of thine: As for their
silence in death, it is native to them through Ignatius their Master, For when
Piso was treacherously killed by a Spainiard, no torture could move the
Traitor to reveal his accomplices. Tacit^^.


Lastly, the rewards they have promised them for that fact, remission of
sins in this life, canonizing and eternal life: Becket was sancted for his
treason, and counted a Martyr: So is Garnet for the powder plotte: and because
they thought it gross to call him a Martyr in t^ arms, they devysed the
conceate of spica Garneti: Cydon Apol Garnet. cap. 14
That fained picture of a strae-Sainct was a sufficient motive to canonize him:
But since they call it a Palea, Tantum vulnus palea inflictum Calviniane super
stiti^ni* Ibid. page 552.
it is but a ehaffie argument, and may pass with the Paleas in their Canon
Law: And Garnet was more ingenuous himself, than the Cretian; for being
asked, What if the Church of Rome after his death would declare him a Martyr?
He answered, Me a Martyr? Martyre^ me? etc. Gar, net. apud Casaub. Front.
page 163.
Oh! what a Martyr? I pray God, that the Church of Rome never think such a
thing. -- Now I acknowledge my fault, and confess that the sentence pronunced
against me is most just. Here their Martyr dissavowes his martyrdom. But
they have found out a new way to heaven by Rebellion, Perjury, and slaughter.
Ibid. p. 170


But I dare hazard the decision of this point upon Richeomus own ground, That
pestilent and abominable seat (said he) which King David calls the Chair
of Pestilence -- that is the Monster-bearing seat Illa est por tentifica seeds
etc. Richeom. Expost. Apol. cap 27
whence flows the Doctrine, which all Kings, Princes and People should
abhor as the Pest. We subscriue this proposition: As for the assumption, he
means it of Geneve, and we of Rome: But let Baronius In Cathe dram Petri in
^rusi sunt homines monstruosi. etc. Baro. Anno 897. number. 4.
make the assumption for us both. In Peter's Chair (says he) were intruded,
Men monstrous, most filthy in life, most dissolute in manners, and every way
most vile. And Genebrard more fully: For the space of an hundredth and fifty
years, Apotastici Apostaticive, potius quam Apostolici Genebard. Chron. 1. 4
saec 10
some fifty Popes fell close away from the virtue of their Predecessors, and
were rather inordinat and Apostaticke than Apostolic. What can be the
conclusion but this, That therefore the Church of Rome is this pestilent seat?
Or let them show any seat in the reformed Churches so broodie of monsters as
the seat of Rome?

Lastly, they purge us: As yet (says Bellarmine) Nondum parasiti principum
exorti fuerunt, etc. Bellar, contra Barcl. p. 31
The flatterers of Princes were not risen, who pull the Kingdom of Heaven from
them, to establish their temporal kingdoms. To pass both their uncharitable
censure in adjudging Kings to hell, and the falsehood of their challenging us of
flattery, we easily evince this from their own mouth, that we neither
preach nor practice King-killing, since they accusevs of flattery: And I am
confident that so horrible a fact as the killing of Kings, had been still
abhorred in the world, as the greatest parricide, if first the Assasines, and
then the Jesuits had not made it common in Doctrine and practice. I close this
point of Recrimination with Viderint qui vel furore suo etc. Cyprian. Epist. 42
Cyprian: Let them consider who serving either their fury or lust do forget
divine Law and holiness, and yet vaunt of the things they cannot they prove,
and when they cannot destroy the innocence of others, think it enough to
rub blottes on them by lying and false rumor. And with Augustine Isti
attendant specu u^ saum, and si milia conqueri, si vllus pudor est, eru
bescant. Ci vit. 4. 7.
I desire them to look in their own Glass, and (if they have any shame) to
blush to object such things to us.

CHAP. XV. The third color of their tyranny, To wit: Tergiversation.
THe third color of their Tyranny, is Tergiversation, Richeom. les. Expost.
Apol.
wherein they carry themselves variouslie: denying Excusing: Transferring it on
others: Or making apologies. For their denying Richeomus denies plainly these
positions which Jesuits affirm: As that it follows not on their Doctrine
that Kings excommunicat are tyrants and may be killed: Capite 21 page 174.
That Subjects are absolved from their obedience: That the facts of Clemens, or
Castellus were approved by them, Ibid. 174
That the violence that falls out, comes not of their Doctrine, but of the
nature of the Catholicke^ Ibid p. 222 Defens Aphoris. Jesuit.
. The like has Becanus, and Hussius, an Jesuit, following his Master Gretzer:
And Scribanius spends some Chapters of the first book of his Amphitheater to
that end: Thus they spoke in a strast, when they are taken red hand with some
mischief.

If they can not get it denied, then they excuse it. So Cydonius speaks of
Marianaes bloody doctrine: Mariana Cydon. confut. Anticot Scripsit Mariana
nescio quid
wrote I can not tell what, etc. But the Parliament of Paris told that his
little diminutiue was a superlatiue, even a damnable treasone, when they damned
the book to be burnt publicly.

Thirdly, they transfer it, and shift it from hand to hand. The Clergy cast
it on the Laics, the Laics on the Clergy, the secular Priests on the
religious orders: The other Orders on Jesuits, and the Jesuits cast it on other
Orders again.

Fourthlie, when they see some Tragical event of their Cydon. Apol. Henric,
Garnet.
doctrine, as a King killed, a treasonable plotte disappointed or discovered,
when the World cry out against them, as in the powder treason, then they take
them to A pologies So Cydonius wrote his Apology for the Jesuit Garnet, to
lay that crime off him, and his society. And Richeom. Expost. Apol.
Richeomus when he saw France abhorring the fact of Castellus, the Parliament
condemning them, the Pyramide erected, and the Jesuits banished, he labors
to purge their order of that treason. This was but a floorish of words, for in
the mean time, the Jesuits of Doway set out a refutation of the Parliaments
sentence against Castle.

But in a free contest and dispute, they maintain these matters flatly. The
Pope says Bellarmine Potest su^ mus Pontisex ^igare Principes saeculares etc,
Bell. contra Barclaiu^. cap. 3 page 46
may bind secular Princes, by excommunication by his spiritual power: He may
by that same loose his people from the oath of fidelity and obedience; may
bind these same people under the pain of excommunication, that they obey not
the excommunicate King, but choose another King to themselves: and more
peremptorly: Kings Possunt, and debent Reges privari suo dominio. Recog page 45
both may and ought to be depryved of their dominioun. And D. Marta gives him
that same power over Kings, by virtue of his temporal jurisdiction. And
Franciscus Veronensis Iesuita Sicarius. p 49
affirms that the anointing that made [c] Marta de Iuris. part. 1 cap. 23
to^o-
them Kings, was w^^ed off by excommunication, and they made private men, and
by private men may be killed: That they are furious men, and Ibid. 61
ought to be killed or bound: And when they are so, the people ought to have
recourse to the Pope, as a commoun father for remeede Ibid. 63.
. As for Castellus attempt to kill Henry the fourth, he calls it a just
fact; that it was holy and lawful; that it was most holy and humane, in so
far that it is blasphemy to condemn it; that it was divine, as the arrow or
stroke that came from Heaven upon Julian, and as the fact of Ehud Ibid. 44.
133. 142.
etc. And as though that were little, it is plus quam Ehudi, more than that of
Ehuds; and in a word, it was good service to God, and meritorious: That it was
an Heroicke work, both in attempting, and constant enduring torments for it;
and that in his honorarie punishment he was so far from confessing of sin
in that stroke* that he craved God pardon for his miss, in not killing him,
but stryking out a tooth. As for Jacques Clements killing of Henry the third,
he calls it an heroic work than which there was nothing more generous
Ibid. 272
etc. And Mariana Henricus eo nomine 3. jaceat manu Monachi peremptus de
Princip lib. 1, cap. 6
insulteth upon that killed King: Let Henry the thirdly killed by the hand of
a Monk with a poisoned knyfe thurst in his bowels.

Hildebrand also allows this doctrine, as a father does his child. We
holding the Statutes of our Predecessors, do absolve by Apostolic
authority all these who are bound by oath or Sacrament, to excommunicate
persons Gratian, Cause. 15. quast 6. Can. nos.
, etc. And Vrbanus Gratian, Cause. 23. quest 5. Can. Excommunicatorum.
the second following his steps, forbade these who were sworn to their
Prince, to serve him so long as he was excommunicate: But more clearly in his
bloody Canon: We judge them not Man-slayers, who burning in the zeal of the
Catholic mother, against them that are excommunicate, do kill some of them.
And Becane Becan. Controvers. Anglican.
in his latter writes is more Iesuited, affirming that the Pope having
excommunicate, and deposed Kings, may take their life from them, and their
Kingdom also, that he may depose them two ways, one by absolving his
Subjects from the bond of Obedience: -- The other by way of compensation, that
seeing they will not protect people, but trouble them for their Religion, they
are no more bound to them. In like manner, Sixtus the fifth delyvered a
gratulatory oration in the Consistory, for killing of Henry the third,
preferring it to the fact of Judith. Cydonius denies it not Confut. Ant. p. 49
And while the world was astonished, and France sunk in sorrow for the death of
their last King, a Preacher at Culen publickelie commanded Raviliacke. Thuan.
Contin l. 3 Oration. Sixth. 5 Ballar. resp. ad Apol. oration Sixti, etc.
But we nee le not inquire the opinions of their I heologues: Let us hear
Sixtus the fifth, commending the fact of Jacques Clement in the Consistory: And
how Bellarmine defends that Oration. What can be found (says he) of Sixtus
Oration, but praises and admiration of the wisdom and providence of God? --
The Pope extolleth to the heavens, that a simple Monk with one stroke killed a
great King in the midst of his Guards. And then giving us the uses of that
Oration. Thereby the Pope would admonish Kings -- for that King commanded to
kill a sacred man (the Cardinal of Lorrane) and God caused a sacred man (a
Monk) to kill that same King, not without a manifest miracle of the providence
of God. Here the Popes Oration, defending Clemens Regicide is defended, and the
fact it self fathered on God. With what face then do they deny that they
allow Regicide? Cyprian said of another wickedness, that it was not only
committed but taught, and we may add Scelus non ta^tum agitur sed and docetu.
Cypr, epist. 3
more, that by them greatest treason is both taught, practiced, and (which is
the top of iniquity) ascrived unto God.

Some times disapointment makes them speak moderatlie. I excuse not the fact
(says Bellarmine) Non excuso factum, odparricidia execror conspirationes.
Bellar. resp. ad Apol. de Iurament. page 22
of the powder plot, I hate murder, I abhor conspiracies: But If God for our
sins had given way to that blow, we should find them Apologists, defending
the lawfulness of it, who now abhor it; and his damning of it, is not for
Atrocitie of the matter, but for the disappointing of the success, as in
Castellus attempt: And how can it stand with the posed resolvednesse of the
Jesuits, to maintain the Doctrine, and condemn the practice? And what means
Garnets Apolog. Garnet. page 263.
exhortation to his Catholics to pray profelici successu gravissimae cuiusdam
re^ in causa Catholicorum at the beginning of the Parliament: It could not be
for the disappointing, for that he might have done by revealing it, which he
knew without confession. That happy success therefore was the blow it self.
These facts are such quae non nisi peracta laudantur, they praise them when
they are done, and consequently frustrata damnantur, they are damned, when
they are frutrated.

How ever then they deny, excuse, or transfer the matter* it stands on
their doctrine and practice, that Kings may be excommunicate and killed, and
Richemous speeches, were neither from his heart, nor according to the truth,
but to serve the time in glosing a wise and offended King. The Jesuits then
were in great disgrace, and the sacrifice of public hatred, as a Fox in the
snaire, they gave fair words; but being at liberty, returned to their
nature: So soon as they were restored, the Pyramide cast down, and the King
himself pleading for them, whereof they boast, Henricus 4 patroc^nium
Iesuitarum suscepit, and public pro ijs perora vit. Becan Opuscul Tom. 1. p.
500
they proved irreconciliable: For though he of a Princely clemency pardoned
their treason, yet they neither laid down their native or first hatred, nor
the second, that they conceived of their supposed disgrace in banishment, but
cut him off; and so declared to the world, that their Apologies Apolog Jesuit
Bohemorum. Laurea Austriaca. l. 1
were nothing, but fained complements. That good Patriot Oration ingenua p. 102.
(whom Jesuits call a profaine politic) proved a Prophet in the end of his
diswasiue Oration to the King, and foretold with tears, That if he restored
them, they would destroy him, and so it came to pass.

This is the sum of their Tergiversation, wherein the Jesuits labor to purge
their order: Apolog. Garnet. 57. Confut. Ant. Cott. 32.
So when that order is justly pressed, then some one must suffer: But when
France is in a broyle, Mariana must be sacrificed to quench the fire. Cotton
Continuat Thuan. 99.
condemns him; Gretzer calls it his provat opinion: Cydonius extenuats it,
but Aquaviva Confut. Anticot p. 39 Vno Mariana aegre excepto. Casaub. ad Front.
p. 8.
censures it severelie in show: The Author of the Jesuits Apology defends
all, praises all, except Mariana alone. But that nicenes is needless, for he
is guilty of a crime that commands to do it as Cyprian Non est immunis a
scelere* qui ^t sieret, impera^it. Cyprian Epist. 31.
says. In the mean time of all this shifting, they give no security to
Princes, but they are cutted down, and cannot tell who does it, they join
scoffing with violence, Matthew. 26.
as the Soldiers did to Christ, when they buffeted him, and said, Prophecy
who smote thee?

But some may think, that these Effronts which they have suffered in the late
tossing of their cause, has brought them to some moderation. No, but they are
as hard set against Princes as ever. Let us hear the Cardinals of the
Consistory In man^ Pont. Mux. est -- Majesta tem^mperatoriam redintegrare,
etc. Apboris. Cardin. 12.
It is in the Popes hand to set up the Majesty of the Impyre, to transfer
the Impyre from Nation to Nation, and alluterlie take away the right of
Election. They think matters succeed to their desire, and therefore tell
plainly, that their intention is no less than to overthrow Impyres, for the
establishing of their Hierarcho-Monarchie. And Marta Caveant igitur Principes*
expellere, vel parum honorare Episcopos* -- si volunt eorum regna, and status
longo tempore possidere. Iu^is part. 2. c. 34. n^ult.
gives a strange advertisement to Kings, Let Princes (says he) beware to
cast out or misregard Bishops, or other Prelates and Ecclesiastics if they will
possess their Kingdoms and States, for a long time. This is plain talk; and
the just extract of that which the King of the Assasines caused one (carrying a
long spear full of sharp knifes) proclaim before him: Fugite ab eo qui portat
exitiu^ regum flee from him who caries the ruin of Kings. But I answer: Let
Princes look to this piece of Divinity so deeply contrived for their ruin,
and ex ungue Leonem: Judge what a Religion it is that maintains such bloody
Doctrine and canonizes the executioners of it: And that so much the more that
they are not ashamed of it as a sin, but glory in it as their perfection, in
setting large Catologues Azor 2 5. 43. Becan controvers. Ang* l c. 122. Bellar,
contra Barclaium.
of Kings excommunicate, deposed and cut off by them: And that specially to
terrify Kings, in showing them their doom, if they do not adore the Pope.

CHAP. XVI. Of their fourth coverture, to wit: LVDIFICATION. And first of their
pretended love to Kings.
THe fourth Coverture of their tyranny, is Ludification. They are not content
with indignities done to Princes; but scoff them also; and that five special
ways: Pretext of love: Fained limitations of the use of their power: Futile
and idle Distinctions: The bait of glorious titles while they are living, and
canonizing after death.

First, they profess great love to Kings, and that all Usurpations and
censures are for their good, as Baronius Pro Rege agimus, imo cum Rege
veritatis am antissimo Baron an. 1097. no* 8
intending to throw the Monarchy of Sicile from the King of Spain, will make
him think that he is pleading for his good, and in a flattering style calls
him a Tutour and keeper of the Faith, etc. But how that King Edict. Phi lip. 2.
contra Baron. Thuan Cont. Spalat. l. 6 fine
expondeth his flattery, may be seen by his Edict, condemning that Tome of
Baronius to the fire in all his Dominions, and that for presuming to dispute
the right of that Kingdom. This is like Ioab and Judas kiss, under friendship
to destroy them: And like Julian Julian. epist, ad Ecebol page 308 Semper
insidi^ osa est, callida, blanda adulatio. Hieron. adver, Pelag. lib. 1.
scoffing of Christians, saying, He would help them to heaven by causing them
keep their Masters command: If any man take thy Cloak from thee, give him thy
Coat also. Wise Princes know their flattery to be but insidious, according
to Ieromes censure* that flattery in Heretics is insidious, crafty, and full
of insinuations.

Of the same sort of mocking is their offer of good counsel to Kings: So
Bellarmine Bellar. de offic. Princip lib. 1. cap 4
says: Be wise ye Kings, be learned ye that judge the Earth, etc. Men
would think by this Text, that their wisdom were to kiss the Son of God:
But their sense is to kiss the Popes feet And a Commenter of this we have in
Baronius, Baron. an. 701. n. 22
ascryving the prosperity of Sancius, and others then Kings of Spain, to the
obseque of the Pope. So they abuse Scripture contrair to its end and meaning,
for therein Kings rebelling against Christ, are exhorted to repent, and turn
to him: But here they mock both God and Princes, in bidding them go on in
their rebellion against Christ, and adore Antichrist. Even as the Pope writting
to that Apostate Clemens 8. Ian. 1601.
Iustus Calvinus (who called himself thereafter Iustus Baronius) abused that
Scripture, Come out of Babylon, Vides vt delivarit Rex, dum ista furens
scripsit. Baron.
The head of Babylon called Syon by the name of Babylon, and Babylon by the
name of Syon: They count Kings wise, when they serve them, as though they had
taken on the Jesuits fourth vow: But if they use their Authority, then they
call them mad and furious, as Charles of France, because he wrote as a King,
behold (say they) how the King roveth when he wrote these things in a fury,
In sensum reprobum dati non fnissent. Bellar. vbi supra.
And when God in mercy opens the eyes of Kings to see the tyranny of Popes,
and forsake them they call that work of Gods grace in reformation, a giving up
to a reprobate mind. Aperuisti Regum oculos etc. Cor. Cornel. praesa. in
Proph. min. August. Psalm 2.
as though that were not rather a reprobate mind to give their power to the
Beast in fighting against the Lamb: In like manner, (e) another Jesuit
calls Kings serving of the Pope in destroying of the Saints, an opening of
their eyes, and thanketh God that he opened the eyes of Jews of France, to
destroy the Hugunotes. But Augustine expounds that Text better, that to kiss
the Son, is not to be sorrowful, as though any benefit were taken from
them, but to be wise in not reigning rashly, but serving the Lord in fear.

CHAP. XVII. Of their second Ludification, To wit, their sained Limitations.
IN their second Ludification of Princes, they tell them, that they need not
fear the Popes transcending power, because though it be plenarie in it self,
yet it is limited, and that in respect of the Judge. The cause, and the
proceeding: For the Judge, they say, he is limited, and does it not alone,
but with advyce of Council and Consistory of Cardinals. Pontifices ordinary
in Synodis Episc^ porum, etc. Bellar. contra Barcl. c. 12
And Becane says, that whither a King has deserved deposition, it is to be
tried by the judgment of learned and godly men. But that is a scoffing of the
world, though in word they join to the Pope, the advyce of (b) Ex prude^ti
piorum ac doctorum hominum judicio aesti^andum est. Becan. controver. A^ glic.
page 252
Synods and Consistory, yet they put all in his hand alone, for without the
definition of a Synod, the definitions of the Pope are sufficient says
Suarez. Sine concilij definitione, etc. Suarez. defens 6 6. 27
And Castaldus is more clear to the point, Lib de Imperatore quaest. 81
That the Pope alone without a Council may depose the Emperor. And Dominicus
Bannez Bannez. 22. quaest. 10
is more peremptory than both, affirming that it is left to the Dominion and
judgment of the Pope when to use this power: And though it were a general
Council, yet all its firmness and infallibiltie is from the Pope alone,
says Bellarmine Bellar. Romans 4. 3
And Pius the second, Bulla 2. page 120.
cutteth short this Limitation, when he discharges all appellatition from the
Consistory: So they must stand to his excommunication unless they will incur
an other excommunication by a penalty of Council. Yea, and Augustinus
Triumphus affirms more blasphemoussie, that the Popes power is such a qua non
potest appellari ad Deum ipsum De potest. Eccles q. 6
as from which we cannot appeal to God himself: Let Councels then stand
content, seeing God himself is excluded. What ever their Theologues dispute in
Schools, matters are carried absolutely according to the Popes will.

As for the respect he has to the College of Cardinals in the consistory,
Palaeottus a Cardinal can tell us best, who for his practicke wit, and great
performances at the Council of Trent, got Hist. Trident. p. vlt.
a Cardinals hatte for his reward. He makes them the Popes creatures
absolutely, and that it is their best to give their voice in the consistory,
according to the Popes pleasure. Quemadmodum illi (says he) qui Divinam
voluntatem, tanquam primam, ac potissima^ rerum omnium regula^ sequuntur: As
they (says he) who follow the will of God, as the first and chief rule of all
things, are counted wise. So i^n may be said, that the Cardinal, who in
giving counsel, adhereth to the judgment of the Pope, (which is the reerest
rule of humane action) he follows the best course in doing his office, and
exeemeth himself from all danger of error; and with all, gives wholesome
advyce to the matter it self. This ground being laid, he tells us, that
the College of Cardinals assisteth not the Pope by way of limitation of his
power, but by way of Ministry Paleot Consult. consist part. 5. page 251.
and that the consent of Cardinals, or other in matters consistoriall, is no
ways necessary Collegium Cardinalium non assistit Pa pae per modum
limitationis sed instar mi nisterij Ibid. part. 1. quaest. 3 artic 2.
: For what ever they advise, it is in his power to follow, or not follow at his
pleasure Ibid art 3
Where is then the limitation they speak of, seeing it is here denied in
terms: And what is this else but as Paul the second said to Platina, Do
thou not know, that all reason and law is in the shrine of our breast Ibid.
art. 4.
? And what moderation he uses in the Consi^^orie, Paulus Servita in his
considerations for the republic of Venice, declares Pope Paul his quarrels.
lib. 1
how contrare to laws divine and humane he carried that matter in the
beginning, in the fury of his passion Plat^na in vita Paul 2 An nescis not
omnia jura in scrino pectoris habere.
,

The limitation of the causes is like the former, which they sum up in some
generals. Animarum Causis exigentibus Be^^ contra Barcla tum. p. 21.
salus; Aeternum and spirituale bonum, and bonum Ecclesiae: The salvation of
Souls, Eternal and spiritual good, and good of the Church: These are fair
pretexts, as though he sought nothing but man's spiritual good; but they are
only colors for his ambition: For if he can come be his Monarchy he cares
neither for the good of the Church nor of Souls; for he has varifyed Basiles
saying, That Basil. Epist. 8
how much a Church decays, the more are they desirous of government: And it
seems that he had a Prophetical Spirit in that place, when he said, that
the domination of Bishops was devolved ad infelices homines, servos servorum,
to unhappy men, the servants of servants, This is the Popes propper style: But
the discerning of the weight or lightness of these causes, is restrained to the
Pope alone, because he as a spiritual Father can best discern when Kings do
wrong to their Subjects in things spiritual Beca^. controvers. Angl p. 252
. And they have a more compendious course; for beside Dogmaticall heresies in
points of faith, they have also a practical heresy or schism, which they
call the Henrician heresy Ort^* est haeresis Henrit ciuna, etc. Bin. Tom. 3
part. 2. 406
: For as they call Antichristian usurpation, Ecclesiasticke liberty, so they
call the lawful defense of imperial authority, by the name of Henrician
heresy. Binius defyneth what it is, to wit, the same that the Politics of our
time affirm. Behold we have witnesses for the liberty of Princes, under the
name of Politics; as well as we have witnesses of dogmatick truth, under the
Name of Heretics: And it were wisdom in these Politics to join themselves to
reformed doctrine, as they do in the vindicating of Princes. They gave the
Name of Henriciana haeresis, from Henry the fourth, who was opposite to
Hildebrand the father of the Hildebrandine tyranny. And a Council. Quintil
cont. haeres Henrician^. Bin. ibid. page 405.
council at that time, was indicted by Hildebrand against that pretended
heresy.

And though they do none of these, but be slack in rooting Sed etiam propter
neglige^^ian^ potest excommunicari. Ra^mond apud Bellar. contra Barcl. page 17
out of Protestants, that slacknes is a cause of deposition: for a secular
Judge may be deposed, not only for his heresy, but also for his negligence in
rooting out of heresies. So when the Pope is angry, he shall never want a cause:
heresy, (as they call it) or Schism negligence, etc. that is to say, the love
of the truth, the defense of their liberties, and clemency to their Subjects,
are sufficient causes with him to cast them down. And smaller things than
heresy o^ schism are found causes relevant: If they but violate the least
privilege of a monastery, they shall be cast out of their Kingdom: So
Valdensis concludes it for the power of Gregory over the French Kings, and
Bellarmine approves his Conclusion Bellar. Ibid. 26.
. But Bozius holds us not long in suspense, Bozius de sig^nis. 17 4 vel sine
causa.
affirming that the Pope may transfer greatest impires upon just causes, or
without a fault. Persidious men (said Tacitus) ^ersidis nunqam causa defic^et
etc Constit. Pont. page 120. Azor. 1* 5. 15
will never want a cause to break their promise, for they will ever set some
color of law upon their deceate. Lastly Alphonsus a Castro puts us out of
doubt saying, that they hold firmly many things pertaining to faith, by the
Popes definition alone, wherein the Pope has given no reason of his
definition* The Popes will then is a sufficient cause; h^e cares for no cause,
though it were to break his own oath: For when Gregory the twelfth was
perjured in keeping still the Popedom, which he swear to lay down; yet it
was not perjurie (says Azorius out of Panormitane, because he had a just
cause so to do. This c^use was his own will, and the love of the Popedom.

Their third Limitation is from the manner of proceeding. It is not rash Bell.
Barc. 7
(say they) but all is in love and wises dome, for this is the Popes custom,
first to rebuke fatherly, next to deprive them of the Sacraments by
Ecclesiasticke censure: Lastly to loose their Subjects from their oath, etc.
Azorius Azor ^ar. 2 lib. 10 c. 7
putteh three conditions: First, to be admonished. Next, that the cause be
notour. Thirdly, that he be disobedient. The like moderation is set down by
their ^ateran^ Council. lateran. sub. ^^^oc. 3.
Council. And as for their sentence of excommunication, it is to be
understood clave non erran^e, if the key do not err. Gratian cause 11. qu^t 3.
cap. Sententia.
But their Law proves this a scoffing, for the sentence of the Pastor whither
just or unjust, is ever to be feared, where the gloss and their Do^tours
every where affirm, that the unjust sentence of excommunication is valide and
differs from that that is null. And Navarrus Navar. Enchir. c. 27 n. 3.
affirms, that even the unjust sentence regularlie is valide. And Bellarmine
takes away all doubts, saying, Peccabit princeps spiritualis; sed non poterit
tamen princeps temporalis iudicium sibi sumere Bellar. contra Barcl. c. ^7
For if a spiritual Prince abuse his power in excommunicating v^iustlie a
temporal Prince, or loose his Subjects from obedience without a just cause,
and so trouble the state of the Commonwealth, the spiritual Prince sins in
so doing: But yet the temporal Prince may not judge of these things, etc. And
Hildebrand speaks more Tamen eum supplice^ venire oporte^ Aventin. lib. 5.
page 575.
peremptorlie: Although that he, to wit, the Emperor had been v^iustlie
excommunicate by us, yet he should have made supplication to us, and sought
the benefit to be absolved. And what they speak of the not erring of the
Keye, is in vain for they maintain that the Key cannot err in the Popes
hand, and have laid that fearful yo^ke upon the Church, to tak that for
good, which he commands, Tenetur in rebus dubijs Ecclesia acqui escere
judicio summi Pontificis etc. Bell de Romans Pont. lib. 4 cap 5
although it were vice. For the Church (say they) is bound in doubtful things
to acqu^esce to the Popes judgment, and to do what he commands, etc. --
And least she should do against her conscience, she is bound to believe that
to be good which he bids, and that to be evil which he forbids.

But they need not a long Procedor, for how soon Quamprim^m Reges fiunt
haeretici, etc. Simanch
a King becomes Heretics, his people are loosed from their obedience. And
though he be not excommunicate by man, all is one, ^not^^^ matter needs no
pronouncing of a sentence. And there is yet more, for the Pope needs neither
to call a Counsel nor a Consistory* for his interpreta^^ ^ ^^^^ In hac ca^sa
(...) ad est (...) interpret* (...) ^^^nnes^
is sufficient. There is then no more for Kings, but after the condemnatorie
sentence of deprivat^o* -- He may be ^^pry^ed of his Kingdom, ^e^^
(...)uare. lib 6 c* 4 n. 1^.
And Thomas closes all; affirming that Subjects of an excommunicat King are
indeed loosed from his Dominion and oath of fidelity,

This is contrare to the wisdom and lenity of the primitive Church, for
Cyprian Cyprian epist. ^8 ex pe^sa enim moderatione libranda est.
tells, that in consuring Philumelus and Fortunatus the meanest of the
Clergy, he would not proceed without the consent of his Brethren and the
people.

But they agree not amongst themselves in their limitation. Simanca will have
the cause declared; and Thomas says, It is enough that the sentence be
pronounced; And Cydonius darre determine nothing therein. Yet Princes must be
content with that they know not what, declared or vndeclared: The Key erring,
or not erring: In Council, or out of Council: Justly, or unjustly: But all
agree to cast Azor part. 2. l. 10 c. 8
down Kings, and that with so many frivolous causes, as the justest King
cannot eschew some of them.

All their moderation in proceeding, which they call aliqua ratione: Omni
ratione necessaria: Commodas ratioones: Congruum remedium: Convenientem
medelam: And Bellar. Romans Pont. 5 6 Idem contra Barcl p. 19 Simancha.
such like floorish of words resolve in a summar and violent destroying of
Kings: Their Church is like some late Physicians, who weary of Galens
Methodicke curing, tak them to Paracelsus minerals and extracts, so they leave
the method of ^enitie and Love, that Christ gave to his Apostles, and are come
to a summar dealing, ure, seca: burn and cut: And of all cures of the
sickness of their Monarchy which they think comes of Kings, they like best
to cut the Basilicke vein. The k^ngl^e head of Nations is that they shoot
at, and that not at the ^are as Peter did to Malchus but at the heart and
throat, ^^ Clement, Castellus, and Raviliacke did to the Kings of France. So
all this Limitation, is but a mist cast in the eyes of the world, and the sword
put in the Popes hand to use it absolutely and summarlie at his pleasure.

CHAP. XVIII. Of their idle and futile Distinctions.
THeir third Ludification of Princes, is by idle and futile distinctions: And
first of the Judge, pronouncing such bloody sentences: That it is not the Pope
Non potest Papa vt Papa Bellar. Romans Pont. 5. 6 Idem contra Barcl. c. 12 Idem
recog. page 23. Suarez. 6. 6 Platin. vitae Gregor. 7.
as Pope, but as he is the chief spiritual Prince. Next they distingiush the
Nature of the power, that it is not a temporal power, but a power in temporal
things. Thirdly, they distinguish the manner of the power, that it is not
direct, but indirect, and in ordine ad spiritualia. That they allow not the
killing of a King, but of a private man: That an excommunicate King is but a
private man, and so may be lawfully killed. Of this sort are these, that
albeit deposition of Kings exceed the bounds of excommunication, yet it
exccedeth not the Popes power. Item, though absolution from excommunication
restore a King to the peace of the Church, yet it restores him not to his
Kingdom.

I doubt if the Jesuits speak of these distinctions without Discrimen vocum
direct and indirecte* non refertur ad modum ac^ quirendi, sed ad explicandu^
obiectum secu^ darium, Bellar contra Barcl. cap. 12
smyling, for they know they are but Cousenings, as though we would say, that
David caused kill Uriah, not as a King, but as an Adulterer to cover his
adultery with Bersheba: Was his sin the less before God? Or if a thief
shall deny that he stole his Neighbors goods, because he did it not
directly by coming in at the door, but indirectlie by creeping in at the
Window, shall he escape punishment? And when Saul pretended a spiritual good
end to Samuel in sparing the Cattle of the Amalekites for sacrifice, was he
allowed of the Lord? Such are these foolries, they are fained to obscure the
truth, and harden their own hearts in a wicked course.

Besides, they do not agree amongst themselves concerning the Nature of this
power, and the quality of it: Some afrme it absolutely, as the most part of
the Jesuits and Philppus Ner^us Schoolers Congregationis oratorij, others deny
it absolutely such as they themselves call profaine politics. And a third
sort like Meteors, hing between these two, pressing to agree them with
distinctions and mitigations. The Canonists go from the Schoolmen, and the
Schoolmen, are divided amongst themselves. So Bellarmine* Non desunt altercats
ones quid sit, and qualis est, etc. Bellarm. vbi supra c. 3 Dubiae quastionis
est inter Catholicos ^ Azor. page 2. lib. 4. cap. 19
confesses that there lacks no chydings among them of what sort and quality
that power is, that is, whither it be by it self and properly temporal: Or
necessar, if it be spiritual it self, but by certain consequence and in
order to spiritual things dispone of temporal things. If it be so, that they
agree not amongst themselves of the Nature, the quality, and use of this
power, why trouble they the world in tyrannical exercing of it? This is (as
Augustine notes of Heretics) that they are like Sampsons Opinio diversa
vanitas vna. August. Psalm. 80.
foxes, though their opinion be diverse, yet their vanity and wickedness is
one: Two of them speak not one way of the matter, and yet they all agree to
fire the world.

They use Papa ut papa like Iuglers, playing fast and loose: When they speak
of his knowledge they grant he may err ut Doctor, but not ut Papa. There Papa
caryeth away the privilege: But herein the use of his power, he may not use
it in temporal things ut Papa, but as summus Princips spiritualis: Here Papa
has lost his privilege. I require them to agree these two, that since his
knowledge and power are transcendent things, why the one rests on him as
Papa, and not the other? This is a trick, they care not what they say, so that
they say some thing, and serve the time and their turn. For this cause
Bellermine Bellarminus in^elicissimus distinctinum architectus.
is justly called by some of them, an unhappy devyser of distinctions: And
we may say of them all, as he does of them, Qui defendunt Imagines
adorarilatria, coguntur uti subtilissimus distinctionibis, quas vix ipsimet
Bellar. de imag. c. 22.
intelligunt nedum populus imperitus. Who defended that Images ought to be
worshipped cultulatriae, that their distinctions per se and per accidens,
proprie, and improprie: Relative terminative, and conterminative, etc. are so
subtle, that scarcely they who use them do understand them, far less the
ignorant people.

Cardinal Peronius has a new devyce, which he calls a double wall about
Kings: That the Execution of their down casting partaineth not to the Pope
alone, ^ut to the body Thuan Con rinuat. lib. 8 page 495. Duplex vallum
adhi^e^^^, etc.
of the Kingdom: And therefore, if the Pope err, the States of the Kingdom
shall adhere to the King. This he did to gull the Estats of France, and to hold
off the Oath of a leadgeance (a better Guard to Kings than his fancy.) Where
was his double wall when both their Kings were killed? The Parricids waited
neither on the Churches definition, nor the Subjects consent, but went on at
the Jesuits instigation: With his Eloquence he blew that Assembly blind, and
turned them to a blind passive obedience, that the Jesuits active blind
Obedience, might ruin all.

All this argues that they presumed on the simplicity of Princes, as though
they could be content with such distinctions: Neither are miscreants stayed
from attempting treason, but rather inboldened, while as Conies they may play
under the Clapper, of such sandy distinctions: neither are Princes secured
from violence neither comforted hereby if it shall overtake them. What comfort
would it have been to Henry the third, to tell him: This is not done to you
by the Pope, as Pope in an ordinar course by a direct power, but as a supreme
Judge and indirectlie for the good of the Church. Who can suffer himself under
such injury to be so mocked? I turn Gretzers word upon them, reproving
Plessie, for chopping at the cutting off the ^e^ p^ars, But thou art come, O
Plessie too lat^ ^t n^mis se^us and tardigra^^ Advocatus es -- ejusdem vt
litat^. sunt serum and null^m patro cinium. Mysta sal
and slow an Advocate for them. The matter is long si^^ judged and done And a
late, and no Patrocinie are of alik^ worth. So their Cardinals late fancied
Guard proved no Guard.

But how shall Princes stand content with these distinctions, seeing the Pope
is not content, for the hard temper of the Ca^onists and Nerius Scholars
please him better. Doctor Marta Marta Iuris c 19 and 20 Azor part* 2 lib. 4 cap
19
mocketh Bellarmines nicenes of potestas in temporalibus, and non potestas
temporalis. Carerius calls him and other mitigators by the name of profaine
politics, so do the two Bozii, and Azorius professes a simple mislike of
their mitigations. Mihi non placet modus loquendi quo utuntur Victoria Sotus,
Bellarminus -- In iure enim Can absolute and simpliciter dicitur, etc. I like
not the manner of speech which Victoria SoTus, Bellarmine etc. Do use to
insinuat that the Pope has only spiritual power, and not a temporal* And
Sixtus the fifth was so angry at Bellarmine for his distinction of direct and
indirect power, that he was minded to cause burn all his Books, as Barcklay
Bellar satisfacere non potuit ambitioni imperio sissimi ^xti 5 etc Barcl* de
potest. Pap. cap 13.
obiecteth to him. And when he comes to Bell. contra Barcl. cap 13.
answer that part of Barcklayes Book, he passes it in silence; Whereupon
Barcklayes ^onne ^o Barcl. pietas. c. 13
in his replye to Bellarmine takes that silence or preterition of so weighty
a challenge for a confession. Like to the Remonstrants in our time, ^hen they
are challenged of Socinianisme Censura confess. c 19.
about the state (f) Examen censur. 19.
of the dead, and desired to declare themselves herein, they pass that
weighty challenge with silence, and neete it with an impertinent Recrimination
which is in effect a taking with that imputation: silence in such a case is to
plead guilty.

CHAP. XIX. Of their fourth Ludification of Kings. In glorious Titles.
FOurthlie they mock Princes with glorious Titles: So Charles the Great got
the name Christianissimus: And King William of Scotland was called Defensor
Ecclesiae, Defender of the Church, which style the Council of Mentz had long
before given to Ludovicus Baron. an. 847. ^* 25. Connaeus de stat. relig. p. 63.
And James 4. of Scotland was called Protector Camerar. de Sanctis Scotia. lib.
3.
Christianae religionis, protector of the Christian religion, by Julius the
second. Henry eight of England was called defensor Leo. 10. Bulla. 12.
fidei, defender of the faith, by Leo ^0. Ferdinand was called Rex Catholicus,
the Catholic King, which Alfonsus many ages before him had used. And the
Helvetians were called Defensores Goldast. replic. p. 432
libertatis Ecclesiasticae, Defenders of the Church liberty, by Julius the
second.

The ground of such denomination was some benefit received. Charles enlarged
their patrimony. King William Kings Titles are ye Popes triumphs.
enriched their Church, with the Abbacie of Aberbrothoke. Henry the eight
wrote against Luther. The Helvetians at Julius the seconds desire scattered the
Council of Pisa, when it was gathered to reform the Church. And Ferdinand was
fi^te for their purpose, by his Catholic Monarchy, to build their
Hierarchy. The end of this denomination was, to prove their Superiority over
Princes, and please them with that Title while they were pulling their honors
from them, and to engage them more to a base subjection. But there is also some
presage herein, for these Titles were somewhat Prophetical that the Kings of
these Kingdoms should ^e^ in Gods time reformers of the Church, to purge her
from that superstition which reigned in her, when these titles were given them:
For even Caiaphas serving his own humor and prejudice, will some-tymes
Prophetically light upon a truth. It has also proven true in some part. The
Kings of England prove now defenders of the Ancient and Apostolic faith: So
the Kings of Scotland prove also defenders of the Church; and France and Spain
will follow in that same work, in Gods time.

This is like another conceate, when the Pope sends to Princes Roses, or
Swords consecrate in the day of Christ's Nativitie: So Pius the second sent a
sword to King James (a) Bull 15.
the second of Scotland: And Sixtus the fifth sent another to the Prince of
Parme, for to overthrow the Hollanders, etc. Tiberius gave great honors to
Seianus, while he feared his greatness, and plotted his ruin: So the Pope
sends childish toys to please Princes, while he pulls their honor and
power from them.

CHAP. XX. Of their last Ludification. In Canonizing Kings.
Lastly they mock Princes by Canonizing, and a long list of the Names of
canonized Kings is set out as a Glass to them to look in, but in effect to
let them see their reward, if they will serve the Pope. They have learned it
from the old Senate, with whom divinity was weighed with humane pleasures as
says Tertullian Nisi homini Deus placu erit, Deus non erit, homo iam Deo
propitius esse debebit. Tertul. Apol. cap. 5.
For except God pleased man, he was not made a God, and man was propitius to
God: And as it now practiced amongst them, it is but a noveltie, and their
Patron Bellar de Sanctorum beatitudine. Baron. 998 number. 3.
brings not a practice of it before the eight age: The Church till then was
destitute of canonized patrons, and had none in Heaven but Jesus Christ for
their Advocate: First (says h^e) they were worshipped by custom, and
thereafter Bellar. recog. page 68.
came formal canonizing. But when Idolatry grew, they joined patrons to him,
as though he alone sufficed not: And this conceate they turned also to Kings,
and sancted them at their pleasure, as they found them superstitious in
religion, or obsequious to Rome. Augustine observed that Aesculapius was made a
God, but not the Philosophers, because men felt the benefit of bodily health
by medicine, but not the health of their soul by Philosophy: and he
avouched, that Plato was more worthy to be deifyed than any of their gods: So
Popes being sick of ambition and avarice, canonized such Kings as cured their
diseases: No good and ancient Pope did so, but when they turned monsters, and
were fardest from God, they took on them to make Gods by canonizing, they
resigned holiness to Kings, or rather declared that they were more holy than
themselves His tempo ribus quibus P. R. apieta te veterum de generaverant
Principes sae culi sanctitate florebant. Chr nol an 1026
They distribute their charity with discretion, and gave to Kingdoms their
kyndlie titular Kings, the pride of Spain, and policy of Italy, either
affoorded not, or admitted not many such Saints, but the simplicity of the
Transalpine people was more pliable to the Popes they filled them with Saints,
while at Rome they were drowned in Atheis^e.

I demand if these canonized Kings ^^^e holyer than Melchisedecke, Moses,
David, Ezekiah, Josiah before Better Kings not canonized than canonized.
Christ? Or then Constantine, Theodosius after him? I think they will not call
them so. If they were not; why are they canonized, and no the other? Why suffer
they these who are honored by Scripture, and true histories, to stand amongst
the people without respect, while as the other are in the Roll of Heavenly
Advocats, and honored with Temples Days, Alt^^s, Services, etc? And if these
other b^e holyer as they a^^ indeed* why is the Church defrauded of their
int^^c^ssio^? They are like their forefathers the Romans, who apotheosed many
wicked men; but did not so to Cato, of whom Velleius says, that he was in all
things nearer to gods than men, and that he was free of all humane vices.
Neither did they refer in the number of their gods, S^ip^o Nas^ca their high
Priest, whom Augustine calls better than all the gods. Augu C^vit. lib. 1 cap
23. and 32.
So of some of the Popes gods, the common speech is verified, that many men's
bones are worshipped on earth, whose souls are tormented in hell. Multoru^ in
terris cineres veneramur, and ossa, Quorum a nimas Orcit^r^ m^na dira necant.


But herein the Popes would prove their superiority over Princes, for he
that deifies, sets himself above that that is deified. They would reallie
be Kings, and therefore pleased Kings in making them titular and imaginary
Saints. But it is no Divinity that is subject to men, and that mutual
protection is ridiculous, when gods keep living men, and men keep the statues
of dead gods. Tertul.
So they know nothing about Kings, but the two extermities of Excommuication or
Canonization: If Kings serve them baselie, they shall be deified by
canonizing: If not, they shall be damned to hell: But there is no truth in any
of these* and both of them argue an Antichristian presumption in Popes: They
usurp over Kings, in casting them down, and setting them up at their
pleasure, and over God himself, in making gods and thrusting them on him as
intercessours.

I close this point with Cicero Magis est in Romul^ admirandum, etc. August.
Civit. l. 22. cap. 6.
wondering at Romulus Apot heosing: For though times of ignorance made men
gods, yet it was wonderful in the midst of learning, men were so exalted, but
he satisfies himself; in that none, but Rome counted Romulus a god, and that
when she was little and b^ginuing. So it was no wonder in the middle Ages of
darkness, to see Rome canonize men, but now in so great a light of the Gospel,
and in the Contest with Rome for her Idolatry, to see her multiply her ^ut^ar
gods, it is wonderful. But we may content our self with Cicero. Who takes
these to be gods but Rome (a) and that no^ in her minorite and beginning, but
in her maioritie and declining to [^] Quis autem Romulum Deum nisi Roma
credidit. vbi suprae Ecce attendite etc. b^d* lib. cap. 32
destruction? I entreat you therefore with Augustine, to consider of this your
Pagan impiety if your mind, so long drunk: with errors, suffers you to
think of any wholesome thing. And this much of their cloakes of shame, or
their Spider-web-covertures of their open tyranny.

The fourth and last Section: Of their foolishness and madness. manifested in
their fruits.
CHAP. XXI. Of their affected ignorance in the consideration of the two great
powers Civil and Ecclesiasticke.
THeir foolish madness is plain if we consider their course and their
fruits that follow. Their folly considered Two great powers.
not aright these two powers civil and spiritual; and their ignorance was
rather affected than simple; to make greater way to their violent pride.

God rules the world by two distinct powers, Civil and Ecclesiasticke: For
Religion must be in the Republicke. and the Republicke must be in Religion
(says Optatus) Reli^ionem in repub* and Re^publ. in religione esse oportet.
Optat. Mile vita^ Spalat. Ostens. Error. Suarez c^ip. 3. n 61 I^em, lib 6. ^^p
3. toto.
The Church and Commonwealth are as the two Estates, and every one of them
has its own full power and authority in things that concern it. They are
both of God, and none of them is that way more worthy than the other, as to
subject the other to it. Neutra potestas est altera eo sensu dignior ut alteram
sibi subijciat utraque enim est in suo genere prima, and ab altera independens.
Each of them in its own kind is prime and independent from other. But yet they
are distinguished from other in their ends, Task and means for that end.
They have both God for their Author, and generally the good of mankind for
their end, but their proper ends are different: For the spiritual power
leads only to a spiritual and eternal good, whereas the civil absolutely
looks first to an humane and temporal good: All mankind lies flat on the
Earth, notwithstanding of all other Callings: But the Pastoral calling pulls
him from the earth and lifts him to Heaven.

The Task of the Spiritual, is the preaching of the Word, ministration of
Sacraments, and the use of the Keys Their task.
of the Kingdom of Heaven, directing men's consciences in the will of God, and
correcting them Ecclesiastickly. For which cause the Pulpit is called the
Tribunal of the Super pulpitu^* id est tribunal Ecclesiae. Cypr. epist. 24
Church, because therein Pastors do publish more glorious I awes than the
Praetor. The task of the civil power is notoure in things Civil; and for
Religion, it is appointed of God to defend the Church, and truth in it: Indite
and gather Councels, and ratify their Canons, to abrogate superstition and
idolatry, to provide Pastors with hou^st maintenance, and maintain their
provisions against the Sacrilegious. In a word, the power of the Church is not
temporal but spiritual; not a coactiue, but a directive power: And the power
civil is not spiritual but humane; not directive but coactiue; to see all
these spiritual duties performed in their Kingdoms. God has not set them up
as contraire and opposite; but as diverse, and that for agreement and mutual
help, to make up an Harmony of government in mankind. Incompatible in one
person.


These two powers cannot compete to any one person Causab. de libert
Ecclesiast. Hin^mar. de potest. eccl c. 1
It is neither lawful nor seemlie for Princes to preach, baptize, communicate
people, excommunicate, delinqu^^ts, etc Neither is it tolerable in Pastors to
denounce war, lead Armies, shed blood, and swey a coactiue power. Ambrose
(b) riddeth the marches clearelie, We pay (says he) to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and to GOD the ^olvimus quae sunt Caesari Caesaris etc
Ambros. de basil tradend.
things that are Gods. The tribute is Caesar's, and not denied. The Church is
Gods, and ought not to be adiugded to Caesar, because Gods Church cannot be
Caesar's right. Which none can deny is spoken with the honor of the Emperor.
For what is more honorable* than that the Emperor be called the Son of the
Church -- For a good Emperor is within the Church, and not about the Church.
And in another place, Quae divina sunt imperatoriae potestati non sunt
subiect^* Idem l. 1. epist. 33
Divine things are not subject to the power of the Emperor -- And thereafter
places pertain to the Emperors, but Churches to the Priests. The right of the
public walls is committed to thee, not of the sacred, so says he to the
Emperor, who craved the Church to be delivered to the Arrians. Athanasius,
and Ambrose speak distinct lie: That Princes are in the Church by profession
and possession of grace, and so the Sons of God, and of the Church: They are
not over the Church, for her direction but for her protection: her Parents, but
her Nurce-Fathers.

Wise Kings ever granted the different power and interesse Constant. Imp.
Basit. Imp. apud Baron. 886 n 1. K James in Deus and Rex Casaub de libertat
Eccles.
in things civil and Ecclesiasticke. That in the first they were Lawmakers,
but in the second were directed and admonished themselves: In the first, they
had a power both to make and allow Laws for the public good: in the second,
they are preservers of Laws, not to decerne therein with authority: But to
order matters Canonically according to the Laws of the Church. The Church
first discerned Truth from Heresy, and then decerned: And Princes ratified
their decrets. Pastors decrets according to the truth obliged men's
Consciences to follow A sort of mu tuall subordination.
the truth, and Princes outwardly enjoined the People to follow a known truth.

Though these two powers or callings simply considered b^^ not subject to
other, yet there is a sort of mutual subordination Spalat lib. 6 cap. 3 ^d.
Ostens^er ^or. Suarez c 3 ^. 61.
in the persons that are clothed with them: Princes are above Pastors in
respect of civil Eminence of outward government, and compulsion, to do their
duty as Pastors; though not in the intrinsecall Interna vero Ecclesiastica,
integrae relin quit judicio d^ recti^^ Eccles cur suam quo que animam and
conscientiam submitt^t Deus and Rex page 56. Rom 13. 1 Heb. 13. 17
direction. And Princes are subject to Pastors, in respect of the informing
and directing of their consciences in Religion The one is subject to the other
civillie, the other spiritually. Pastors are subject to Princes. Let every
soul be subject to superior powers. And Princes are subject to Pastors
spirituallie. Obey them who have the oversight of you and submit your selves.
And yet not withstanding of the comparision of the callings, GOD has wisely
subjected Pastors to Princes. First, because the Kingdom of the Church is not
in this World Christ being the only spiritual Mo narch.
But principallitie, has the beginning, use and end in this life, and
therefore here must they have the pre-eminence or else never. Next, because of
universality: For the Church of God is not in every place: And yet these
humane Societies without a Church have both need of, and are governed by
principality. Thirdly, because of Ancietie; for albeit God had a Church ever
since he called on Adam in Paradise, yet ere the Church came to any greatness
in number or conspicuousnesse in the use and work of spiritual power,
Principality had the own Government and eminency among men. For this cause
some Hermas Let. de pace Eccles. l 7 c. 5
have pressed the name of secular power from the Ancietie, as though it began
cum saeculo: Though more properly it be called a temporal power from the
object and means. Their merches Ne principes quasi bruta at nimalia
tractantur* Luther.


This great blessing reformation brings unto Kingdoms, to rid merches
between these powers: Amongst other things this inrage^ Luther, (b) that he
saw Princes mocked and abused as beasts: Therefore he vendicate their honor
from the Popes tyranny. We teach according to Gods word, that Princes and
Preachers are mutually sheep to other: Princes to Preachers in respect of
their spiritual office, informing, and counselling them out of the word of
God: And Preachers to Princes, in respect of a temporal coactiue power, to
protect them, or correct them, if they offend. If we consider in Mankind a
spiritual Sphere, Preachers are above all: In which sense Nazianzen says,
that Lex Christi subjecit imperium sacer dot^. Nazi ^nz ad C^v. No^eminenti
oribus potesta ^ibus subiecti sumus. Ibid. Bellar.
the Law of Christ has subjected the Impire to the Priest. But if we consider
it in the Sphere of Temporalitie, then Princes are above all: And so that same
Nazianzen, We are subject to super eminent powers; but they will have Princes
as Sheep to Preachers simply, and their Priests to be sheep to none but to
the Pope, of whom they will be ruled, not only in spiritual things, but also
in temporal.

When these two Powers kept them within their bounds, they were helpful to
others: Pastors by religion Their concurrence.
wrought the consciences of people to the obedience of Princes, and Princes by
their coactiue power held people in the obedience of the Gospel. And Leo
Reshumanae aliter tutae esse non possunt, etc Leo epist. ad Pulc^er.. 6.
commends this concurrance: For humane things (says he) can not be safe,
unless both the Kingly and Priestly authority defend these things that
pertain to religion. And our more royal Leo said, that Deus and Rex. page 3
these two powers are so straightly conjoined, that either of them depends upon
the safety and incolumitie of the other: And Isiodore Gratian. cause 23. quaest
5. Can. Principes
Civil powers were not necessary in the Church except to fulfill that by
terror, which the Priest can not do by his doctrine: Oft-tymes the Kingdom
of Heaven is furthered by the earthly Kingdom that such as do contrare to the
faith, and discipline of the Church, may be broken by the rigor of Princes,
etc. And Bernard Bernard. Epist. 243.
shows both the possibility and expediencie of their agreement, in his
peaceable resolution. Non veniat anima (says he) in concilium eorum; non
enim viris usque institutor Deus, in destructionem ea connexuit, sed in
aedificationem: Let not my Soul come in their counsel, who say that the peace
and liberty of the Churches will hurt the impyre, or that the prosperity and
glory of the impire will hurt the Churches: for God the Author of both has
not conjoined them for destruction, but for edification. It had been good for
them, if they had followed his advice, that these two powers would join their
minds together, who were joined by Gods institution* let them mutually cherish
other, and mutually defend other ^ungant se animis qui iuncti sunt. In stituto.
Ibid.
. But where Princes and Pastors pass their bounds, and incroached upon other,
the exercise of their power was the Apple of strife The matter it self was two
great powers in their kind, and the respects of mutual subordination, and
subjection, was a fair color for ambition to usurp, and for the rebellious
to resist.

It cannot be denied, but there were faults on both sides: Extremities are
noisome Iliacos intra muro^
Some Princes have given too much to Clergy men, as they who gave homage to
Popes. This came of Superstition, which first plays the Iugler to blind, and
then the tyrant to force them to do as that blindness leads them: When they
were possessed with Superstition, the Popes ambition could exact nothing of
them, which they thought not reasonable.

Some Princes again have fallen in the defect, and Neglect of Pastors.
given too little respect to Pastors: They saw their persons base in worldly
things, and considered neither their calling nor their work; and so counted
them baser than any of their Estats. This misreguard was helped by some
flatterers of authority, who either of ignorance, or Invy have spoken and
written disdainfully of Pastors Calling, and equalled it to the basest handie
craft in Cities. To let that pass (in respect of personal subjection to
outward Government, and of civil censure in case of breaking the common
peace) yet the comparison of these Callings is odious; Deus and Rex. 3. 56
for both judicious Princes K. James in De^u and Rex Nazianzen ad cives terror.
Chrysostom, de cacer^ l. 3. Ambros. de dign. sacerdot. c. 2.
and ancient Divines without passion or contest, have given it greater
respect, and casting these two powers in the Balance, Nazianzen compared the
one to the Soul, the other to the Body: Chrysostom use the comparison of the
Heaven to the Earth: And Ambrose the comparison of Gold and Lead.

We allow not the bad Consequences and Practice, which Papists draw out of
these popular comparisons, yet there is a considerable Truth in the things;
for the Pastors calling is only about things spiritual and eternal. The
Angels would think it no disparagement, to dispense the mysteries of the body
and blood of Christ, to cleanse men in the Lawer of Regeneration, and to stand
between God and man, in delyvering his will to them, and presenting their
prayers to him. Beside that comparison of Callings, the person of Pastors have
a great excellency in respect of Gods choosing them to the work, his
furnishing Pastors Cha racter. 1 Cor 3. 9 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. 13.
and assisting of them in it. Men's greatest excellency indeed is by the Grace
of Christ* as they are Christians renewed and sanctified: But particular
callings give also some qualification to the persons that are cled with them;
and the Pastoral calling qualifyeth their persons with a spiritual respect,
because they are Gods instruments in a spiritual work. Their aptitude to a
spiritual work, gives them a spiritual habitude and Gods employment therein
gives a sort of transcendent specification. Second causes though of one kind,
take a diverse respect, both from the object, and from the employment of the
first cause: And it is greatest excellency to be Gods instrument, in
converting, renewing, and saving men: For they that turn Souls, shall shine
as the stars in the firmament, whereas others shall shine but as the
firmament it self. If Daniel* 12
sanctification be joined in Pastors with the excellency of their aptitude
and employment, then they are Gods first borne with a double portion of
holiness: And that without prejudice of the external supereminencie of
honor, and authority, which God has seated in Kings: The one breadeth a
sacred, inward, and spiritual reverence, as to Gods Ambassadors. The other an
out ward, and civil reverence, as to the top of humane Majesty: This is 1
Cor. 4. 1 Job. 33. 23.
proper to the supreme Magistrate alone, whom God has invested with
Nomotheticke prudencie, and Architectonick power in matters sacred and civil.
Papists abuse these comparisons.


But Papists abuse these comparisons of the Auntients, while they turn them in
arguments for the exemption, and deny obedience in temporal things to
Princes, and clame a temporal precedence and pre-eminence. God is the God of
order, and allows on Princes supreme honor as their due in civil Society:
As for spiritual excellency of Pastors, it does neither co^taine
intrinsecallie, neither clameth by way of consequence, any pre-eminence in
temporal things, but in spiritual allane^lie. All their iuris^iction is
merely spiritual, as Halensis says, that Bellar* respons ad Apol. c. 4.
Halensis part 3. quaest.. 40. number. 5.
the spiritual power judges according to the spiritual punishment, and not
according to the civil: And it may be instanced by the Apostle who
(doubtless) if he had civil power would have used it against the incestuous
man, and punished him civilie: But he knew the reach of the Apostolic power
to be spiritual, and therefore censured him spirituallie with excommunication.
But most clearelie, S Augustine disclames it in Christ's Name. Hearken, O Audite
gentes August* Tract Ioh. 115.
Jews and Gentiles -- hearken, O kingdoms of the earth: I stay not your
domination in this world, etc. Dumb Pops have least ex cellencie.


Herein Popes usurp most who have least right, the excellency of Pastors
flowed from their pastoral calling, and their discharge of it; but he is an
idol pastor, who has thrust himself in the most eminent place of the
Church, and yet is least in worth. The least Pracher is worthy of more honor
tha^ he though he were in his pontificals: Bellar. de offic* Princip lib. 1.
cap. 22
He preaches not and so can neither be the Vicare of Christ, nor successor
of his Apostles. For Christus Rex and Dominus noster (as Bellarmine
acknowledges) non erat occupatus in rebus temporalibus, sed praedicatione
verbi, and conversione animarum: Christ was not busy in temporal things, but
in preaching of the word, and conversion of Souls. But he inver^eth Christ's
Diet, neglecting preaching and employing himself altogether in temporal
things: Neither can he be Peter's successor, if we trust Bernard Past. remte
populo hu^c, aut nega, aut exhibe, etc. Bernard consid. lib. 4
Prove thy self a Pastor to this people -- least thou deny thy self to be
his heir, whose seat thou hold. This is Peter who never went out decked
with Jewels -- and yet without these he believed that command might be
fulfilled: If thou love me, feed my Sheep. For in these things thou
succeeds not to Peter, but to Constantine -- Thou art a Pastors heir, be
not ashamed of the Gospel, to Evangelize is to feed the flock, do the work
of an Evangelist, and thou have fulfilled the work of a Pastor. Ancient Pops
preached.


Their Analist Baron. ^55. ^. 21* 26.
commends preaching Popes, Serigius secundus for that he was praedicatione
liberior, a free Preacher, and Leo the fourth, that he was a preacher of the
word, and left an Homily in register, to direct Churchmen in their office,
which Baronius closes with this mark. Pervigilis curae pastoralis, nobile
documentum, a notable document of a wakerife pastoral care. It is a notable
document indeed to prove Leos pastoral care, and to convince the later Popes,
who are all together void of that care. Becanus Nec facit ea visibiliter quae
fecit, etc Becan. refut. Apol. Reg. Ang. paradox. ^1.
also overthrows the Popes Vicarshippe in that same place, where he pleads
most for it. He scoffeth at that saying of Tertulian, that Christ reliquit
vicariam vim Sp. Sancti, the vicariat power of the holy Spirit to rule his
Church: And proves the holy Spirit cannot be such an Vicar, because he
does not these things visiblie, which Christ did in his mortal flesh, for he
neither administreth Sacraments, neither preaches in public* This concludes
as strongelie against the pope, for as the holy Spirit cannot visiblie and
bodily exerce these offices, so the pope (though he may visiblie exerce them)
yet does it not at all, but in place of a Vicare, he is that abuse and blot
in the Church, whereof S. Cyprian speaks (if that be his work) The tenth
abuse Decimus gradus Abusi onis etc. Cyp. de Abus socul* c. 10.
is a negligent Bishop, who requires his degree of honor among men, but
keeps not the dignity of his Ministry before God, whose Embassage he
bearetth. The pope is wholly taken up in consistoriall business.

But since he must be called a Preacher, let him Latter popes are bloody,
pastors.
have it in that sense that Gregory speaks of: Nova atque inaudita est ista
praedicatio, quae verberibus exigit fidem: This is a new, and unheard sort of
preaching, which exacteth Lib 2. Epist. ^1.
faith by strokes. And if he will have honor for doing his office, let him
have it, as Extra ipso Rege superior. Philo de profugis. Item de vit Mosis. 2.
3. Sixth. Senens. 5. Annot. 176
Philo tells, the high Priest amongst the Jews, albeit he was inferior to
the King, yet so long as he was in his Ministry entering in the Temple,
clothed with Aarons garments, etc. -- In that respect he was above the King.
Let the Pope then exerce hierarchicall functions, as Christ, his Apostles, and
the first godly Popes did, and then let him pretend his spiritual eminency,
and clame the honor due to it. But so long as his preaching is the roaring of
Bulls, Curs^s, Excommunications, etc. from the Capitol, he is Aba^don, and
not the Vicar of Christ.

But what would the Pope and his Clergy say, if the Emperors may as justly
be Popes, as popes Emperors.
Emperor upon the ground of his supereminent power, would raise contrare
positions and practices, and so pay the Pope home in his own coin? As first
to exempt himself and Kings and Princes, from all sort of Ecclesiasticke
subjection, as to hear the word, partake Sacraments etc. Next to use
proscription against them, cutting them off from the commoun liberties of
subjects. Thirdly, to depose them from Ecclesiasticke offices, and discharge
them from all exercise of their calling. Fourthlie, to cause their people
contemn them and set up some other ambitious Churchmen in their vaking rowme.
etc, That clame of Princes over them in spiritual things, were as just as
their usurpation over Princes, except we trust the conceate of Bozius who
affirms that the Ecclesiastics take upon them the secular Boz. Mon. 1. 12
power and jurisdiction, but the seculars may not take upon them the
Ecclesiasticke power. But their own Pope Nicolaus Nec imperator ^ura
Pontificatus arrip^it. etc. Nicol. 1* Epist. ad Michael. Imp. did, 96 Cum ad
veru^.
crosses this conceate, and makes the opposition equal, that the
Ecclesiastics may no more have a temporal power, than the Emperor may have a
spiritual.

Herein was a Mass of their folies, they confounded things that God had
distinguished, spiritual and temporal, heavenly and earthly; and so
verifyed Philoes first and better exposition of Babylon, to agree to them, to
wit, Babels confusion in Rome.
that Babylon signifies Confusion. Philo de confus. and de Gigant.
Next with that Confusion they inverted all, and made temporal things their
end, and neglected spiritual: They pretended that they used temporalia in
ordine ad spiritualia, but in effect they used spiritualia in ordine ad
temporalia: And so verified of They succeed Pagan Priests.
themselves Philoes other exposition ( b) of Babylon, that it signified
inverting. No right, no reason could content them to keep their own place,
and suffer Princes to (a) Sed Rege^ Christo and Po^tisic^, etc Bellar. contr.
Barc. cap. 17
keep theirs, as God had designed to both, but they will have the King subject
to Christ, (c) and to the Pope, and the Pope, subject to Christ only.
Therefore with this their Babylonish confusion and inversion, they prove
themselves by Nicolaus Pagani imperatores ^d^m etc. Nicol prim. ubi supra.
testimony to be the successoures of Pagan Emperors, who would be both
Priests and Kings: But we need not draw this by way of consequence. Doctor
Pontifices and Religioni but Deorum, and summae re^ publicae praef^. isse.
Marta grants it in a plain Assertion, that in these ancient times all
business were dispatched by the Priests, and confirms it by Ciceroes
testimony, that the chief Priests among the Romans did swey both the
Religions of the Immortal gods, and the chief matters of the Commonwealth.
For which cause it may b^e con^ectured that their controversar Iuris. 1. 25 50.
speaking of their Pope, calls him rather Pontifex Romanus, then Episcopus
Romanus, that (a) Bellar lib. de Romans Pont. Popes profaine^esse, made holiness.
under that old Pagane name, h^e may insinuate the Notion of his twofold
Pagan power.

As for his Consistoriall business, whereof I spoke before, Palaeottus Dicatur
Papa his ipsis etc Pal^ot de consult, Consist. Conclus. Page 364.
has plastered that sore, and tells that the Popes business in the
Consistory about temporal things are hierarchicall acts, because they are
ordered to a spiritual end. So great is his power, that treasons, deposing of
Kings, overthrow of Empyres, etc. are all turned in hierarchicall acts by his
meddling. But I would know to what sort of hierarchicall act these may be
referred, for Dionysi^s Dionys de Ecclesiast. hie rach. Matthew 10. Luke 9 Act. 6
recounting the acts of Ecclesiastic hierarchy, has no such matter:
Therefore they are his Monarchick exercises, which he has taken up, since he
disdained the Ecclesiastic hierarchy.

This is far from Chrysostomes mind, who thinks that Christ forbade his
Apostles to take provision for their journey, that they might only wait on
preaching, as the Apostles also did. How then does the Pope, who is altogether
taken up with temporal business? Gregory Amissis bonis c^lestibus terrenum
est omne quod sitiunt Greg. moral. 25 c. 10.
calls it an earthly disposition, when men forget heavenly things, and
thirst only for earthly things. If their Visions tell that the Bishop of
Anconaes Inter Epist. Aug 20^. Aug. contr. Parm. l. 3. c. 3
Soul acknowledged it self justly in hell because neglecting preaching, he
waited only upon Worldly shows, banquets, and such other toys. What shall
become of the Popes who are worse employed in oppressing the Church, and
disturbing Europe? And if S. Augustine say truly, That the heart of the Wheat
is in heaven, but the heart of the Chafe is on earth: Then surely the popes
must be Chafe, and not Wheat, since his heart is all on the earthly
Monarchy.

This then is their wilful ignorance, whereby they deny to Kings not only
their Architectonik power, which makes them custodes v^riusque Tabulae: And
Pastores populi: Isa. 49. 23. Ibid ^0. 1^.
Keepers of both Tables: Pastors of people, and Nurce-fathers of the Church:
but also their Eminency in temporalibus. For the Pope has supreme temporal
jurisdiction temporalie and directly (says Marta) And again, he has
universal Dominion, universally and over all. Papa habet Marta jur is. 1. 19.
toto. bidem part. 4 Cas. 79. 41
supremam temporalem iurisdictionem, temporaliter and direct. Item habet
vniversalem iurisdictionem and Dominium in universally in omnibus.

Petrus Damianus was the first who aff^irmed the Popes tempo alitie, and though
ever since it has been in vigor yet About. Ann 1070.
as an exposed foundling of an uncertain father: For the defenders of it
cannot agree on the original: Some father it on Christ's institution: Some on
the tradition of the Apostles: Others on Councels, exponding Scripture so: Some
on the Donation of Princes: And some on Prescription. It is a staggering faith
whose prime article knows not the father. But let Cap. per Ven.
them stand at Innocents the third decretal. Reges in tem^ poralibus superiorem
non recognoscunt.

CHAP. XXII. Of the fruits of their folly, and first: Of Irritation.
THis much of their foolishness in the course of usurpation, follow the
fruits, which are either in regard Their tyranny irritats Princes.
of the party offended, or of themselves: In the party offended it works
irritation, and an exact inquiry of the matter: In themselves, it works a
discovery and destruction. Irritation came necessarily of so violent and
insolent courses, as to use Princes for Lackeyes* to cause them wait on bare
footed in winter not to find access, to tred on their Platin. Aventin.
neck. These and the like indignities were int^lerable: For though Princes can
oversee small offenses, yet when their Life, Honor and Authority are tr^dde
vnd^rfoote, it were not patience, but senselessenesse not to be moved: And so
these matchless indignities put supreme Ecclesiast.
powers to supreme perturbations of indignation and anger; for oppression
makes wise men mad. Their generous pirits were as far irritate by
indignities, as they have the prime and fl^wre of ingenuitic.

This was augmented by many respects of their iniurers: In their Persons they
were subject to Princes, their Their vile in gratitude to Princes.
calling was spiritual, and ought to have procured every way their good: Their
obligement by good deed was exceeding great, for they had received liberties
and territories from Princes, and so were obliged to gratitude. But all these
could not move them to their duty: Therefore their injuries were more
greevous to Princes. This foul ingratitude was contrar to that which Charles
Carolu^ Mag -- omnes pene terras Ecclesiis contulerat. etc. Wi^hel Malmes. l.
5. apud Spalat. Lib 6. cap 7 ^. 89
the great exspected in his liberality to the Church: When he saw the Germans
inclining to rebellion, he thought the best way to secure the Impyre to his
house, was by giving large Lands and principalities to Churchmen, and that
because of their holy calling, and that their Children succeeded them not, and
in case that Princes rebelled against his Posterity he thought Churchmen
both by their excommunication, and civil power would hold them in order. But
all turned here contrar to his exspectation. Sed quod Carolu^ putavit sibi
etc. Ibid.
for in all sturres the Impyre had not such adversaries as Churchmen. And
herein was verified the old Apologue In sylvam amplam venit olim securis ferrea
inermis atque, etc. Spalat. Lib. 6 cap. 5. n. 173
of the Axe and the Oak tree. The Axe without an handle lay on the ground, and
entreated the Oak for as much timber to be an handle unto it, under promise
to cut down the brambles that molested the Oak, but when it was so mounted,
it turned against the Oak, and cut it down also. So when the Pope got the
temporal power by the gift of Princes, they turned it against the Givers. And
the parable of Ioannes de rupescisa Fro^ard. vol, 2,
is not vnlik of a naked Bird who begged feathers from other Birds, and when
they had busked it with lent feathers, it began in pride to smite them who had
decked it.

And most of all, they provoked God to anger, for they made his Name and
truth to be blasphemed, when men saw nothing in them but the desire of a
worldly dominion: They laid a stumbling block before people, to hold them on
the earth, when they should have led them to Heaven: The piety of old
Prelates, turned Pagans to Christianity: But they did what they could to make
Princes and people forsake the Religion of so proud and fleshly Prelates. That
which seemed to be peace between Emperors and Popes for some three or four
Ages, was but a conspiracy each of them flatetred other in offending God, but
he turned this ^ust irritation of Princes in a preparatiue to reformation,
that Princes being sensible of the Effronts done to their honor by the Popes
tyranny, might be led to feel the wounding of their Soul by his heresy,
and so stirred up to reform the Church in both.

People were also irritate: For beside their defrauding of spiritual comfort,
whereof as then they were senseles, they They irritate people:
were cast in civil discord. The factions of the Guelfs and Gibelins, so
called from Gu^lfus D. of Baveere, and Conradus Giblingen Ann. 1140. etc. The
exco^municatio^ of Princes turned them all in division, some of duty and
conscience adhering to their princes, other of superstition and treason falling
from them; Kingdom against Kingdom, and Kingdoms, Cities, and Families
divided amongst themselves: So soon as the alarm was given by
excommunication, there was neither peace, nor place for Neutralitie, but the
old bloody proscriptions of Sylla and Marius were acted every where. This
made them weary of such broiles, and disposed them to embrace a more peaceable
Religion, that would keep them in peace with their Princes and Neighbors.

Their intolerable cruelty against the Emperors enforced This irritatation is
a disposition to Reformation.
the world to this remeede, Gregory the seventh, against Henry the fourth,
Paschal the second, against Henry the fifth, Innocent the third against
Philip. Innocent the fourth hired men to poison and stobbe Fridericke and
Conrad. John the twenty two, and Benedict the eight vexed Lodovicus Bavarus.
They excommunicat them, stirred up other Princes to invade them, and forced
them to base and unreasonable conditions of peace, they poisoned Otho. Frisin
lib. 6. cap. 36 Deus and Rex. page 64. Tot mala, tot schismat^, tot ta^ animarum
quam cor porum pericula in volvit. etc. Casaub libe. Eccles.
them with the hostie or cup. It is impossible to consider what miseries these
iarres brought on people: For Otho testifies that they brought so many evils
and Schisms, and involved the bodies and souls of men in so many dangers that
the cruelty and durance of that persecution was sufficient to prove the
misery of mankind. In all these broyl^s, people smarted, and being brought to
desperation, were forced to take some course to vendicat themselves. Their law
provyds that feudum meretur amittere, qui feudum inficiatur.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the second fruit of their folly: An exact inquiry of the
matter.
THe second fruit of their foolishness, is an exact Inquiry brings
knowledge.
inquiry of the matter: When men saw their tyranny, they inquired the cause,
and as Tertullian Et inquirere accenditur quid sit in causa, etc. Tertul. ad
Scap. cap. 5.
speaks of the Martyrs, when they know the truth they follow it. For as he
speaks in another place, who so studieth to understand, Qui studu* erit
intelligere, cogetur and credere. Id Apol cap. 18.
shall be forced to believe. Their tyranny is so gross and manifest, that
the world shall be forced to see the thing they could not imagine. The more
that Princes inquired, the more they found their own innocence and the
tyranny of the Pope. Moderate injuries are tolerable, but extreme indignities
put men to the highest degree of redress, and so bring them nearer to a
remeed, tha^ lesser wrongs. This was a meeting of their Inquisition: For their
bloody inquisitours, inquire persons to destroy them: But this inquiry seeks
out the cause to follow the truth.

If they had keep^d themselves in moderation, the world Their extremities
brings their ruin.
possibly would have bidden in their implicit Faith, in the point of
jurisdiction, as well as in doctrine: But when they went to intolerable
insolences, men were forced to inquire in the state of the matter, as a man
brangled in his Possession, searches all his writs. So Princes set Lawyers
Divines, etc. to work, to plead their cause at least by writ, for there was no
place for judicial pleading their party being their Judge, and stopping all
means of redress by his tyranny. Every onset that the Popes made, The Popes
onsets are his foiles.
brought both a new search of the matter, and a new discovery of their shame:
Divines and Politics were divided amongst themselves, and their contraire
disputs and treatises made the world see more in these deepes, than otherwise
they could have seen. Their strife with the two Henry's gave some light: the
other with Fridericke Barbarossa gave more: Even in these times of greatest
tyranny, God raised up some good Patriots, to plead the cause of Princes, as
well as he had Witnesses of the truth: And though the Pope bare down the one
under the name of Heretics, and the other under the name of politic
Shismaticks, yet their works testify, that God let not Antichrists pride
go without a witness.

It is a wonder that so many durst write so plainly in God provided pleaders
for the authority of Princes.
those Ages, and of that argument that was then tossed de potestate imperiali
and Papali: Beside the Sorbone who proved loyal to their Princes: Many Divines
else where made it their task, as may be seen in Otho Frisingensis, Lego and
relego gest a Romanorum.
I read and I ^read over again the doings of the Roman Bishops, etc. And the
fruit of their reading (at least so many of them as were honest minded) was
with Occam (b) Defend me gladio tuo and ego defendam te calam^ meo O^cam
to implore the Emperors protection. Defend me. O Emperor with thy Sword,
and I shall defend thee with m^ Pen; so dangerous a thing it was then to
write the truth. Goldastus Goldast. Constitut. It. Politica. It. Monarchia It
Replica.
has done good service to God, and authority (but has given a blow to the
Pope) in gathering together in great volumes these many Treatises, which were
scattered in obscure corners: As a Physician by seeing the Recepts and Medicine
of a diseased Age, will* easelie know what has been the Epidemicke disease of
the time: So a judicious Reader will perceive that Christendom was then in a
burning fever by the Popes ambition. Such were then the Emperors best defenses
with Apologies* Protestations, etc. Their authority was broken, the Majesty
of the Impyre defaced, and their Sword so blunted, by Superstition in their
people, that they could neither defend their right, nor revenge their wrong.
And if we consider exactlie the ingynes of these times, we shall find that
God stirred up for the defense of Best spirits defended Princes.
Princes the most godly, judicious and learned men; but a rabble of fleshly
flatterers defended the Pope. This great exact search of the matter was a
second preparatiue to reformation: Irritation gave the first by the Alienation
of Slavish spirits defend the Pope.
Princes minds from the Pope: And this inquiry gave the second, by the
illumination of their minds in the truth.

It will befall him as to the Ass, who not content with his long ears, asked
two horns of Jupiter: And being importune in his pleading, he got his ears
cut off: And when the Persians were not content with their dominions in Asia,
but incroached on Greece; they stirred up Alexander to ^ast them out both of
Greece and Asia. So the Pope not content with his spiritual power, but
usurping on the temporalitie of Princes, will lose both powers together: For
Princes and people see now more in that question, than in many Ages before.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the third fruit of their folly, The Discovery of Antichrist.
THe third fruit of their folly is Discovery, whereby The pope is Antichrist.
2 Thesse. 2.
the Pope declares himself to be that great Antichrist, the head of that
Apostacy, Some expone that Apostacy of Heresy, falling from the truth:
Others of rebellion* falling from the Impyre, but both go together, and the
Pope is the head and heart of both: He began with Heresy, and Emperors
cared not for it; therefore God punished their carelessness, by letting popes
fall from their obedience, and the discovery of both came joyntlie, though
Princes were more sensible of the discovery of rebellion than of Heresy. Why
Antichrist was obscure of old. 2 Thessalonians 27.


This purpose of Antichrist was obscure in the first Ages by three special
causes: First, it was not an open iniquity, but a mystery of iniquity: The
Essence of it was in opposition to Christ, but it was colored with the pretext
of a Vicariat to Christ: A Vice-Christ in show, but an enemy to Christ in
deed: Next, because it was a Prophecy and the best interpretation Optima
interpretatio prophetiae est ejus comple mentum Aug.
of prophecies is their accomplishment, for till they be accomplished, they
are as dark Riddles, but when the time is come, and the thing prophesied is
done, they have a clear and certain exposition (says Irenie) Omnis
prophetia priusquam habeat efficaciam, etc. ^ren l. 4. cap 43.
Thirdly (which is not well adverted) this obscurity was helped by two errors
in Chronology: The one was in fixing a certain time of six thousand years to
the worlds standing, according to a fabulous tradition of one Rabbi Elias: The
other was in the wrong supputation of that fixed time, according to the
reakoning of the seventie Interpreters, who added more than twelve hundredth
years Graecorum supputatio Hebraicam superat in 1236 Sixth. Senens. Bibl. lib
5. Annot. 68.
to the Hebrews just reakoning.

Lactantius and Phylastrius, following the opinion of their time reakoned five
thousand, eight hundredth years before Christ, and so Elias six thousand years
were fulfilled about the five hundredth year of Christ; whereupon the Fathers
of the third and fourth Age were forced to an Individual and Trieterian
Antichrist; because they saw no time for an Antichristian succession. This made
the Fathers in the first Ages to speak of the last day as coming presently on
them: So Cyprian said ^ppro(...) quante secul i sine. Cypr. de unit. Eccles,
^^-14
The last day was approaching: And in another place Inter saecu li labentis
ruin as. Idem ad Demetrian, n-17
That he was in the ruins of the decaying world. And it is probable that these
same errors of Chronology, made Papias and the Chiliasts to speak of a
thousand years Joy in this life; they looked for Christ's coming very
shortly within two or three hundredth years, and so were forced to refer
these thousand years to a time after his coming. That might seem tolerable
in them who wanted the benefit of exact supputation, but it is a gross error
in them, who renew it ^n our days.

Imperfect supputation in Chronology, has bred many errors The error of
supputation.
inhistorie. The Egyptians, and Chaldeans are ridiculous for their innumerable
thousands of years: And the Romans in the first Ages of their Town, reakoned
their years by the Pretors fixing of a Nail in Minervaes Temple in the
Calends of September. But God in our time has perfecte^ supputation. The
truth of the Hebrew text, the bases of Eclipses, Iubilies, and remarkable
Conjunctions of Stars, etc. Have made now a certainty of reakoning of times:
And among other things do tax old supputations of error, and the conjecturs
of Antichrist founded thereon of Temeritie.

Now then supputation is mended, the Prophecy of Antichrist Supputation is
mended.
accomplished, and that Mystery revealed: for many things are known to after
times, whereof these ancient writters were altogether ignorant, says
Alphonsus Multa su^t posterioribus nota etc. Alphons a Ca stro h^res tit.
Indulgent* Onuphr ad* ^latin^ Vit Petri.
And Onuphrius, to that end. Posterior hominum diligentia multa, quae ante
parum comperta era^t, invenit The after diligence of men has found out many
things, which before were not known The Apostles lays the proposition, who
opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God. The pope ^aketh
the Assumption, and plainly crveth to the world in his usurpation over Kings,
me me adsum qui feci. His opposition we have heard, in that he makes the two
powers spiritual and temporal opposite, which God has joined in a friendly
concourse and conspiration for the good of man: His exaltation is also plain
in depressing Princes: He will neither be inferior nor equal, but superior
to them; and that as far as the Sun is to the Moon: The ignorance of their
gloss in Astronomy, in reakoning the proportion of these Stars is no
grosser, than their Divines inpudenc^e on the Apostles Can. Solitae.
text. Romans 13. 1. turning sublimibus in sublimioribus, and thereby pulling
themselves out of temporal subjection, and setting them in a superlatiue
degree above Princes absolutely.

If we consider the thing that stayed his coming, Antichrist is come.
and the removing of it, we shall find that both Antichrist is come, and the
Pope is he. This is the Empire of Rome, which the Apostle darkly insinuates,
Aiunt Apost hac sub tegumento verborumque involucris posuisse, etc. Otho
Frisin. lib. 8 cap. 2 Servius in Virgilium.
least he should stir up the Romans to a persecution for prophesying of a
decay of the Empire. They held Rome to be eternal, and Capitolij immobile
saxum: Imperium sine fine dedi; Roma vrbs aeterna, were the common titles of
the ^owne, and that forsooth, because when Traquinius would have built a Temple
to Jupiter all the other gods yielded to that great one, except Terminus and
Iuventas, whereupon their flattering Augurs Placuit Vatibus contumacia Nu
minum. Flor. apud malved, de Ant. lib. 4 cap 9. Tertull Apol. cap. 32
inferred that Rome should have no end of her indurance, but floorish in a
perpetual youthly vigor. Liminum Deus abscedere noluit -- Terminus cum Jove
remanens aeternum urbi Imperium cum Religione significaret. That the primitive
Church took this for the Empire, it is plain by Tertullian. We pray (says
he) for Emperors and the whole state of the Roman Empire, because we know
that the great cruelty coming on all the world, and the last days that
threatened horrible calamities, are stayed by the standing of the Roman Impyre.
The Impyre is removed out of the way.


This was removed three special ways. Frist by Constantine, who translated
the Seat of the Impyre to Constantinople, Which translating Genebrard Non sine,
Let Numine -- Vt regnu^ Ecclesiae -- Romae haberet Sedem.
calls a work of Gods providence, that the Kingdom of the Church spoken of
by Daniel might have a place at Rome. We grant it came of Gods providence, but
not for the end that Genebrard assigns, but for a contraire, to fulfill the
prophecy of Antichrist, and to provide him a place at Rome. And Rupertus
Diabolus locum aptum Antichristo novit. Ruper: Tuit. De Antichr. lib 4. cap.
10. Maxim congruebat -- and cito pervios haberet populos pradicatio generalis.
Leo. ser. 1, de not Pet. and Pauli.
beside Gods providence observes also the craft of Satan, in choosing Rome as
a most fit nest for hatching the mystery of iniquity. And Malvenda says,
plainly, That Rome is fallen in the hands of the Church. Next, the Barbarians
weakened the Impyre; for when Constantine had taken away the Guard of the
Impyre, the Legions that lay on the Rhyne and Danube, the Goths, Hunnes,
Vandals, Her^l^, Longobards, etc. Come in as deludges upon the Impyre. Here is
a wonderful change of Rome; Leo marketh it well, that it was most conducible
to further the work of the Gospel that many Kingdoms should be confederate
to one Impyre, that so the general preaching of the Gospel might have more
sudden passage: But now that same Impyre must be dissolved, to make way to
Antichrist* that from that city he may the more fitly send out his heresy
and Apostasy.

Thirdly, the Pope had an hand in that Removal of the Impyre, for what
remained; he broke down by deposing The Pope helped that Removal.
Kings, and absolving their Subjects, etc. And it is worth our remarke, that
their first Rebellion against the Emperor was for Images, which the Greek
Emperors in a godly zeal had put out of Churches, as Onuphrius Primus Romans
Pont. etc. ^mpr. Graeco. in nos resistere ausus fuit etc. Platin de vit
Constant. p. 108.
marketh that Constantine the Pope was the first that durst resist the Emperor
Philippieus: And after him Gregory the second Gregorius ma^ora ausus, Ita
licum. Imperium ^ure eripuit Ibid.
was more bold, and cutted the Impyre of Italy from the Grecians. So idolatry
and rebellion began together, and when they had left God in the one, they
forsook the Emperor in the other. But more fully they weakened the* Impyre
when Hildebrand and his followers brought in Excommunication, etc. And it is
the Apostles phrase, speaking of the removal of the Impyre, 2 Thessa. 2. 1
Cor. 5.
that shall be taken (...) out of the mids, And of the incestuous Corinthian
to be excommunicate, he bids take him (...). And Augustine August. quaest
in D^u 39
observes, that the Apostle borrows that speech from Moses, and it has a
different sense in the old and new Testament; in the old it signifies to
sacrifice, or slay, but in the New to excommunicate, and that excommunication
now is come in place of killing. But Baronius Baron. Paranes. ad Vene.
Macta and manduca, kill and eat, has brought the Evangelicke censure back
again to the legal killing, and so every way they helped the removing of the
Impyre by excommunication, breaking the reverence of Emperors in the hearts of
people, and by usurpation, beating them down, and setting other Princes
against them. Therefore Crantzius writting of Boniface the eight sitting in
Imperialibus cries out, vides Petre Crantz Sax. 8. 93.
successorem tuum: Vides Christ Vicarum tuum. Quo ascendit superbia servi
servorum tuorum, Thou see, O Peter, thy Successor, thou see, O Christ thy
Vicare.

Next, as they did cast it down they exalted themselves; Popes exalt
themselves.
so the Pope is Emperor sede vacant, Though when the Popedom vaketh the
Cardinals have power, and when a Bishopric vaketh the Chapter has power, yet
he gives not the like power to the Electors, in the ^aking of the Impire: His
consistory of Cardinals is in place of the old Senate, and so old Rome is
casten in a new mould and the Monarchy turned in an Hierarchy, as the reward
of his oppressing of the Monarchy. Bellarmine gives us advantage Bellar. re
c^g. page 47.
in this point, where he grants that the Pope of old was subject to Emperors
as to their temporal Lords -- But the Popes authority is more and more
declared. By this confession so long as Popes kept Apostolic and primitive
Verity they gave obedience to Princes, but wh^^ they turned Apostaticke, they
rebelled: And therefore this declaration of the Popes authority, whereof he
speaks, is nothing but the discovery of the mystery of inquitie. That
removell demonstrats Antichrists coming.


Among their Demonstrations to prove that Antichrist is not come, this is one.
Secunda demonstratio sumitur, etc. Bellar. Romans Pont. lib. 3 c. 5.
That the Roman Impyre is not altogether destroyed. Bellarmine grants an
inclination and decay of the Impyre. and that we may see almost the utter
ruin of it, so in effect he grants that it is almost ^uinate, but not
altogether. This is all which we crave, for we urge not a total ruin of the
Impyre, but such a decay as makes way for Antichrists entry. But Greizer Ego
Plessaeo suaserim -- ut ipsemet Pragam vel Viemam etc. Grez Mist. Sal^ u^
proleg cap. 6. p 55.
is more bold, and bids us go to Prage and Vienne, and see whither or no
the Roman Impyre be decayed: (b) Quia Romans Imp. de lendum erat id quod iam
fere etc. ibid. lib 2 cap. 7.
But we bid him go to Rome, and see if he find a Roman Emperor there,
either in person, power, or credit. For the Question is not of an Emperor of
Vienne, but of Rome* of whom the Apostle writes; and that his sending of us to
Prage or Vienne, is a granting of our clame, that he is no more Emperor of
Rome: His strength now is in no part within these bounds that were Roman
Provinces in the Apostles time; for then and some Ages following the Quadi, and
Marcomanni, etc. were bordering enemies on the Impyre and no parts of it:
Besides these Provinces that now he possesses, he has not as Emperor, but
as a Prince of the Impyre: Austria is his hereditarie Duchy, and he holds
Boheme and Hungary by intrusion, so that the Roman Impyre is but a poor
(...) and a naked shadow. Martaes conceat of the Ensigns of the Impyre.


For curing this blow, Doctor Marta has an odd conceate. After he has
refuted. Alciat for affirming the Impyre to have been ruinate by the Goaths,
etc. He would prove that it stands, yet in full intergri^ie, first Identitas
Imperatoris hodierni cum Antiquis pro batur, etc. Mart. Iuris. p. 1. c 2 n. 23
because the titles and Ensigns of the old Impyre are sufficient to prove the
integrity of the Impyre: But that is a weak reason, for so the ^atria^ks of
Constantinople and Alexandria would be in their former integrity, because they
keep their ^un^ient Titles: By the like reason also the Pope stands in his
former large jurisdiction, because he keeps his titles, and Peter's Keys for
his Arms. But they see the contraire hereof to their grief, for he wants
more than the half of his ancient bounds; as may be seen by his Provinciale
Romanum, descryving the bounds of the Popes jurisdiction; and Catalogus
Annatarum prescriving the sums received at the entry of Prelates. As for
Ensigns they overthrow their Assertion, the Emperor bears the double Eagle
in sign of the two Impyres, the Western seated in Rome, and the Eastern in
Constantinople. But these prove the vanity of his Title, for he can do
nothing in Rome or Constantinople, or in any Province of old, pertaining to
them: And though the Eagles be now double, yet they cannot do the twenty
part of that that one might, when Marius first put it in the B^nners of the
Legions.

His other reason is ridiculous, Considera^dum est Romans ^^^^. -- in universo
^rbe consistere Ibid n. 26.
That the Roman Impyre is the whole World, and that the Kingdoms of France
And of the whole world.
Spain, etc. are quotitatiue parts of the Impyre, though no Subject to the
Impyre, Licet Franci non subdantur Imp. sunt tamen pars Imperi^ quotitativa
Ibid cap. 20 ^* 26
These are mockeries, and no reasons: For the Scripture tells, that the ruin
of the Impyre shall be by its division in several Kingdoms: But by his
sophistry it stands entire, not withstanding of that division* And what an
Emperor is he, that has neither respect, nor obedience of Kings within his
Impyre, who are both great* and mightier than he? Christiani Reges Imperatore
maioressu^t Bellar* Rom Pont. l. 3* cap. 5.
in so doing Martaes quotitatiue parts destroy the quidditie of his imaginary
universal Impyre. And by the same reason, the Assyrian, Persian, and Grecian,
yea all the four Monarchies yet stand in their integrity, because th^se
Provinces and Lands over which they ruled are yet extant. And the Roman Impyre
shall never decay till the last day, because th^se Provinces shall also
continue till then. But Bellarmine in the heat of that same dispute overthowes
Martaes conceate, affirming, Sciendum est imperium tandem divid^ndum in 10
Reges quorum nullus erit vel dicetur Rex Romanorum* that the Roman Impyre
shall be divided at last in ten Kings, whereof none shall be or can be
called the King of the Romans, albeit they shall possess the Provinces of the
Roman Impyre: As now the King of France, the King Bellar ubi. supra.
of Spain* and the Queen of England, etc. Therefore th^se Kingdoms according
to Bellarmine, are not quotitatiue parts of the standing, but the scattered
parts of a dissolved Impyre.

Moreover both reason and their own confession prove such a removal of the
Impyre, as makes way to Antichrist. Rome is not the Emperors.
The reason is taken both from Rome, and her ancient respects. For Rome it
self: It was the mother and seat of the Impyre, and so long as they were
Emperors indeed, they either abode there, or had it subject to them* But now
the Emperor cannot do so much in Rome as a Barron in a Village, for though
he were ^rowned there, yet it is expresselie provided, Vnde dictus Imperator
stare non debet in uroe nisi per Vnam noctem post suam consecra tionem, etc
Provincial. Roman* in fine.
that he stay there but one Night after his Coronation, and thereafter go up
to Mount Maurus, and shaking his hand, say, All that we see are ours, and at
our command And thereafter he sends through all the World summoning all
Barrons and Christian Princes, and Pagans, who ought to answer to him, etc.
This is a ridiculous ^^tle of a ^owne that will not lodge him, and the ^i^ing
of Justinians words concerning an universal Impyre, fitteth him no more than
Peter's Name does the Pope; for the Pope has nothing of ^eter but his borrowed
title; and the Emperor has naught but the shadow of the Impyre. In first
times the Pope non habuit potestatem in urbe ante tempora Vitaliani, says
their own Rolevinck fas^. Temp 60^. But now we may turn it. Imperator non
habet potestatem in urbe, That the Emperor has no power in the Town. There
is a manifest change of the Emperor removed, and the Pope seated in Rome. And
in the late Ages the Emperors came never to Rome, but with great Armies; some
times they took it by force: Other times they were surprysed in it as an
evidente that they had no power of Rome. Lastly, the wiser sort eschewed Rome
as a snare. So Rudolph the first being invited by the Pope to come to Rome for
the Imperial Crown, answered as Aesops Fox did to the sick Lion, who
requested her to come in the Cave and visit him, but she refused, because she
saw the foote-steppes of many -- Oli^ quod vulpe^ agro^^ caut a Leon^. etc.
beasts entering the Cave, but none returned. So, many Emperors went to Rome
with glory, but returned with shame: Since Rome is now to Emperors as the
Lions Cave is to beasts, they cannot rightly be called Emperors of Rome.
And Pope John the thirteenth writting to the Emperor, did not style him Roman
Emperor, which is sufficient to prove that they acknowledge no Emperor of
Rome.

As for the ancient respects of the Impyre, if we follow This Impyre nothing
like the old.
Lipsii admirandae Copiis, Opibus Operibus, Viris^, and Virtutibus. Lipsii
admiranda.
in its Forces Riches, Works, Men and Virtues, it is weak, for in none of
these can it compare with the ancient Impyre. The bounds also prove the same,
for the Impyre of the Orient is taken by the Turks, and the Western Impyre
destroyed by Odoazer in the time of Augstulus, and restored again by Charles
the great, is also turned to a shadow: Bellarmine (b) hazards the issue of the
question upon this instance affirming that God erected the Western Impyre by
Charles the great, which Impyre (says he) indureth yet, Iteru^ Deus erexit
in Occidente priorem tibia^; etc. Bellar. Romans Lib. 3. cap. 5
But this instance is sufficient to convict him, for Charles Impyre was
between the Meditarrane and Balticke Sea, between Britain and Hungary,
whereof the present Emperor has but a small part. And though in Maximilian
the firsts time it was divided in ten Provinces, yet was it but a small part
of the ancient Impyre: In Constantines time* the Impyre lay between Britain
and Persia in length, and in breadth between Caucasus and Syene, and he
divided them in 94. Provinces, whereof scarcely one is within the present
Impyre. And how far is it from the power of the old Emperors, when
Maximilian the second begging the Election to the Crown of Pole, was repulsed,
and taken in battle by an handful of Polonians. And when Ferdinand that now
is* engaged the half of Austria to the Duke of Bavaria to assist him in the
Bohemian wars, he was far from the riches and forcs of Augustus and
Constantine, etc. The Impyre almost extinguished.


These and the like reasons have forced from some of them a confession of the
desolation of the Impyre. Ubi nunc Romana Monarchia? (says Faber) -- quam
obsecro Roma Regi suo Monarchiae praebet obedientiam. Where is now the Roman
Monarchy* Where are they that rule the raines, since we see the head of the
Monarchy make defection from them? For what obedience, I pray you, gives Rome
to her own King? And Dominicus Soto Temporale urbis Roman^ Imperiu^ iam
cessavit 4. apud. Vieg. Apoc. cap. 13
affirms that the temporal Impyre of Rome is now ceased. And Paulus Iovius
Post quam Caesaris potentia face^s sit. etc Paul. Iov. lib* ^. p. 16
entering in his History, and recounting the Kings of Europe, he raises them
all from the ruins of the Impyre; for after that the power of the Emperors
was dead, which some times by cutting off Kings, compelled all to obey one, and
when the most fierce people in the love of their ancient liberty rebelled, it
is manifest that the most noble Roman Impyre, being shaken and rent in pieces
by the force of the Barbarians, went in the possession of many lesser
Kingdoms. And Salmeron says, Imperium illud Romanum iam diu eversum est --
and quafi exstinctum -- tenuissima quaedam umbra est Imperii antiqui. The
Impyre is long since overthrown and dissipate in many Kingdoms, and in a sort
Salmer. 2 Thessalonians.
extinguished. For he that now is, and is called the Roman Emperor, is but a
small shadow of the Impyre. So that he does not so much as possess Rome it
self from which it is named. And Iustinianus Vix tenuem quandam umbram ^mp.
retinet. Justinian* ib id.
another Jesuit. The Roman Impyre is long since driven in these straites,
that scarcely it retains a light shadow of the Impyre. This confession is
enough against their Wranglers. And they say no more but what was said long
before by Lyra I am a multis annis Impertum caruit Imperatore. Lyra ibid.
All Kingdoms are departed from the Roman Impyre, and denies subjection and
tribute, and for many years that Impyre wants an Emperor. And Eberhardus
Imperator vana appellat^o est and sola umbr^* Ave^ntin* lib. 5.
before him tells, that the Majesty of the people of Rome, whereby of old
the world was ruled, is taken from the Earth: And the Emperor is but a vain
title and a naked shadow.

By this their discovery, we turn their demonstration against themselves, and
have evicted both that Antichrist is come, and that the Pope is that
Antichrist: For since the Antichrist is come, and the Pope is he.
Impyre is removed out of the way, first by Emperors, then by Barbarians, and
thirdly by the Pope (who has thrust himself in the desolate Impyre, as the
reward of his usurpation) What can follow, but that he is that man of sin,
that exalts himself above authority. And this one point of Antichrist may
resolve all the questions between them and us. For it is an infinite labor,
to cast over all the Controversies, but this one virtuallie has all: Some have
thought to be resolved of all by the Question of Scripture, because it
contains the places of arguments: Others from the question of the Church,
because of her authority, etc. But this one of the Pope has all, because he
is both Church, Scripture, and all to them, De quare agitur, cum de primatu
Ponficis agitur? etc Bellar de Pon Romans prafat.
and when it is clearlie proven that he is that Antichrist, it will follow
necessarlie, that in all questions controverted they have the worst part. So
that the point of Antichrist proponed by the Apostles mystically, and known
by the first Ages coniecturallie; by the doctrine and practice of Rome, is made
now so clear, that we may say with reverend Iuell, Multi quidem loci de
Antichristo obscuri erant -- iam vero Ecclesiae Romanae doctrina and institutis
effectum est ut quibus oculi non desunt ne Sol ipse clarior Iuel. defens. Apol
cap. 16. page 357.
fiet. Though many places of Scripture concerning Antichrist were of old,
obscure and ambiguous, because as then it appeared not to what policy they
should apply them. Yet now by the doctrine and practice of the Church of Rome,
it is come to pass that the Sun himself is not clearer, to such as want not
eyes. For which cause the Pope, when he In Council. Lateranen -- nequis de
Antichristi etc. I vell ibid.
saw that his person and estimation was touched by the things that were spoken
of Antichrist, he discharged straightly all Preachers, that none of them should
so much as surmise any thing of the coming of Antichrist. This is nothing
else, but secret conviction that the notes of Antichrist appertain to him. And
that same Leo the tenth, Tempus quoque -- prae dicere vel as serere
nequaquaquam pr^^ sumant. Leo. 10. Ann. 1516 Council. Lateran* S^ss. 11. apud
^in* tom 4 par. p. 2 1 12
more fully in his Bull discharges that same the year preceding Luthers
kything.

Therefore it galleth them at the heart to call the Pope Antichrist, and
Maximilian Duke of Bavere, took occasion thereof to dissolve a Dispute at
Ratisbone Ann^. 1600
between the Theologues of Saxony, and the Jesuits of Bavere: He saw his
Jesuits failing in the matter, while The mention of Antichrist gnaweth them.
they cried continually, ad formam, ad formam, and sought but a color to
break the Dispute. And when Hunnius occasionallie called the Pope Antichrist,
he fretted and discharged any further proceeding. Baronius Le vissimi and
sordidissimi Novatores etc, Baron. 867. n. ^6.
railes against us in vain for that same cause, saying, that the vile Novators
use reproachful names and pictures, to the disgrace of the Apostolic Sea,
but they need not, for the Pope ends the plea, and be usurping on Princes,
exalting himself above them, and putting them out of the way by
excommunication and tyranny, gives a just Commentar of the Apostles words and
proclaims himself to be that great Antichrist, he expresses more vile
lineaments than the Protestants can attribute unto him. And it was the prime
question that the Emperors Commissioners for the reformation, or rather the
deformation of Germany, proponed to the Preachers of Augsburgh. To declare if
they counted the Bishop of Rome to be Antichrist -- adh^ret capiti lethalis
arundo. The deadly dart of their discovery has wounded their head
grievouslie, that they can not hear of it.

CHAP. XXV. Of the fourth fruit of their folly: Their just destruction.
THe fourth fruit of this usurpation is their destruction. The Gospel shall
destroy the Pope: 2 Thessalonians. 2, 8
The Apostle descryveth it in two degrees, consumption and abolition: The Lord
will consume him by the Spirit of his mouth, and abolish him by the brightness
of his coming. This consumption is by the word of God, a most powerful means
to destroy popery, for it is a work of darkness, begun increased, and
perfected by the graduall obscuring and depressing of Scripture: And therefore
the graduall revealing and manifesting of Scripture is sufficient to banish
that darkness. So the Waldenses began with a private use of Scripture, and
thereby troubled Antichrists Kingdom. VVicliffe brought it to Lectures in the
School, and wrought them more harm: Hus brought it to the Pulpit, and made it
shine clearer: But Luther, Calvine, and other Worthies of reformation, made
that Light to shine clearer in many places at once, and so brought a great
destruction upon Antichrists kingdom, and made many Nations forsake him, and
turn to the Lord. The word discovers.


The Light of the Gospel discovered two things at once, the Popes heresy and
tyranny; by the first discovery, it loses the bands that formerly held
people in awe: Superstition so puddled their consciences, that they endured his
very tyranny as equity: But when the shining truth discovered him to be an
Antichristian se^ucer, their irritation was doubled to avenge themselves on
him, both for his misleading of them and usurpation.

Doubtless, this is the secret cause why so far they abuse Therefore they
hate the word.
Scripture, they accuse it of insufficiency, and forbid the translating of it
in vulgar tongues, and reading of it to people, because Satan makes them
presagious of their destruction to come by it: Their adoring of the Nails, the
Spear and weapons that killed Christ, argues their sympathy with Satan and
the Jews that crucified him: And their abhorring of the Sword of Gods word
argues their Antipathie to it, as a malefactor abhors the Sword of the
Magistrate. And the three Bishops at Bononia, who Consil. 3 Episc.
gave advise to Paul the third, for reformation besought him to put the Bible
out of the way, because it was the Book that wrought them most woe.

This their consumption they acknowledge with Popery is far decayed.
grief, for who is ignorant (says Bellarmine) Quit enim ignorant ^este^
Lutheranam, etc Bellar. Tom. 1. Orat. Rom^ Ann. 1576. Joshua. 7.
That the Lutheran Truth (which he calls a Pest) arose in Saxony, and
thereafter occupied almost all Germany? Thence it went to the North, and to
the East, and consumed Denmark, Norraway, Swaden, Gothland, Panonia, and
Hungary: Thereafter with the like swiftness to the West, and the South, and
in a short time destroyed France, England, Scotland, some time floorishing
Kingdoms: And lastly that it passed over the Alps and pierced into Italy it
self: The Gospel preached into these places, was like the sounling of the
Trumpets about Jericho, to throw down mightily the abominations of Babel: And
Cotton confesses further that the authority of the Pope is incomparably
less than it was; and now the Roman Church is but a diminitiue of that it
was, as may be seen in the ardidinals Cardinales o^^m apud summum. Pontificem
his in heb domada covenie^ant. etc. Tholos. syntag. lib. 15 cap. 4. n 15
Oppressed Kingdoms first left poperi.
who were wont to meet oftener, but now meet one^ only once a week because
the business of the Court of Rome decressed.

The order of their consumption is very considerable, that such Nations for
sooke the Pope first, who were most abu^ sed by his usurpation: They abused
Germany pitifully in the days of the Henry's and Fridericks: No reason
could content them, the Emperors found more patience to suffer, than the Popes
tyranny found measure to bound it self. England Anglia hortus deliciaru^ and
puteus inexhaustus.
also was to them a Paradise of delight, and an inexhaustable fountain; at
every occasion they sent Legates to press that Kingdom De antiquis Romans Curi^.
in Rege, Angli^, etc. Casaub. ad Front. Duc page 68. Matthew. Paris. Ann. 1245.
for money as a sponge, is pressed for water, and imposed the provision of some
hundredth at their pleasure: Henry the third, in a survey of the Church-rents,
found sixty thousand merkes sterling to be provided for Romans. Whereupon
with his Nobles he supplicat Innocent the fourth, at the Council of Lions to
ease that burden: They got fair promises, but their burden doubled: 'For a
new survey within six years found ten thousand merkes more was yearly
assigned unto them. They whipped Henry the second, by Discipline, as a Boy,
for Beckets punishment, and canvased King John so fearefullie, that he found
no rest at home, but sought desperate courses with Mahumetan Princes, and in
end was forced to resign his Kingdom to the Pope, and take it holden of him,
and lastly was poisoned in the Eucharist. Navarre also found the like
cruelty, and when their King was excommunicate and cast out of his Kingdom,
by Julius the second, his Subjects deserted him, when he was invaded by
Ferdinand.

But their first blows came from these abused Nations. Every Nations resent
ancient wrongs.
people has their own Genius (I mean neither of the Platonicke conceats of
attending Spirits, nor Paredri Daemones) but a Gentilitious disposition, of a
Nation: It is not mortal with persons, and therefore, neither so soon irritate
nor appeased. Persons lay their quarrels at their death, but the surviving
Genius or Spirit of a Nation lives longer than persons, and in the own time
does resent old injuries, and revenge them. Therefore long oppressed Germany
(finding a light in Luthers Germanies reformation.
time) gave such a blow to Antichrist, that he could not as yet cure. It had
been good if they had not run on the other extremity about Church
maintenance, but they fearing that the Clergy would again abuse authority,
did spoil the Church of her Patrimony, and defiled the the reformation of
Religion with horrible sacrilege.

As Germany began so England followed, and shook off his yoke under Henry the
eight, and brought fo^rth at last that England* reformation. Anglia regna^te
Henric^ 8. grande illud etc. Casaub. ad. Front p. 69. Quare etiamsi Henricus 8.
non fuisset, viam tamen fata invenis^ sent. ibid. p. 71. Navarre a thorn to
the Pope, Io. Navarreni haeredes ad parts etc. Barel. Epist. dedicat. Popish
tyranie undoes it self.
great and ever-memorable fact which (overcome with oppression for many Ages)
she had conceived with great sorrow. And what ever personal disposition they
allege to have been in Henry the eight, yet GOD had his hand in the work:
And though he had not been at all, yet God would have provided him means to
do that that was done. Therefore, in the reformation of England, we should not
look to the time of Henry alone, but to five or six Ages preceding, wherein
that Kingdom was long grievouslie oppressed by the Popes, but the fullness of
the Popes cup, and Gods just anger, to break his power in that Kingdom did
meet together in that time.

In like manner, the King of Navarres Posterity paid the Pope home again for
his excommunication; they were stirred up with private hatred, and syded with
them who co^spyred against the Sea of Rome. By their forwardness, the truth
was first spread abroad in France, and to this day they have been shaking
France from the obedience of Rome; and who knows, but some branch of that
stem shall help to give the Pope his fatal stroke in France also.

Let us hear from a bygot Papist, what vantage Pops have made by their
tyranny over Kings: Event us rerum (says he) satis docent nihil proficere
Pontifices dum hac -- via incedunt -- The event has clearelie proven to this
day that the Popes have profited little, while they walk in this high,
slipperie and steep way: But they rather make broils, schisms, and wars in
Christian Nations, then propagate the Faith of Christ, etc. And when he has
reakoned out the pernicious course of Gregory the seventh against Henry the
Emperor, of Boniface the eight against Philip, of Julius the second against
Lodowicke the twelth, of Clement the seventh, and Paul the third against Henry
the eight, of Pius the fifth against Elizabeth, etc. Then he inferres: Did not
all these Princes contemn and mock the Papal Impyre as an intolerable pride?
nonne hi Quicquid h^reticorum est in Gallia, etc. Id. Epist dedicat.
omnes Principes papale illud Imperium ut meram arrogantiam riserunt. And
concludes, that that tyranny was the cause of the overthrow of Popery. And
in another place he affirms, that the strength of the Protestants in France
and Britain is hatched of the miserable heat of the Popes temporal power.
This testimony is true, and out of their own bosom.

This is like the ruin of old Rome, she forced out her Now Roms ruin is
like old Romes.
tyranny on far Countries, and her furthest extension met with the greatest
opposition of mighty Nations, and had in it the period both of her furthest
reach, and the beginning of her ruin; as the sea mark is both the point of
the highest flowing, and the beginning of the ebb. So when she streached out
her self to Britain, Saxony Persia, etc. In Gods time she began to find
her stresses there, and was compelled to call home her Legions to guard her
Quod in Anglia vide mus accidisse etiam in aliis regnis, etc. Causab. ad Front.
p. 71.
head and heart, Italy and Rome it self, from the inc^ersion of the
Barbarians. So now Rome stretching out her ambition to far Countries, has
found her curbing to begin there, and in Gods time by reformation (which is
her consumption) she will be put to the defense of her Antichristian Seat,
which in end shall fully be destroyed. The Pope is the Child of perdition.


This is the measure of his cup: He is called, the child of perdition, first
actiuelie, because he destroys men's Souls by herefie, and their bodies by
persecution, and sounds nothing but destruction: Santarellus the Jesuit
discovered a secret, when citing the Apostles text, that 2 Cor. 1^ 8.
he had power to Edification, but not to destruction, he left out the word of
Edification, to tell that the Popes power is only for destruction: And though
he was justly censured by the Sorbone, yet their practice goes broad Ierem.
1. 10.
according to his reading, and they inculcate for that same end, the words of
Jeremy, I have sent thee to root out and destroy. Next, he is the child of
perdition passiuelie, because God will destroy that Destroyer: Do to her as
she has done to other. It is his doom, that Kings Revel. 18. and 17.
shall eat up her flesh, and burn her with fire. And yet he is so blinded,
that he falls in controversies with Kings, and by that provocation
sharpeneth them as Gods instruments, to his own destruction.

But in this time their prevailing against the Protestants Their oppressing of
Protestants hasteneth their destruction.
seems to stay the course of their destruction. But indeed it is a
furtherance of it: God is justly punishing Protestants for their contempt and
abuse of the restored Light: And their sins are now greater, than in the time
of darkness: Yet the Pope also therein is filling his cup, and like Pharaoh
hardening his heart, both to hold Gods people in thrall, and to pursue them when
they depart. God has charged his people to come out of Babel, and many Revel.
^8.
have alrea lie obeyed: This inrageth the Pope, for he sees that his lies and
deceit by Jesuits and Emissaries cannot recall them, who have departed from
him, therefore he uses the force of Arms to destroy them, and in so doing
hasteneth his own ruin, for the blood of the Saints that he spilleth lik
water, fills up the cup fot his destruction. Every drop of that blood like
Abels cries for a vengeance: Salmanasers prevailing over the ten Tribes was a
forerunner of his overthrow, and Nebuchad^ezars carrying of the Jews captive,
brought ruin to his own Monarchy: Dan. 5.
While the Pope now like Balthazar is insulting over God and his Church, he is
but hastening destruction on himself: God has stricken that Beast to the
ground by the hammer of reformation, and his present broils are sturring of
his horns and hooues to be up again, but he will never recover his former
grandour. It is more like his vltimus conatus, his last pressing, preceding
his destruction, than a kindly recoverie. They have wrought their hearts to a
strange hardness against their destruction: Baronius laid these grounds, that
their seat non potest destrui, no not superabundanti peccato. And though he
grant that Baron Ann. 900. n. 2.
the abomination of desolation was in it, Ibid. and Monsters sat on it, yet
(says he) there remained a Church. 899 This is a pillow for them to sleep
to death.

This argues an imminent ruin, as Homil. 3. in Ierem.
Origin observes: Rome senseless of her ruin.
When a great disease (says he) takes a man as now Babylon which is confused
with the wound of her own malice, then God is hastening to punishment. Capitur
Babylon and non agnoscit: Babylon is taken, and knows it not: And a sick man
the nearer to death, the further from the knowledge of his sickness says S.
August. This their senselessness is confessed: Satan keeps us in captivity
(says their Onus Ecclesiae) and has bereft us of sound judgment, that Onus
Eccle. l. 17. n. 26.
we know not how we have offended, neither ponder our sin, nor see the
punishment ready for us. And he gives the reason in another place: Because
the vial of ignorance of the own state is powered out on the seat of the
beast, That Ibid. cap. 18. initio.
we see this their state better than they, one of themselves has told us. The
Babylonians (says he) sees not Babels burden, but only they who are in
Jerusalem. Pint. in Esai. 13. c. 13. Hieron epist. 26. inter August.
The like Jerome notes of their Predecessors, that when the Goths took their
Town, they fought not to God, but to humane help. And S. Austine, that while
the world pitied their ruin they were seeking stage plays, and laughing in
the Theater: And Salvianus says, The Roman people is Salv. Lib. 7.
drunk with the Sardonick herb moritur and ridet, they die and they laugh.
They feel a decay, and take not up the cause Cypr. de. lapsts.
of it to be their Apostasy, Si cladis causa cognoscitur and vulneris medela
invenitur, says Cyprian: So long as they will not see the cause, they will
not repent.

CHAP. XXVI. That now- Rome is incurable.
GOD has gone so far on with them, as to consume Reformation were their
happiness.
them in a part, and there restes no more, but to go on till their final
abolition: In this case it were their happiness to repent and reform
themselves: But what hope can there be of reformation since they have wedded
themselves to their wickedness, and God has given them over to it: The vyall
is powered out upon the seat of the Beast, and his kingdom is full of the
darkness of fear and sorrow, that Apoc. 16. 10
makes them gnaw their tongues for pain: And they blaspheme the God of
Heaven, because of their pains and sores, and rail against his truth, and
yet repent them not of their deeds. The Pope stays reformation.


There is no greater stay of this reformation than the greatness of the Pope:
For corruption, he is as the head of the Item dicet nos ingenue fateri etc.
Hadrian. 6. ad Franc. Chereg. apud* Fasc. Rer. 173.
fish that rotteth first, and then infecteth all the body. So Hadrian the fixed
directed his Legate to confess ingenuouslie in his Name that God had sent
persecution on his Church for the sins of men, and chiefly of the Priests
and Prelates of the Church -- for we know (says he) that in this holy seat for
some years many abominations have been, abuses in spiritualie, excess in
commandments, and in a word, all things perverted. Neither is it to be
wondered if this sickness have descended from the head to the members. All we
(to wit, Prelates of the Church) have declined every one to his own Omne^nos
(id est pralati Ecclesiastici) declin avimus, etc. ibid.
way, and for a long space there is none that has done good, no not one: And
for reformation, the Pope is as the head of the Conie, when all the body is
flaine, the skin sticks at the head so it is more easy to reform all the
body of Popedom than this head. If he would return to his primitive State
to be a preaching Bishop over the City, and his Ecclesias suburbicarias, In
such a case we might say of him, as Lactance did of old Rome. If she would lay
down her Lactantius.
Monarchy, adantiquas casas redundum esset. Then there might be some hope of
a reformation, but he keeps Bernard.
the Roman temper of whom justly it was said, Romani regnare sciunt, regi
nesciunt: He will not reform one jot, but verifieth Ambrose, saying, that a
continual and long Continua and diuturna potentia, gignit insolentiam, etc.
Ambros. hexam. lib 5 cap. 15.
power begets insolency. For what man will we find who of his own accord
will lay down his Impyre, and Ensigns of his Government, and of a first in
number can willingly be made last.

It is not Religion he strives for, but his triple crown, and his exorbitant
power over all, is dearer to him than The Pope cares not for Religion.
his life, and it is the Jesuits doctrine, that they who deny that power would
throw Popery out of the Church. And Paul the fourth made this good, when he
offered to Queen Elizabeth of happy memory to ratify the Inglish
reformation, Negare non possunt nisi qui Pontificatum plane tollunt, Cydon
Consut. An ticot. cap. 2
if she would but acknowledge his Supremacy. So he will rather mix Heaven
and Earth than lay down his greatness, and as Menelaus an usurping high
Priest, was the greatest impediment to Judas Machabeus in reforming and purging
the Temple, So is the Pope the greatest impediment of Christian reformation.
Many inquire what is the greatest controversy that holds us and Papists at
ods, and some think idolatry, others the Mass or Transubstantiation. Some
free will, Merit, Justification, Purgatory, etc. But this is the greatest,
even the Popes Monarchy: For if Protestants would acknowledge him to be a
Spiritual and Temporal Monarch, I make no question but he would subscriue
other controverted points. They plead that the Pope is the best bond for union
of the Church, and Canus Can. lib 4. c ult. and 6. 3.
affirms, that the Apostle speaking of the offices of the Church did forget
that whereon her union most depends, that is Pope. But beside that blasphemy,
the contraire is clear: For he is the root and life of this Schism.

They talked indeed much of Reformation, and made The Con^cell of Trent a
mockery of the world. Council. 9. Car. Council. 3. Ep. Pestremo sancta ynod^^
omnia -- declarat ita decreta esse, etc. Council. Trid. sess. 25. cap. 22.
a fashion by Cardinal Campegius to reform Germany, but he meddled with
trifles and no substance; and nine Cardinals offered a plat-forme of
reformation to Paul the third, and three Bishops of Bononia gave him a more
full one, but he suppressed them both, and at the Trent Council they mocked
the world, both promising and pretending reformation, but they strengthened
their deformation: They turned private and School opinions in points of Faith,
confirmed their own heresies, and condemned the truth by their Anathemaes:
They mended no point of Doctrine but multiplied Chapters of reformation of some
abuses, and in end to mock the world, cast the execution of all in the Popes
hand. Lastly, the holy Synod declares that all statutes of reformation are
so decreed, that the authority of the Apostolic Sea be safe The meaning of
that clause may be found in the instructions of Julius the third, to
Crescentius one of his Legates in the Council: That there Neque si quid in
praesens largiatur. etc. Hist. Con. Trid. lib. 4.
was no great pe^rell, though for the present he yielded to some things
hurtful to the Court of Rome: Of which sort some things before were granted:
and that because things might easily be brought to a former estate so long as
the Popes Authority was safe and intere. So the Popes Cabinat instructions,
and the Councels exemptions of the Popes authority do mutuallie expone other,
and both of them are but gross Iudifications of the world.

Some Popes indeed had good desires of reformation, Hadrian the sixth sought
reformation.
but they turned to naught: Hadrian the sixth did intend it seriously, but by
Cardinal Soderinus he was diswaded, For (said he) it is not to be hopped
that the Lutherians Animam ad-Ecclesiam fa di^ abusibus ^corruptam restituend
u^^ adiecrat. On^^. vit. Had. 6. Vsu venire -- postulata postulatis accumulans,
etc. hist or. Council Trid. lib. 1. So did Marcellus. 2. Post longum in prandio
silentium, etc. Onuph Vit. Marcell. 2.
can be satisfied by the reformation of the manners of the Court of Rome, and
that in all humane things it is found, that when one is satisfied in one
desire, he multiplieth desires upon desires -- that the former Popes walked in
a more sure way for they cutted not away heresies by reformations, but by
Cruciatas instirring up Princes and people by force to oppress Heretics as
Innocentius the third, destroyed the Albigenses in France; By these and other
difficulties Hadrian professed that the condition of ^opes was miserable,
because they could not do good when they would most.

Mercellus the second intended also reformation, as is plain by his speech at
dinner after long silence: I see not how they can be saved, who have this most
eminent place But that Seat could not brook him above twenty days, it
either chocks the very thoughts of reformation, or else them who breed them.
These two are in the Line of Popes, as good motions in a natural man, that
begin and end at once: It was their personal commendation to be so
disposed, but the conviction of that Seat that it is incurable. But as Bernard
said to Engenius, non ambigo te ista deplorare, at frustra istud, si non and
emendare studueris. Bernard de Consid. Lib. 1.
I know thou deploreth these things, but that is for naught, except thou study
to mend them. So say I of these two comparatiuelie good Popes, where was their
omnipotency that they did not exert it as they do against the Protestants?
Are they weaker in good than in evil? But the truth is that Rome is
incurable, and past reclaming.

If any good thought be in them while they are private They are better private man
than Popes.
men, it is choked so soon as they sit on that Seat; As Aeneas Silvius spoke
and wrote goods things in the Council of Basile, but being Pope Pius the
second, he recanted Seducti, pecca vim^^ ut Paulu^ etc. bull. Retract. Pii. 2.
them, saying, That he had sinned as Paul, and persecuted the Church
ignorantly, etc. But we say, that he was rather first Pius, and then impius,
for his greatest piety in his Popedom was to canonize Bernardinus, and
Catharine Bulla. 3. Pii.
of Senes his country woman, and to abrogate appellations to councels. So Paul
the fourth when he was but Petrus Theatinus was an vrger of Hadrian the sixth
to reformation, S. Inquisitionis, officium -- quo vno niti affirmabat. Apost.
sedis authorittatem eis commenda vit Onuph, vit. Paul. 4. In Gregorium 12.
invehitur etc. Azor. moral. lib. 5. cap. 15.
and had chief hand in the Council of nine chosen Cardinals, by Paul the
third. But thereafter being Pope, he was the most cruel vrger of the
Inquisition, and on his deathbed recommended it as the special prop of the
Popes authority. And of Gregory the twelve. Azorius tells that one inveyed
against him, because in the time of a great schism, before he was made Pope,
he swear solemnedlie in public, that if he were made Pope, he would lay
down the Popelie power: But afterward being chosen Pope he would not lay it
down. They are now more like Pius the second, Paulus the fourth, and Gregory
the twelth, than like Hadrian and Marcellus: That Seat infects them with
wickedness, that they are not like these men they were in private, and since it
is the property of that Court, that Curia Romana potius recipit, quam facit
probos, it must be the privilege of that Seat it self, the fountain of
that contagion.

I doubt not but many of the best sort wish that their They see their error,
but will not mend.
Predecessors had not gone so far on in heresy or tyranny: They are like
men by unskillful Sailers cast in such a danger as they cannot easily expede:
And with Caesar at the flood of Rubicon, they think the Dice is cast,
according to Soderinus counsel, they resolve to hold all fast as it stands,
and wait upon the event. All their doing for reformation is either in trifles,
as by Campegius: or else gross mockery of the world, as in the Council of
Trent: or if they do any thing reallie, it is worse than these: so their
Franciscans are refined in Capuchins; the Capuchins in Recollects: The
Dominicans in Jesuits: The Jesuits in Nerians: A llrefining is but advancing in
a greater degree of hypocrisy, cruelty, and what may either blind or destroy
man.

Cardinal Boromaeus, Experience can tell how they Boromeus instance.
are set for reformation: He intended to reform ordinem humiliatorum and to
reduce them to their first estat: But they took that intention so evil, that
they stirred up one Hieronymus Farina to kill him, who discharged a small gunne
on him at his prayers, but killed him not. Therefore Pins the fifth abolished
the order, In tanti sceleris execrationem totum ordinem abolevit. They cannot
endure reformation, but cutted off Hadrian and Marcellus, Thuan. Continuat.
Ann. 1610. p. 130.
who minded it. Who can tell when their ^vtter abolishing shall close all?

Pertinacie in one man makes him wilfully to insist in his errors: And
pertinacie in a succession of more men makes the successors wilfully to
defend the known faults of their Ancestors: So is it now in that Seat of
scorners: They know the errors of preceding Popes, and their own
wilfulness, and yet will persist therein, scorning both God and man. Thus
now-Rome is incurable and reserved to the punishing hand of God.

I close this point of reformation with Portugalius, writing of the abuses of
the Church of Rome, and urging Portugal. Aur spec. p. 460.
reformation; but considering in humane judgment, that it was a desperate
thing, and craved the hand of God, he concludes with this prayer, The only
begotten Son of God reform his own Church; reformet vnigenitus Dei filius
suam Ecclesiam.

CHAP. XXVII. Of their treacherous Practices in France.
IT would now seem that after so many Effronts in this France is their
Butcherie.
unhappy Usurpation and in the time of so great discoveries of their
wickedness, and decay of their greatness, they would either change or relent
their course: But there is no such matter, for this last age has seen some
strange practices thereof, and that either executed or attempted. Their
cruelty executed in France is not our: The Massacre of Paris is their shame,
we may say, Their fained peace strove with war and prevailed. Pax ficta cum
bello de crudelitate certavit and vicit: For these Civit. 3. 2^.
last years they have made that floorishing Kingdom a wonder to the World,
and astonishment to it self: They found the two Francises, Henry the second
and Charles the nynth according to their heart, to maintain Popery and
repress the truth: But after the Butcherie of Paris, their rage increased at
the reviving Truth, and therefore set forward to the like massacres; and
finding Henry the third unfit for their cruel purposes, Their cruelty on
Henry the third.
they cut him off to serve themselves of the D. of Guise, who was lutum
sanguine maceratum, Clay knedde with blood. He was indeered to the Pope for
the massacre of Paris, and the Cardinal his brother, thought it a cause to
thank God that his house was honored to be the instrument of Cardin. Lo^
thar. ^ractic. n. 1. Goldast. polit. 1139.
that massacre. Henry's catholic zeal could not save him, because he had not
a Iesuited zeal to destroy all the Hugonots; he agreed with them in all
points of Religion, but in this, his clemency and their cruelty could not
agree, and therefore, he must be killed.

When Henry the fourth arose, their rage was more Against Henry the fourth.
kindled, because of his Religion, and notwithstanding his formal
reconciliation to their Church, yet they ever kept their prejudices and
hatred to him: Their rage was not satisfied but doubled by Castellus his miss
and their banishment: And their desire to return, was not so much for the love
of their Country, as to have occasion to cut him off, and their hatred had
never a pause, till his death.

That same spirit is yet powerful in them: Though Their plots against Jews
the 13.
King Jews be zealous in their Religion, and (contraire to his clemency)
has been drawn by instigation to destroy many thousands of the Saints, yet
they are not Qui rebels juvat rebellionem juvat, quecirca j^st^ Dei judicio
reddetur etali^. Cornel. Cornel. ubi supra. Quest. 8. An. in tanta
perturbatione consultum con stituere, corregnantem, etc. hist. Jesuit. l. 4.
cap. 3.
satisfied with that is done: They perceive in him an halting, and therefore
are weary of him. They have boasted him to desist from his League with
Protestant Princes, (which they see a means to strengthen himself against his
common enemy) and have threatened him with rebellions and insurrections: They
have also given him an Admonition in nine questions disputed, whereof the sum
is, That if he relent in destroying the Hugonots in France, or assist the
Protestants in Germany, they shall set up with him, a coniunct King. And least
he should think that but wind, they stirred up Franciscus Martellus, a Priest,
near to deep like another, Ravilliacke to kill him, but God discovered the
Traitor, who before his suffering deponed that two Jesuits Guyotus and
Chapusyus were his Counselors and instigators. And lastly, they are brewing
a browst like the Guysian faction against Henry the third, and stirring The
extract of the old Guisian treason.
up his brother against him under color of Courtly miscontentments against
Cardinal Richli^u: And this is the corregnans, or coniunct King whereof their
Theses spak.

It is a wonder that so mighty a Kingdom should be so fearefullie shaken by
plots, and more that they see it and The Jesuits over^hrow Frence.
groan for it, and yet can not expede themselves of these snaires. There was
matter for redress, when Henry 3. was killed, but nothing answerable
followed: and Henry the fourth, had just cause of anger, and revenge by
Castellus stroke, but it turned to nothing; for when he had banished the
Jesuits, within five years, that martial King turned a pleader for their
restoring. Becan Exam. Concord. p 29.
And after his death, when (b) Cydon, refut. Antico^t. c. 1. Thuan.
the presumptions of their treason were pregnant, they threw from the young
King a declaration of their innocence, and a condemning of the Booke-seller
that dispersed the Copies of it: Thuan. Continuat. Ann. 1610.
And when the Nobility did their best homage They destroy their discoverers
to their dead King, to kiss his heart, affecting to show their lone in
marking their months Audit Hericu^ Regem ita nostrorum opera delectatum, etc.
Cydon. ibid page 44.
with the blood of it, the Jesuits by right of a pretended, or (if it was true)
an ominous Legacy of his heart left to them, carried it to their College of
Laflex; and that not so much in the sorrow of funerals, as in the joy of a
triumph, for that they had found such a morsel for the pains of their long
hunting. It were an hard matter to determine whether the hearts of the
Nobility were more grieved, or the hearts of the Jesuits more over-ioyed
about the Kings heart, but sure it is that the Jesuits gloried of it.

In that common sorrow Abbas Sylviu^ the Abbot of They burn at Rome, what
France spares.
Boes in the just grief of a loyal heart, when he considered the Jesuits
Problem: An fas esset tyrannos occidere, if it were lawful to kill tyrants,
and how Marianas and such Books were in the hands of people, he turned him to
the Jesuits in his Sermon, and exhorted them that they would provyde that no
Book passed under the name of Thuan. Continuat. Ann. 1610.
their Society, and with the Superiors approbation, that might any ways
offend the French, Summo studio providerent ne ex ipsorum officina vllus liber
qui Gallos offenderet, prodiret, except they would expose themselves to such a
danger, which all their wisdom supported with authority and riches of their
favorers could not eschew, The Jesuits took that grave admonition so hardly,
that they complained to the Queen, and made him to be sharply rebuked: But
what they could not do at Paris, they effected at Rome, when they caused him
to be put to death there: whereof some accused them -- because that he was
the first who after the Kings death reproved them out of Pulpit, albeit in the
funeral oration which he published, he left out the speech that he directed
to them. Quida^ Iesui tas accusaba^t -- propterea quod primus post mortem Regis
ipsos insectatus est. Thuan. Con.
This was a Iesuitish trick, that they who should have been punished for
treason, turned the punishment of it on them who challenged them. It is like a
new devyce of Bellarmines, who Thuan. Continuat. Lib. 2. p. 53.
seeing how odious the Jesuits are made to the world by their wickedness laid
open in sundry Books; suggested to the Pope, and his Consistory that a new
censure of Books should be institute to raze and purge out all things that
were written against them. A devyce of a gnawing Conscience, for though all
these Books were burnt. yet the treachery of that order will be known to
Posterity.

Let France consider her estate. Before Jesuits arose, they France Iesuited is
become treacherous.
were loyal to their Princes. But since Spain thirsted for that Kingdom (as
his great stay of the European Moarchie) and has as many friends in her
bowels as Jesuits, there is nothing, but Leagues, Plottes, and Factions formed,
and every faction ending in the killing of a King. The Sorbone stands yet in
her honesty, but can do no more, than a School censure, and is borne down
by the incroaching of the Jesuits on her, to punish her for her former loyalty
to Kings. The ancient forwardness of the Court of Parliament seems to be
relented, since the Jesuits Schoolers have place there. The process of
Ravilliacke was so tepide, that they seemed to fear nothing more than to find
out the truth: What was it to burn Marianaes Book? and such like after that
murder, or to tell their discretion to the world in condemning Bellarmines,
book but not burning of it for their respect to his Cardinalshipe: Curia
Regia. Librum Bellarmini condemnavit, nec tamen exempla Hist. Jesuit. p. 179.
eius in Cardinalis honor concremari voluit vti Marianae and Suar libris
factum est. The death of Kings would make men forget such respectuous
distinctions: The Jesuits go on in their business, and contemnes such paper
censures, But ex-Iesuited shall be loyal.
they know the event and punishment will be no more, but a Magistralis censura
of the Sorbone and an honorarie punishment of the Parliament, in making the
Author to burn his Book. Such Paper-bridles are too weak to ride so
hard-headed a Beast: They will as little preserve their living Kings, as
restore them when they are killed.

Some may think strange, that seeing both France and Why Spain is more beloved
of the Pope than France. Orat. vera p 41. Vita Ignat p. 69 Debemus orar^ Deum
noctes and dies ut servet qua^ dintissime, -- Philippum Regem Catholicum qui --
potentia ad insinitum ma^ore quam vnquam fuerit in mundo ullius Regis est
propugnaculum ad defensionem Religionis Catholica. The standing of France and
the Jesuits incom patible.
Spain are popish, how it is that the Crown of France is worse handled, than
the other? We read of no treason plotted against the Kings of Spain, nor
League maintained in their Countries; but contraire; that he does foster a
League in France against it self, and while he is in security, France is
daily in hazard. The reason is, Spain is fitter for the Popes end; and the
Jesuits (who swey all) are hispanized: They count Spain the special pillet of
the Catholic faith, and the Protector of their order, and therefore pray day
lie for that King. This may be called the Jesuits fifth vow, to seek the
Spanish greatness, for though he were a French, English, ^cot, etc. Yet so
soon as he is Iesuited, he would kill his native King, (even though he were
popish) for the grandour of Spain: There have been more treasons executed
against the French King, than all the Kings in Europe; for though they be
Popish, yet they are a bar to Spain, and a thorn in the Jesuits eyes. The
fancied fifth Monarchy is a fit stoop for the decaying Hierarchy.

We may say of the Pope as Augustus said of Herod, when he heard that he had
killed his own Son amongst the Babes of Bethlehem, that it was better to be
Herod's Sow than his Son: There is no King worse entreated of the Pope than
his first borne most Christian King: That floorishing Kingdom seems now to
be drawn to some period, which can have none other end, but either her ruin,
or the riddence of her disturbers: Let not France think to brook her ancient
liberty and peace, so long as the Jesuits nest in her bowels: Her floorishing,
and their standing in her, are both incompatible and impossible: It is
weakness in Princes to think by Courtesy to gain them, who for the
Character of their order, have odium Vatinianum, an irreconciliable hatred
against all Princes, that will not idol the Pope and Spain.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of their cruel attempts against VENICE.
THeir two attempts were against Venice and great The Venetian question.
Britain: They minded the overthrow of the liberties of Venice, but States are
not so soon killed as persons. Padre Pauli lib. 1. Of the quarrels of Pauli.
5. interdictum contr. Vene^os.
Pope Paul the fith his quarrel with the Venetians was vile and flagitious,
he sought occasion to manifest his omnipotency against them, and waited not
on an honest cause of contest, but took the first that offered, and commanded
them absolutely, to set at liberty two Churchmen, whom they had justly
imprisoned: The one was Scipio Sarraceno, a Chanon of Vincenza, for purse wing
a woman's Chastity even in the Church, and other villainies: The other was
Brandolino Valde-marino, Abbot of Nerves, who was a Magitian, and studied the
Art of composing exquite The Pope patronizes villainy.
poison, and had thereby cut off his Brother his Servant, and endangered his
Father. It was not unlike to the quarrel of the Thessalonicians against
Theodosius Officers, for imprisoning a Coatch-man deprehended in adultery,
whom the people would have enlarged. Hildebrand colored his treason and
disloyalty with the cover of the Cleargies Chastity: But Paul the fifth
coming on the stage acted that same part of usurpation, by defending the
villainies of the Clergy. He commanded the Venetians also to repeal some
Laws which they had made to restrain the profuse dotations of their subjects,
whereunto the cunning avarice of Jesuits had induced them: And because they
stood to their liberties, he put them rashly under an interdict, which when
their Clergy, and other Orders would not acknowledge, the Jesuits (whose
Avarice occasioned the Law) by virtue of their fourth vow of blind obedience to
Navar* Ma nual. cap. 27 ^. 244. Lancel^^ Instit* lib. 4* ^4 The Venetians
wisdom and courage Edict. Vene^contr. Interdict. Paul. 5
the Pope, maintained the Interdict, least they should incur irregularitie.

But the Venetians opposed so worthily, that the Pope repented his attempt,
they managed the matter wisely every way by the Edicts of their Senate and
Writtes of their loyal Divines: Padre Paulo. Spalat. Vendrame* Marsil.
Crassus. etc.
The storm brake up upon the faulty members of their Republicke, and the
Jesuits were found in their treason, refusing their alledgeance, for to defend
her in their just cause: Therefore they were cast out as a pest of the
Republicke, and the Pope forced to put a fair face on a foul retreat: He
was glad in end to pack up the quarrel, and dissemble the blow, which as yet
is not cured. The Venetians would neither repeal their laws, neither admit
the Jesuits to this day, neither would enter in They reject the ^esuits simply.
capitulation for agreement, but upon this condition expresselie, that the
receiving of the Jesuits should not be mentioned at all. And inacted a Law
that they should not (b) Veueti -- semper declararunt causa Iesuitatum* esse
peculiare etc. Thuan. Conti^* 16 12 Paulus* 3 ordinem probavis. At n^^ per Ordo
ille a Venetis edict^ publico explosus. Can. lib. 5. cap. 5. The Popes
shameful retreat. Quarrels Paul. 5* lib 5.
be admitted for an hundredth years: The which Law they renew every year to
keep that centurie of their proscription whole. I think herein they repayed
the Pope the old indignity he did to their Orator Franciscus Dandalus whom
he caused lie under his Table as a Dog at Avenion. This was another proof
of the Venetians wit and valor against the Pope, the former was against Paul
the third, who approved an order institute by Baptista Cremensis, but they by a
public Edict scoffed and condemned it.

This was the end of the Popes brawle: Blind Pride devised it, Temeritie began
it, Pertinacie held it on foot, and Necessity forced him to retire with
shame, a few Cardinals with him raised this storm, but they could not lay it
again; that was a work of great Kings by their Ambassadors: His former
temeritie was turned in timorousness, he durst neither hold out against the
Venetians to the end, neither propone the Treatise of peace to the Consistory
fearing opposition, but to the Cardinals apart, and then told them in public
audience when all was ended, The Venetians stuck to their liberties, and in An
unlawful Procedor has an abrupt closure.
the closure, would not admit of any Ceremony that smelled of Absolution or
Benediction, least it should import guiltiness on their part: Neither would
they suffer in all their Dominions any sign of joy to be made by Bone-fire or
reigning of Bells, least it should be thought a formal reconciliation after a
just censure; but suffered a rash and unjust Interdict to be revoked by a
verbal declaration: The Cardinal Ioyeous sent by the Pope, declared that the
Pope revoked his interdict, and they gave him an Act of the revocation of their
Protestation: He kept no order in giving out an Interdict, and as little in
revoking of it, the pronouncing He broke his Laws.
was in spleen and passion and the retreat was in shame and confusion.

This was against their own Laws, for the interdicted persons should not be
received, unless first they satisfy for their fault, or that they give their
oath for fulfilling of the commandments of the Church, Desent. excom cap. Alma
matter.
But the late ^asuists Remittenda erit caut^^ turatoria. Seyrus. The saur* lib.
5. c. 15 n. 26. Vivald, Candel. p. 495.
help the Pope in this strait, Avila says, that that the Pope may relaxe an
Interdict by his inward Act alone, Papa potest solo actu interiori relaxare
Interdictum And Fernandes Fernand. part 2. c. 12, n. 22
affirms, that the Pope may absolve, albeit the cause cease not, and (a)
Rodrikez says, That one who is absent or unwilling may be absolved. All these
cases serve to cure the Popes folly: His intention is good enough to undo that
whereby he had plondered the world two (c) Potest absens vel invitus absolvi.
Rodrik part. 1 cap. 8. n 83 n* 13.
years: And while the Venetians held at the point of their innocence, and
would not be absolved by him, he was forced abruptly to declare them free.

But Becanus tells us, That they are ashamed of the matter, for when it is
objected, he frets and fumes, The Papists are ashamed of that quarrel.
saying, That since the matter is settled, it ought not to be wakened again,
because such doing is the work of seditious men: Ais venetos -- sed bis
peccas. 1. quia cum lis illa sopita sit tu illam tuo flabello resuscitare non
debes. Hoc seditiosorum hominum est. But I will serve him with his own
dilemmes. Either the Pope had a good cause in hand or a badde: If a good cause,
why did he quyte it so shamefullie? Where was his omnipotency that he could
not double out the defense of the great and maine Article of his faith: If he
had an evil cause, where was his omniscience and infallibitie, that they
suffered him to enter in such a quarrel? But the truth is, it was the
witless impotencie of his proud spirit. By their fretting they testify they
are ashamed of the cause, contest, and event. But if they had prevailed in this
contest, they would have put it in the Catalogue of the Popes victories over
Princes, and gloried in it, as they did of Dandalus subjection to Clemens the
fifth. Becan ex am con. 53. Recitemus pactum memorabile Dandali magna
panitentia magnum argume^tum Gretzer mist. Sal. 57. p. 462.


Thus was the Question and carriage of it vulgarly taken up, but God had a
secreit in it to give the Pope a foil The secrets of that quarrel.
at his own doors, and that not so much in the opposition and event as in the
cause which was not only avarice and pride, but most of all, the defense of
sorcerie and villante. Here in GOD would have the world looking on the Whore
in her own colors: Satan also blinded the Pope, that he saw no more, but to
pouse his power, and smyled in his sleeue when he brought Sanctissimus on the
Stage to patronize Villainy. It is their custom to act and maintain
villainies, and though they confess John the tweluth to have been a monstrous
adulterer, yet they Baron. 983.
damn the Council that condemned him. Lastly, God was herein teaching the
possibility of the Popes curbing, when a petite state (in comparison of great
Kings) at his Elbow gave him an irrecoverable blow for his folly.

CHAP. XXXIX. Their cruel attempts in great BRITAIN.
THeir other attempt was in great Britain: They Their diverse assayes against
great Britain.
assayed it with all sorts of weapons. First, by the wind of cursing Henry the
eight, and Elizabeth: But that proved evil wind to the blower: Next, by Water
and Rex Phil. Pont. sui instituti fecit certiorem: qui illud quam maxim lau*
davit, Regiq. animum addi* dit cum promissione se ubi classis in Insulam esset
appulsa certam pecuniae summam ad bellu^ continuandu^ suppeditaturum* Cicarel.
Vir. Sext. 5. Plat 391. Onuph. Iuli. 3 Cicar^ Greg. 13.
Sea, by their great Armado, wherein Sixtus the fifth ( a) had his hand, but
God scattered them, and made the winds and Seas fight for this Yland: Thereafter
they pressed to bar K. James entry by Brieues perindiciall to his
Succession, but when they saw they prevailed not, they pressed to flatter him,
at least to feed themselves with hope of toleration: And when that failed,
they turned to their wonted practice of treason, and labored to kill him
before his Coronation: And when God disappointed them therein, and all hope of
toleration was lost, they went to extremity and fetched from hell the devyce
of the powder plot. Some thing lik was attemped in Florence, and Lisbone and
lately in Genua, but they are nothing to this, for these were Papists against
Papists, and their ground was civil miscontentments, but here Religion was
the cause, and that against a King, a Queen, Prince and flower of all the
Estates of a Kingdom, and many Papists also. These were against some few foes
only, but this was to blow up friends with foes, and not to give them leave
to think of God at their death, but in one instant to be Breathing, dead, and
evanished without Burial. But GOD turned this Mine upon the Miners to discover
and overthrow the depths of Rome.

This brought the matter of usurpation again on the King James his Royal
pleading.
Stage with a new and singular sort of acting: Before, it was disputed by
Divines and Lawyers, but then by the pen of a King, and while other Kings were
either killed in the question, or being alive durst not or could not debate
it, God set up a living and learned King on a throne to plead his cause.
Strangers acknowledged his furnishing with wisdom and learning, as far as
any King since Solomon. Iacobus 1. Mag. Brit. Rex omni laud mayor eminet, adeo
ut cum Solomone sapientissimo certare posse videatur. Angel. de Polit* Discip.
And that our Age has seen him only among Princes, plenished with all
knowledge, and beloved of them for his most learned works. Nov. hom. E^ is it.
dedicator.
Cum autem nostra aetas te solum augustissime Princeps incomparabili felicitate
sortiatur, qui excelsamente -- doctissi mis lucubrationibus omnium Principum
animos tibi conciliasti. And himself, professes that God had raised him from
an obscure Kingdom to a greater, that from so eminent a place the world might
hear him pleading for the truth. King James against Cardinal Perron. Fol. 1
Two glorious Titles concurred in him: First, the title of Defender of the
Church, from the Crown of Scotland: And the title of Defender of the Faith
from the Crown of England. And God gave him a double measure amongst Kings, to
be one of his Worthies, and to lift up his pen against many hundredth Papists.

That royal Premonition dedicate to Princes was easily His premonition
vnanswereable.
vshered, coming from a Prince, but it cast the Iesuited Papists in a plunge:
Many of them railed against it, as Bellarmine, Becane, Suarez, Cofteau,
Schioppius, and others, to the number of forty five, But it stands yet
vnanswereable, because they brought nothing against it, but their own
preiudicate and ran^ide Paradoxes. And the worthy Divines of England, under
such a Chiftane, have so tortured them in that argument, that they have left
the field. And whereas the Parliament and Sorbone censured some Books written
against it, they allowed it as a truth: And it was so welcome to the popish
Clergy of France, that they were ready to subscriue it all, except that one
point concerning Antichrist: And yet that is the most important point in it
all, and their scruple was only because then they were not so far enlightened
as to see that mystery, which in Gods time they will subscriue as well as the
other.

The event of this attempt was their shame, as we may They reported shame.
see by their proceedings: Beside, the Parliament of Paris censure against
these forenamed Books. Claud. Aquaviva the general of the Jesuits, condemned
Becanus Book of the controversy of England So soon as that Book Aquaviv Ep^d
Baltas Pro ^in^ial. Fran. Ann, 1613.
(says he) came hither, and some thing was found in it which might better
been otherwise spoken or else omitted, we sent unto you these Notes of our
censure, that it may be me^ded, etc. Cum primum huc liber ille pervenit idque
in eo deprehensum est -- censurae notas remisimus. And in his Epistle to P.
Cotton ^rrore factum est quod vehementer doluimus, etc Id. Epist. ^a^ P. Cott.
We are sorry that it is so evil fallen out, that Becans book was not sent
hither to be corrected -- but we have caused such things to be noted, and
sent to him, as ought either to be delete or corrected.

Pope Paul the fifth with his Cardinals, In quo nonnulla falsa, temeraria, etc
Censur. Paul 5. in lib. Becan. Ann. 1613. Claud. aqua. vi^. Epist. Aug. 1614.
give their censure, that in Becans book are many things false, temerarious,
scandalous, and respectiuelie seditious. But Aquavivas mandatorie Epistle to
his order discovers their mind more fully (which the Jesuit fisher makes
the ground of his Tergiversation in refusing to give direct answer concerning
loyalty to Princes) We command our order (says he) by the virtue of holy
obedience, and under pain of excommunication -- that none of our order
publicly or privatlie by Lections and Council, far less by writting
books presume to affirm that it is leasome to kill Kings, etc. Praecipitur in
virtute S. obedientiae -- ne quis nostrae Societatis -- affirmare praesumat
licitum esse Reges occidere. And in another place In virtute* obedientiae
ne*^vulgari Pacia^turqui^ quam in quo de potestate, etc Id. Epist. 2 Aug. 1614.
By the virtue of obedience it is enjoined to the Provincials, that they suffer
nothing to be put out by Jesuits, concerning the Popes power above Kings, etc.

These censures was extorted from them by force of Conscience and out-crying of
the world, wherein may be Their Palinodie:
seen their policy, in that they condemn respectiuelie such Books, and not
simply: And their mocking of Princes, that while they condemn these Books,
they allow the Doctrine and honor them who maintain the like: For Bellarmine
Baronius Frustra aliquid moderationis ab il la Civitate expectari, in qua
Illus. Card Bell. and tot al^ m^norum gentiu^ etc. Casaub. Epist. Front. Duc.
p. 59.
Bozius, Marta, etc, were in great respect at Rome, and daily venting their
treasonable Paradoxes, while these Censures were framing there: And Sixtus the
fifth, in the Consistory allowed the deed of Jacques Clement. But out of these
their Censures, we may raise three necessary conclusions. The first is. That
they utter their own diffidence, and the weakness of their cause, as their
own Lessius obiecteth Eo ipso diffidentiam* etc. Less. apud Withring. discuss
p. 279.
to them in a passion, because he durst not put to light a Book he had
written of that argument, and that for fear of punishment. The second, They
are either selfe-condemned Heretics, carrying their conviction in their
Conscience, or else damned Hyporites, condemning solemnly in write what they
approve in the heart. The third, That they yield the cause to us, and confess
that victory is on our side: When the Pope with his Cardinals and general of
Jesuits, call their Soldiers from the fields, and chyde them for using such
weapons as they put in their hands.

This was the end of their Powder-plotte, and the disputs The powder plot has
shaken Rome
of the authority of Kings occasioned thereby. So long as the fire of that
powder was in their head, they vexed the World with Books and Disputs. But
when their mines went wrong, and the fire and fume of that powder turned on
themselves, then the general of the Jesuits, and the Pope himself sounded a
foul retreat. Such a fearful silence is a palinodie in Print.

CHAP. XXX. The troubles of Germany and France are from the Pope.
NOtwithstanding of all their Effronts they go on in their former wickedness,
and have stirred up these late troubles in Germany, which (though they be
amassed Germanies troubles from diverse causes.
of sundry causes) yet the Popes hand is most in them.) Some look no further
than civil quarrels, others to the jealousy of France and Austria, which hold
Europe in business, but unequally: For France content with her own
Dominions, vindicats other people from Austriaes tyranny: And Austria sick of
the fancy of a sitfh Monarchy, vexes it self to oppress other. But the two
maine causes of these broils ( usurping over Princes, and rooting out of
Protestants) flow from the Pope. As for usurpation over Princes: He likes a
Monarchy for its The Pope an Incendiarie.
form, that he may borrow a color to his own Monarchy: But hates the
power of it, because it is more unite and strong against him, than Republics,
and because of his presage, knowing that his final ruin shall be by Kings.
Therefore he makes greater Princes depresse the lesser, and feeds discords
among the greater to weaken them mutuallie, and withal stirs them up to
destroy the Protestants.

Sometimes France was his first borne, when they cut Why he prefe^s Austria to
France.
off the Longobards and enriched Rome: But now since the Austrian power is
increased, by the continuance of the Impyre in that house, by the access of
the Low Countries, Portugal, America, etc. It seems fittest for his end: And
though he abuse the French King, in making him destroy his own Subjects by
wars and Massacres; yet (a) Rex Christianiss. dum distractus est in Subiectis
-- non potest aure^m praebere -- ut crescenti Hispa norum potentiae in Germania
se opponeret* Epist. C. Caraffa dat Vienn October. 1621. He fears Austria more
a special end of that business, was to bleare his eyes, that he should not
see the growth of Spaines greatness in Germany. This is Apostolic
simplicity forsooth, or rather a too great simplicity in the Frensh to weaken
themselves, and strengthen the enemy: And it is time for that King to open his
eyes, and see how he is abused, since God has discovered their secret plots,
though the Author of that Letter commanded to burn it so soon as it was read.

But yet the Pope fears Austria more than France: They have him closed
betwixt Naples and Milane, and within few days, may oppress him in Rome. And
Charles the fifth profaine policy is fresh in his mind, who held Clement the
seventh captive in Rome, and yet commanded the Clergy of Spain to pray for
his deliverie. He serves himself of the jealousies of these great houses,
and assists or deserts either of them as he sees occasion; and The Pope a
Iuglar plays fast or loose.
in all see keth his own security in their jarres: and when he saw the
Austrian to prevail for a time in Germany, he inclines now to France, not
in love, but for his own standing: This is his usual usurpation to serve
himself of Princes: He caused the Normanes expel the Greeks out of Naples:
When he wearied of the Normanes, he assisted the Germans against them: When
he wearied of the Germans, he brought in the Frensh: And last, stirred up
the Arragonians against the Frensh. When Nicolaus the second began that
work, Baronius called it, Divinum consilium, a divine counsel: So be like
these troubles of Germany, are a divine counsel with them.

With this usurpation over Princes, he intends mainlie the rooting out of
Protestant Religion, and for that He intends the rooting out of Protestants.
end, stirred up both France and Austria against the Protestants, which we may
perceive in his Resolutions and practice: His Resolution is with Innocent the
third, to destroy the rising truth: This has ever been in following Popes,
and fully concluded in Trent. The Cardinal of Lorraine Cardin Loath practic.
n. 1 Goldast. Polit. P. 1139
reveals the Conclusion of Charles the ninth, Philip the second, and the Pope
was ad exstirpandas Germaniae haereticos and novam toto Imperio formam
instituendam ex prescripto Pontificis; and is confident that the Heretics
being assaulted both at home and abroad, shall be They contemnet he Germans.
killed as beasts by Dogs sent amongst them, and no ways es^hew the snares:
And again, seeing there is so great a confederacy and power against
Heretics, both the Pope and Cardinals do exspect shortly so great a
mischief on them, as shall double the joy for the Massacre of Paris. As for
the Germans he says, that nothing is to be feared from these improvident
beasts, who know not their strength -- but shall perish before they perceive
their danger. And again, That they are so imprudent and senseless, that they
never mind to repel a common danger Adeo imprudentes and stupidos esse. Ibid.
n. 2.
by common force, but every one labors to defend their own privatlie. And
thereafter, There they are so stupide; that they know not their own danger,
till they be overthrown. This is the opinion of the Pope, and his Clergy of
the Germans, which imboldneth them to abuse Germany, as they do.

To effectuat this end, they have consederate the Emperor, Their policies. In
confounding causes. Epist. Caraff Cancel Hisp p. 112. Negotium mulium
concernens conservationem. etc. Epist. dat. Vien. 15. October. Ann. 1621.
Pope, Spain, Bavere, and the holy League (as they call it) even as the Pagan
Priests stirred up the Emperors to persecution, and contribute large money to
their Armies: So now does the Pope and his Clergy in the persecution of
Protestants. Their ways to work this end are, Policy, perjury, and
oppression. Their policy, first, they pretend civil causes, to hide the other
plot of persecution, and yet the Emperor discoverth it in his Letter to the
King of Spain: That their business concerned the conservation of the holy
Faith, and the standing of their House. And it is manifest, that long before
the sturres of Boheme, they were persecuting the Protestants in Westphalie ^614
in Silesia, 1614. and 161^. in some imperial Cities, as Ulme, Aken, Wesell
1614. in Donawerda 1617. in the Volteline, Stiria, and Bohemia it self 1618.
And the Bohemian wars were occasioned by these persecutions, when Gallobell.
they were driven to that desperate state in Religion, as to seek the
protection of some foreraine Prince.

Their second policy: They divided the Protestants, In dividing Protestants.
and drew a part of them on their side, as Charles the fifth did at the
Smalcaldicke war, and they boast of it, that the Protestants are so loose, that
many of them fight on the Papists side Cancel. Hisp p. 90.
In all their meetings they pressed to draw the Lutherans from the Calvinists
(as they call them) and used that speech, Sicut Catholicus, sic Lutheranus,
promifing as great quetnesse to the Lutheran as to the Papist, that when they
had broken us by the Lutherans, they might destroy them also. Some of them
contemned the D. of Saxe, as a man of no Spirit, Cancel. Hisp. p. 116.
but the most part feared him for his great power and therefore first ^ngaged
him by the offer of Lusatia: Next, they held him on to be Executor banni
Imperialis; And lastly* they fed him with the title of Vicarius Imperij: All
this was to gu^l him, as Charles the fifth did to Maurice his predecessor: So
their secret correspondence reveals that they studied by all means to please
him, that at least Vt saltem apparenter illi satisfiat. Cancel Hisp. p. 116.
In pretending peace.
i^ s^ow he might be satisfied.

Thirdly, in all meetings they ever treated of peace, to make the Protestants
careless: And while they were busiest in war, they protested Nos nihil nisi
pacem publicam quaererere Cancel. Hisp p. ^3. October. 1621.
most they were seeking the public peace: and when Armies were gathered on
both sides they fained a Cessation of Arms, to make Protestants disband their
forces; which being done, the Papists with their standing Armies seized on
some Provinces, as the Palatinate. Lastly, as they confounded Religion and
policy, so in policy they confounded the quarrel of the house of Austria
with the quarrel of the Impyre.

This was the rypenesse of a long plotted persecution, for Protestants at once
every where oppressed.
the Papists learned of Severus Canals, the art of Intelligence and myning:
He found them about the walls of Bizantium, and brought their Copy in this
Land, to his Dyke betwixt Forth and Clyde; They went so along the root of
it, that all Forts were advertised in an half hour, what the enemy was
doing, and where he assaulted. So the Jesuits turned their universal
intelligence (whereof their rules give a direction) to work mines in all the
Regulae Iesuitarum.
reformed Churches beyond Sea: In France, Boheme, Silesia, Moravia, Uolteline
Westphalie, etc. Princes were irritate; People were miscontent; the Papists
fretted at the prosperity of the Protestants; and Protestants abridged of
their own wonted liberties in Religion, and debarred from public
employments, and defrauded of the course of Law etc. Such a broyling
disposition was like powder laid abundantly in mines, that lacked nothing
but firing. In Boheme was their head-mine, because of the elective Kingdom,
and the exasperate minds of people for their crossing in Religion: Thereunto the
Jesuits laid the match of a new oppression to force the fire of defense. They
both sought and wrought this occasion Anno. 1619.
of the Bohemianes, and the meeting of all their Provincials at Rome, was to
devise how to use their opportunity, which they had long exspected. So soon
as Boheme fired, their mines played in all places at once, so that none could
either help another (as they were wont) nor save themselves. Thus the
Protestants were at one time every where oppressed.

Secondly, their perjury is manifest: For they come The papists perjury.
directly against their promise confirmed by oath. The Pacification of Passau
was solemnly ratified at Augsburg: And the Emperor Rudolph and Mathias
confirmed the 1552. 1555.
liberties of Boheme by Letters reversall (which in elective Kingdoms, are
strong obligements of Princes, and have the force of mutual contracts. And
Ferdinand the second by the like Letters, declarations and Edicts confirmed the
same: But most solemnly by his oath at his Coronation Capitulatio
iniur^^^rand^ confirmata France* furt. August. Anno. 1619. Art. 2.
did swear to maintain both the Sacred and civil peace of the Impyre. Ibid.
Art. 3 Ibid. Art. 9. Ibid. Art. 25 Ibid. Art. 26. Ibid Art. 34 Ibid. 38.
Tractat* Vlmensis ^^n. Aun. 1620.
That he would keep the Electours Princes, etc. in their possessions,
dignities, and rights. That he would keep friendship and good correspondence
in the Impyre, and not bring strange forces in it: That he would iniure or
offer violence to no Elector, nor Prince of the Impyre: That he would not
proscriue any unheard or without a cause: That he would not labor to turn
the Im^yre hereditarie to his house: And finally, that if he did any thing
beside or contraire to his Capitulation, it should be null, and of no effect.
In like manner, he promised often to the Duke of Saxon, and by him, to other
protestant Princes and Provinces, that he would not cross them in their
Religon and liberties. Likewise, the Duke of Baveere, and Princes of the popish
League, did swear to disband their Armies; not to invade any Protestants Land,
and to leave the questions of Boheme to their own hazard Let GOD and the world
judge how they have kept these oaths: When they feared a revolt, they sent
out declarations and Edicts for liberty of Religion; but when they prevail,
in wars, they turn to their oppression, No oath can ty them.
When the Pope sees his own vantage, he absolveth them from these oaths:
They keep their own maxim, non est servanda sides Haereticis, that faith
should not be kept to Heretics, which is as false in the These (because we
ought to keep our promise to all) as in the hypothese, Gretzer* de fid Her.
Beca^ man lib. 5. c. 12.
calling Protestants Heretics. And though Gretzer and Becane would gloss the
matter, yet their exceptions are such as make their oaths but roapes of sand:
For beside the case of fear or violence, whereby they prove the weakness of
these oaths, they refer the tryail of the lawfulness or unlawfulness to the
Pope, which is in effect to make oaths, no oaths at all.

Thirdly, their Oppression is manifold: When they Their oppression.
had taken in Boheme, and the Palatinate, they oppressed all other Countries,
and Provinces which had none entresse in the quarrel of Boheme, as Pomer,
Mekelburge, Brandeburge, etc. First, they urged them to inquarier Soldiers; if
they received them, they were subdued: If they refused, it was a quarrel to
take them by force. Secondly other Provinces and Cities which wanted Garrisons,
were exhaust with great contributions, as Hassen, Wirtenberge, Norinberge, etc.
And these contributions were to maintain Armies for oppressing the Impyre
under color of its defense. Thirdly, when force and poverty had subdued all,
they invented a new quarrel of the restitution of Ecclesiasticke goods, that
they might find a color of plea against some Protestants, who assisted
August. 1630 Epist. Anonym* de Commit Rati^bone^s.
them. Fourthlie, when this had a course, they devised a new Commission at
Regenspurg, to punish all these as traitors to the Impyre who assisted the King
of Denmark, Duke of Brunswicke or Count Mansfield: so there was no Protestant
whither he was their enemy or friend, or neutrall, but they devised a
quarrel to oppress him: A Lutheran and Calvenist was alike to them, and their
own distinction, sicut Catholicus sic Lutheranus was forgotten. And turned to
sicut Calvinianus sic Lutheranus, for when they had first driven out the
Calvinians, they banished the Lutherians also. Fifthlie, when all these
quarrels were Gallobel. September. 1631.
fished, they lacked a specious color against the Duke of Saxe whom they had
long gulled: Therefore they took occasion of it for the meeting of Leipswicke,
wherein the Protestants had conveened, to help their desperate case, and
prevent their final ruin. The Emperor made that a new quarrel, and Count
Tillie commanded the Duke to renounce the conclusions of Leipswicke, otherwise
they would handle him as an enemy: Of all protestant Princes, his Lands only
lay in integrity, and they reserved them as the last fat mo^sell to their*
Armies: Thus they fished quarrels against all Protestants, as the Wolf
drinking above the Lamb in that same strand, troubled the water, and
Melanct^^n.
yet accused the Lamb, and ran upon it. So the Papists troubled the
Fountain of the sacred and common peace, in cancelling Laws and breaking
oaths, and yet accused the Protestants of the breach of Peace. They made both
their* innocence, and blameless (though necessar defense) Austria an Usher to
Popery.
to be treasonable.

When Austria had increased her Monarchy, than Popery followed; The one was a
Coach to carry the other and they oppressed men both in Soul and body: They
denied them any Church benefit, Baptism Marriage* etc. except they went to
Mass: And where pacifications had provided Protestants to some places of
credit, Magistracy or Iudicatories, so soon as they died, their places were
filled with Papists. They banished them with this clause, That it should never
be leasome for them to return. And not content to persecute them in their
life, they denied them burial after death, except in their sickness they had
confessed, and taken extreme Unction.

They have followed Machiavell in their matchless Their cruelty.
cruelty: And let Palswach, Brandeburge* and Magdeburge stand to the
posterity as the proof of it: They destroyed August. Civ. 3. 26. Eusebius hist.
Lib. 8 cap. 12
young and old and Matrons with their Daughters cast themselves in the Rivers
to eschew their villainies. Eusebius has the like of a Matron in Antioch with
her two Virgin daughters* in Diocletians persecution. And as S. Austine
co^paring the cruelty of Sylla with the Goaths, said, That the Goths were more
merciful to Rome, than Sylla who was a Roman. So I may say, that the Turks
are more humane to Christians than Papists are. And though herein they
equalled Diocletian in cruelty, and exceed the Turks, yet they glory in it,
and Tillie proponed it to Leipsich, that unless speedily they rendered the
Town he would do to them as he had done to Magdeburge. But God within two
days took order with him for that bloody insulting.

Thus they wrought a pitiful deformation in all places: They urge ab^u^ation.
Preachers with the Gospel thrust out, and Priests with their Mass brought in:
Men compelled either to go to the Mass, or to sell their goods and leave
their Country: And if they remained, they were forced to take this following
Oath. In a godless ^o^^e.


I poor sinner, do confess before God, and all Saints, before the Priests
and Pastors of Souls standing in the place of God, that I have all my life
long gone astray in a cursed, execrable, and heretical Religion. And in the
Supper of that Religion, I receive nothing but plain Bakers bread, and plain
Wine in a Cup. I do also believe, that all my Ancestors and all others that
believed in that Religion and Faith are damned and perish for ever. Wherefore
I promise before God and the Virgin Marie his Mother, and before the Priests
and Pastors of Souls, being in the place of God, that I will never adhere
nor cleave to the cursed and heretical Religon. So God me save. This is
Antichristian cruelty urging poor people to deny the truth, damn
themselves, and condemn their Predecessors.

The world never saw a more deeply contrived Policy, People to deny the
Truth, damn themselves.
or a more cruelly executed plot: And doubtless by this cruelty Austria will
lose the hearts of Germany: And when God sends the Germans a deliverer, he
shall find their hearts, as Luther confessed by his own experience: That the
people gladly embraced him, because they had been oppressed with the Popes
tyranny. And Carolus Miltitius Legate to Leo the tenth, confessed that in
trying the Germane disposition, he found three inclining to Luther, for one
adhering to the Pope So did Cardinal Polus. Austriaes cruelty, their
overthrow* Their confidence.


They are confident for obtaining their end, and that both in respect of
themselves and us. For themselves, they have made a division as a thing ended.
That the Pope shall have his hierarchy established through all their conquest.
That the Emperor shall have for his partage the Eastern Provinces of
Germany. That the Spainiard shall have the Lower Palatinat with the Western
Provinces of Germany. That the Duke of Baveere shall have the over Palatinat
with the Electorall dignity. Moreover the evidencies Canc. Hisp. p 117. Octo.
An 1621 Prasi^, Scipion Scambat. lesuit. An. 1630 Com. Ratis. bon. 1630.
of their confidence break forth, and they had not prudence conceal it: For
Thefes were dispute at Vienne and dedicated to Ferdinand the third ( prevento
termino) with this frontispice.

Austriacum ad specimen si se componeret Orbis Irent obliqua sidera nu^^a Via.
This is as much, as if Europe would be happy, it must receive the Austrian
yoke: Herewith they ^ought closely Capitul Art. 34. Epist. ad Zunig^^ Ann.
1621.
to convoy the Election of the Emperors Son to be King of the Romans, to
establish an hereditarie tyranny in Austria. This was contraire to his oath at
his coronation. And notwithstanding of that promise his Letter under his own
hand told. That if he had one catholic vote more, they would make the Impyre
hereditarie to his House, and that Baveeres promoving to the Electorship were
the fittest Epist. Anon.
means so to do. And how strong their hope was in this point, may be seen
by a Book of congratulation for his Election to be King of the Romans, as
though the matter had been done without controlement: And the Jesuit Their
triumph. before the victory.
Scambato, is not content with Virgils words Magnae spes altera Romae, but to
encourage him to attempt, Aggredere, biddes him enter in, as though the door
of the Impyre stood open to him.

Ingredere, O Magnos aderit iam tempus honores. LAVREA AVSTRIACA. Impress. Ann.
162^.
Lastly, they have put out an hudge Volume with the title of the Austrian
Laurel, to tell the world of their semper victrices Aquilas; as though they
had gotten a piece of that Laurel which the Eagle let fall in Liviaes bosom.
But let not him that puts on his armor boast, as though he put it off: to
sing triumph before the victory, is foolishness, for no man knows what the
Evening or the next day may bring.

As for the Event concerning us, they prophecy our ruin: They prophecy our
Ruin.
Stella spoke indefinitlie, Lutherani, qui nunc tam elate and superbe vivunt
tam citissime erunt absumpti tanquam sal in aqua Ita vt nulla unquam sit
reliqua recordatio eorum, sicut Stella. Luc. 9. 20. Practic. apud, Gold ubi
supra.
nec aliorum haereticorum qui praeterierunt. The Cardinal of Loraine says,
That it was near hand. Some Jesuits have defined it within an hundredth years,
as Jesuit Ogilvie in a Conference in the Castle of Glasgow, Affirming* that
within an hundredth year ^^fter Luther skything, the Protestants Religion would
be abolished. And now since their Victories in Germany, they triumph over us,
as over a thing destroyed. So the Jesuit Cornelius Cornel. praefat Comme^t, in
Proph minor.
calls our Religion Calvini haeresin pene evulsam, an heresy almost rooted
out. And Urbane the eight in his Papal prescience doubts not but that
heresy will be shortly rooted out of France. But they may guess at the end
of their prophecies by the Rome pont and Card. incredidibili diligentia vaca^
re rebus Gallic^s, etc. Practic n. 3. An. 1573.
ardinals Alternatiue, for he with the Pope was persuaded that this would be
done either by Charles the ninth and Philip the second, or else never: Now God
has made him prove a false prophet, for these two Kings are gone, and the
truth of the Gospel is yet shining into the world; and we doubt not but
Urbane and Cornelius shall find contraire events of their predictions, and
possibly Laurea Austriaca shall succumbe under Arma Suecica.

This sort of prediction they have learned of the old But they should consider
old prophecies of themselves.
Pagans who not being able to refute Christian Religion by reason, nor expel
it by force, took them to predictions that it would not lest above 365.
years. Aug Civ. 8. 53.
But time has made them liars. If Papists would look to prophecies, we desire
them with Jerome to remember what is spoken of the purpoured colored whore,
and the destruction of Babylon which maugre all their futile exceptions, is
Now-Rome. Quid de purpurata meretrice, and Babylonis exit^ c^ntetur intuere
Hieron.
And if we would use a prophetical liberty, we might advertise the Jesuits,
to take heed to the 1640. year, that makes the period and Centurie since
their confirmation. The Templars alleged sins are yet secret, even after
their cutting off, but the wickedness of the Jesuits is manifest, and excites
Princes to take order with these fire brands of Europe. Austria and Spain are
as two threshers, beating the Lords Church on the threshing floor; and the
Jesuits are as Smyths, that prepare their Instruments; and God in his time will
pay them all home. But we leave, these things to GOD, who shakes the Counters
of their hands, who would determine of times, and things to come, as says S.
Austine. When the slaves of Rome conspired, Vbi suprae.
and some Masters were found killed in their houses: The Senate inacted a Law,
that all the slaves of that house should be killed where a Master was found
dead. Senatusconsultum Silanianum. This Law would fit Jesuits where a King is
killed. But in place of Prophecies, let them take Count Tillies presage at
Rodium, when he considered his bad success the former months, felices suos
progressus iam claudicare, and placida fortunae aura se non amplius afflari
armadvertere dixit, He said that Gallobel. Ian. 1632.
he perceived his prosperity to halt, and that Fortune smyled no more on him.
So mot it be to Gods enemies. It is time for Protestants to awake.


Let Germany awake, and see her oppression both in Religion and liberty:
Except she will be as stupide as the Cardinal of Lorraine calls her. And
let all Protestants awake, except they resolve to be snared by Popish policy,
to be blinded by their oaths, and destroyed by their oppression. God will
deliver his Church in his time.


God for our sins has suffered them to go far on, and they will proceed
in all the wicked purposes of their heart except he stay them: He has begun
in mercy to work deliverances in some parts. It is our duty to thank him
for that is done, and to pray for a continuance till his Church be fully
delivered: That the Children of darkness who have conceived mischief, and
traveled in Psalm. 7. 14
pain, may in end bring forth a lie.

CHAP. XXXI. That Now-Rome will not reconceale.
AS there is no hope of their reformation, so their Their reconciliation
desperate.
reconciliation is desperate: It has been often assayed, but ever in vain;
and the old saying of Romes taking by Arms: Roma nunqua^ frustra tentata, that
Rome was never in vain assayed, may now be turned to the contraire, Romana
reconciliatio semper frustra tentata, that Romes reconciling has ever been
assayed in vain. Paul the third politically set first nine Cardinals and then
three Bishops, to treat of reformation, yet he minded no such thing, but
only to gull the world. Though Wicelius and Cassander were set on work by
Ferdinand and Maximilian, to draw up some form of agreement, and abode still
in the communion of their Church, yet they damned these Treatises; and a maine
cause why they burnt Spalato, was, for that he held it possible to reconceale
the Church of England to Rome.

This irreconciliablenesse is both in the outward peace Sciopp. Class. Belli
sacri Tics. Ann. 1619. a) ^esuit. Hill. Rati^bo^. Ann. 1607.
and in Doctrine. For the outward peace; beside that has been said in the
former Chapter: Since the Trent Council they have ever been plotting; and the
Jesuits of Princes Confessaris turned their Corycaei and Counselors the
Frogs from the bottomless pit, have stirred them up to war: And when they
had prepared all things, one ( a) of them began the Alarm in an Imperial
diet. Nunc tempus est haereticorum istorum oppressionem and deletionem
maturare: Catholicis nec nervum pecuniam, nec militem, nec Consilia deesse. Now
it is time to hasten the oppression and destruction Gasp. Sci^p. Class bell
sacri. An. 1619.
of these Heretics: For the Catholics want neither money, nor Soldiers, nor
Council. There is both their plotting and preparation against us confessed and
it is senselessenesse not to observe it: But when all was ready, and the fire
begun in Boheme, then Sciopius gave a formal Alarm, and intitles his Book
suasoria de ratio nibus haereticorum compescendorum. A Suasorie to compesse
Heretics. And because Granvellanus and some other Ibid. in praefat.
had suggested peaceable counsels to Emperors about Religion, he bids these
moderate counselors get them gone, qui mollibus sententijs haereticorum
ingenia alere solent in maximam crucem facessant. And to ground their cruelty
to Protestants, he bids Princes count of Luther as Diabolum pro Deo colunt Ibid
cap 1.
a devil, and says, That we worship Satan in stead of God. This is like
the blasphemous calumnies of the Jesuits of Munster in their Credo
Calvini-sequarum, who Credo in Diabolum Orcipotentem. Sc^oppius. Ibid
affained to us that we believe in Satan. Thereafter he bids destroy all
Infaints and Children, percuties in ore gladij and delebis etiam Infantes and
pueros. That is Magdeburge Model. He makes not bones of that, that Jesuits
deny: Ibid cap. 19.
That it is leasome to cut off Princes that favor Religion. And in end that it
is lawful to make covenants with Turks, Ethnicks, and Jews, but not with
Protestants.

This is their preamble: Let us hear what follows, Rome intends our
destruction.
and that both from the Popes Consistory and the Emperors Cabinat. For the
first the Cardinals at Rome declare that the Popes design is to restore the
Church of Rome to Aphorisin. Cardinal. 1623.
her wonted greatness: And for this end that as the Palatine is broken so
Saxon and Brandenburge must also be removed as the greatest stays of their
purposes in Germany. And when the French King by their instigation had
oppressed the Protestants of France, the Jesuit Cornelius at Rome, not content
to praise him for it, (lest we should doubt any longer who are these spirits,
who stir up Kings to battle) stirs up Princes to persecute other
Protestants Agite Principes generosi, pergite magnis animis, opus felicibus
adeo auspicijs caeptum conficite: Paribus studijs rebellem Comment. in ^^
Proph. min.
Calvini haeresin pene evulsam stirpitus ubilibet eradicate. Go to generous
Princes, set forward with great courage, Perfect the work begun with so
happy success: And with the like zeal, root out every where the rebellious
haeresie of Calvine. And least this seem to be the humor of Urban 8. Brevs.
Ludovic. 13. An 1628
a private Doctor. Their infallible Doctor Vrbane the eight breaths the like
cruelty to that same young King after his taking of the Rochell, that he
would go forward to hunt the rest of these fierce beasts, (the Hugonotes) out
of their den, and destroy them all utterly.

And from Vienne they declare, that they mind no peace, but So does Austria.
to destroy Religion by force. For the Jesuits under the fable of Abaris the
Hyberborean (far worse applied than Nazianzen did) stirs up the Emperor
with his Arrow Scipio. Scamb. Epist. ad Ferdinand. 3. Nazian M^nod.
and Oracles, to propagate the truth by force as well as by reason. Et Colendi
Numinis disciplima inferat vole^tibus, aut imponat invitis. Scip. ibid. Epist.
dedic:
norit ad propugnandum coeleste dogma non minus ferri aciem quam ingenij acumen
adhibere. And that a Prince must use Appolloes arrows, and know that heavenly
doctrine is propugned, no less by the edge of the sword, than by quicknes of
Ingyne. This is another sort of argument, than Christ taught his Disciples Of
old it was said, that Faith should be propagate not by Arms, but by
arguments, not by blows, but by words: For who will compel me (says
Lactantius) Lib. 5. c. 14. and 20 Ferd. Epist. ad Zunig. Ann. 1621.
either to believe what I will not, or not to believe what I will? But let us
hear the Emperor himself declaring his intention, Ad exstirpandas sediciosas
factiones, quae Calvinistica potissimum factione foventur: ^o root out the
factions of the Calvinists.

Beside these we have evidences of their irreconciliablenesse from their
Pacificators and Scioppius. Their Pacificators They damn former Patification.
were set to work by authority, to color their cruelty by a large Volume.
They saw the Pacification of Passau which was ratified at Augsburge, condemned
them of cruelty and persurie: It provided peace of Religion, Compositio Pacis.
Pax Augusta^ na Art. 1. Ibid. Art 11. Compositio Pacis. page 12 13
that none should molest or invade other for their profession. And that the
peace should have the own vigor, usque ad finalem compositionem, until a
final composition. But when they saw that they prevailed, they set these
Lawyers to work to put an Orleand gloss upon the Pacification, and to make men
believe it had no force: Their special reasons are that the peace was not
concluded by way of a Pragmaticall Page 7. Page 11. Page 152. Page 147. and 149.
sanction, but of a covenant rising of necessity for the time. That the
Emperor is not bound to it, nor the Bishops. That beside the case of
necessity there was also fear, and vim inferens non meretur ut ipsi promissio
servetur. And lastly that it is null in it self; Because the Pope did not
approve it. Thus they elide that solemn Pacification which held Germany in
peace for sixty years and more. Others say the like, that the peace was not
valide. That it expyred at P. Windek* de exstirp h^res.
the publication of the Trent Council. That it was only till the Catholics
had expede their business (that is their plotting against us) and postea hoc
vnum bellum contra sectarios administrarent, they would follow out this only
war against heretics. All the time of their practicing the treat of Passau
was taken to compryse both Compos. Pacis 551.
the Public and religious peace: But now when they think they have
prevailed, they cure their tyranny with distinctions. That it was not a
Sanction but a transaction: And that the Public peace did not touch the
religious peace but materiallie and by accident, where as formallie they are
diverse, yea, adverse. These are shifts to color perjurie and oppression.

As these Pacificators were set to work, to loose the They feign a new peace.
Consult pacis.
bands of the stablished peace, so was Scioppius to propone a new form of
Peace with his two Books, the one of the Consultations of Peace under his own
name: The other is of the Foundations of peace under the fained name of
Fundamenta Pacis annuente Pontifice and assentiente Imperatore. August. Ann.
^631. Consult. p ^43 57. 71. But it is our revolt.
Theophilus Sanctafidius, or rather Miso-theus nulli-fidius.

First, he confesses that the wickedness of their Clergy gave just
scandal to the Protestants. Fundament. page 48. 157. Next, that their
reformation would be a special means for our conversion. Consult. 50. 57. And
that many other commodities would follow. Ibid. 70. 71. 72, Then going along
in quiring the means of peace he damneth two. The first is Disputs or
conference of learned men on both sides. Fundam. page 122. 125. The other is
transaction or toleration such as was made at Passau. Fuad. p. 126. 137. 155.
Thereafter he comes to positive means of peace which must be a Nation
allcountell in Germany Consult. p. 59. But such a one as shall urge the
obedience of the Council of Trent. Ibid. p. 61. Heerewith he sets down a
short Catechism to be embraced of us as the special ground of peace. Fundam.
p. 4. Wherein is the Or else our destruction.
Divinity of their Traditions, the infallibility of the Pope: The five
bastard Sacraments. ibid. p. 16. 17. The Immunitie of the Clergy, and the
Popes Monarchy. p. 14. Impunitie to the Pope and Clergy were they never so
flagitious. ibid. p. 34. 35. 36. 40. 48. 50. 51. 54. But because these may
prove weak means to work this peace, therefore his last is the destruction of
Protestants: If we will not embrace such a faith, to make us as Sisera, Zeba,
and Zalmuna: And so he praises the Duke of Baveere, and Ibid. 139. 140
Count Tillie, comparing them to Gide on and Barac, for destroying Protestants
as Canaanites and Midianites. Barac imitatus est Sereniss. Princeps
Maximilianus Elector, etc. -- and comes de Tillie vir admirandae non minus
innocentiae and sanctitatis, quam fortitudinis and fidei, verusque aetatis
nostrae Gideon, and rei Catholicae in Germania, propugnaculum. In all their
doings they pretended peace, but intended war, and our ruin. So the Duke of
Bavere: Nos nihil nisi pacem publicam quaerere: And yet his own father gives
him the lie, professing that he feared nothing Guil. Bav^r. Cancel. Hisp. p.
126.
more, than a most filthy peace, if they should embrace the conditions
proponed by the King of great Britain. Sed timeo ne in propositas ab Anglo
inducias ruant, ipsam denique turpissimam pacem.

And the Emperor in his Oration at Regensburg: They pretend peace, but intend
war. In Commit. Ratisbon.
though the first part of it was a suasorie to peace, yet the five remanent
Articles were all of war: The excluding of Count Palatine for ever, the
curbing of the Hollanders, the compescing of the King of Sweden, etc. Therefore
one defined well the proper notion of their peace, Pacem vocabant domus
Austriacae dominationem, and e contra turpem servitij patientiam, they called
peace the domination of Anonymi. Ep. de Commit. Ratisbons.
the house of Austria, and on the other part, a vile patience of slaverie, and
withal Popery set up again. And Scioppius like himself cut them off, done^
ex haereticis fiant Catholici seque Pontifici subijciant, till they fall down
at thy feet, and of Protestants become Papists, and Classic. cap. 1.
subject to the Pope: it is such a peace as the Spartans promised to the
Messenians if they would depart altogether out of Pelopponesus. So do their
Pacificators to Protestants if they will change either Religionem or Regionem.
This is like Edom, Raze it, raze it, from the foundation. Psalm. 137.
And we may say of them with Tacitus, vbi solitudinem faciunt, pacem
appellant, they call it peace, where they have wrought desolation. Their peace
is Ludification.


This is the plat-forme of their Pacification, which if any will so blind
himself as not to see, we must say of him as Cardinal Caietane said lately
of the Parisians, beholding these superstitious people thronging on him for a
blessing, he whispered these words in stead of a blessing, Quandoquidem hic
populus vult decipi, decipiatur: Since this people will be deceived, let them
be deceived.

If it seem strange how Scioppius who sounded the bloody Alarm to the wars
turned a Pacificator. Let them consider his alarm and pacification are alike,
for in the first like Alecto, he stirs men to battle: In the other like
Erinnys he kills them either by heresy, if they yield, or by cruelty if
they resist.

But if they seriously minded condescending or agreement in doctrine, we
answer them as Gelasius did Euphemianus No condescending in Doctrine.
an Heretic who desired that he would condescend. Whereas thou says, we
ought to condescend unto you, thou grants that you are fallen and descended to
the pit of error -- And you would have us descend from our hight unto Gelasius.
you: But we rather requeist you that ye would ascend with us from your
errors to the eminency of our truth. This should the more move them, because
they turn it to their own use (though Bellar de Laic. cap. 19
preposterouslie) There is no agreement between light and darkness, and
Bernard says, Bernard. sentent Cyprian. de lapsis.
That inter Babylonem and Jerusalem non est pax, sed bellum continuum. And
Cyprian. non est pax illa sed bellum, nec Ecclesiae iungitur, qui ab Evangelio
separatur.

This was Melancthons wise Observation: There was They seek our Palinodie.
none in his time either more able to indge of controversies, or more calm to
incline to peace: And yet after many Colloques for agreement he gathered this
conclusion, that while the Papists treat of mitigation, Nihil aliud quam
Melanthon. Consil.
palinodiam nostram requirunt, They seek nothing but our recantation: And I
add the other part of the Alternatiue, that if they get not palinodiam they
seek panolethrian our Si pacem postulant arma deponant. Cyprian. August. Sermon
Temp. 166. 167.
utter destruction. But I say to them with Cyprian, if they seek peace, let
them lay aside their Arms. For (as Augustine says) Negat Deum Patrem, qui
pacificus esse contemnit: And again, non potest concordiam habere cum Christo,
qui discors esse voluerit cum Christiano: He denies God the Father who will
not be a peacemaker. And he cannot have concord with Christ, who will be at
discord with a Christian.

And yet lest we seem too rigide, we agree to such The right condescending.
a condescending as may be elicite out of a ^riers sermon at Lions, Nothing
(says he) holds us at discord with Hugonots, but this unhappy word, solum.
For we worship Iunius de Eccles.
God, and Saints, and Images, but they worshipp Deum solum. GOD alone: We
take both Scripture and tradition for the Rule of Faith and manners; but they
tak Scripturam solam, Scripture alone. We take good works in justification,
etc, but they take fidem solam, Faith only: We take with Jesus Christ the
Saints for our Mediators, Intercessors and Saviors by their merits and
satisfactions, but they take Christ alone, etc. If then they will come to our
solum to worship God alone in Christ, and rest on him as our only Savior,
then we will agree. When Agrippa advised Augustus to lay down the Impyre,
Mecaenas diswaded him, he followed Mecaenas. So the Pope, though he pretend a
love of peace and reformation, yet he keeps still his Monarchy and proves
more like Julius Caesar, keeping the Dictatorship, than like Sylla in laying it
down.

Seeing then the life and being of Popery is the Rome shall be deserted.
Deformation of the Church, and her Reformation is the destruction of Popery,
and they are already both judged of GOD, and sentenced in his word to
consumption and Abolition; and the hand of Providence goes on in the execution
of that sentence there is neither ground to treat for reconcliation, nor hope
to attain to it. Or if we will treat of it, we accuse the Lords sentence of
iniquity, and his execution of rigor. Let Babell then be under her sin,
and punishment begun and approaching, and let all that love the Lord Jesus
separat themselves from these wickedmen.

A CONCLUSION Exhortatorie to Princes.
I Turn now that speech (which they abuse) to you, most sacred Princes. Be
wise O Kings, be learned ye Judges of the earth: Christ Jesus whom ye have
long Psalm. 2. Princes are Gods instruments to punish Antichrist.
pursued by Antichirsts direction, when he might destroy you, calls you to
repentance, to change both your minds and course: Your Minds; to know that
popery is that foretold Apostasy, and that the Religion which ye persecute
is the truth of God. And your course that since blind zeal (the companion of
false Religion) has made you think it good service to God to destroy his
Saints, you would turn your power for the service of the Lamb, Apoc. 17.
of whom ye have it, and both revenge Gods quarrel, and your own upon the
Beast.

Consider how GOD sets down his Dittay and Romes dittay Apoc. 17. Apoc. 18.
D^ome: His Dittay in Idolatry, Filthiness, and above all the blood of the
Saints. Rome was ever bloody and the Mathematicians observed, that when her
ground-stone was laid the Moon was in cauda Draconis, to tell that all her
changes in rising, growing, standing, would be in the c^u^ltie of the Dragon:
And soon after, Romulus wet her walls with his Brothers blood: She turned the
earth in a Butcherie by wars abroad: And her Gan^es at home in the Theater,
were bloody: She shed the blood of the Saints in her persecuting Pagan
Emperors: And lastly, sheddeth the bloody of the Protestants by her
Antichristian head: Jerusalem was guilty of the blood of all the Prophets,
because they succeeded the Murderers in malice and cruelty: And Rome succeeds
Jerusalem, and exceeds her in persecuting Christ: Aut Romae, aut. Roma,
Spalat.
All blood of the Saints is shed either in Rome or by Romes authority: She
has shed more blood than Ninivie, Babylon, Shusan, and Jerusalem it self.

Her Doom is, do to her as she has done to you: And what Romes doom, and
destruction.
she has done to you, your Souls and Thrones may feel. For beside your
souls killing, the Pope has overthrowen Matestatem and dignit ^^perit
evert^t. Onuph V^^. Greg. 7.
the Majesty and dignity of Impyres. She denuded you of Kingly Authority
when she exposed your Sacred Persons to the contempt and violence of the
basest Villanes: She ate up your flesh, not so much in catching the riches of
your Kingdoms, as by nesting in your bosom, like a Viper to destroy you: She
burnt your with the fire of excommunication, raising such combustions that your
Country and Courts were divyded. The Son set against the Father, Epist. Si*
gibert ad Pas^hal 2.
as Henry the fifth against Henry the fourth, to pursue him to death, and
after death to deny him Burial. Apoc. 17. 16.
Therefore this is her recompense, that you make the Whore naked, eat up her
flesh and burn her with fire

God has sentenced her, and there remains no more but execution: Though we
rest on none but Scripturall The prophecies of it.
Prophecies, yet their own Prophets foretold their ruin: For Hildegardis* and
Catharina Senensis, (whose contraire visions Delrio Disquis. Magic.
labors to reconceale) Brigitta, tells them of their destruction: Revel.
L. 1 cap 41.
What ever be the force of her writ it must be Canonick to them, ^ardin. de
TUr Cremat. pr^fat. Revel. Brigit.
since Boniface the nynth has cannoized her, and Martine the fifth confirmed
that canonization, and their later writers as Chemensis, Onus Ecclesie.
Capistranus, Aytinger, etc. have spoken broadlie, That Rome shall be ruined
by the Almaines and the French.

As God calls and commands you to do it, so you are bound to it by these
two bonds wherey they press Princes are bound to perform it.
you most, your Baptismall initiation and sacred oath: In Baptism ye were
initiate in Christian faith, and not in Antichristian perfidie; And the
substance of your oath is to defend Apostolic and primitive truth and not
the yesterday novelties of Rome: Their own Baron, Genebrard, Stapleton*
Patrons grant that in the middle ages they were Apostaticke and Apotactick,
but since, we never find their reformation or amendment: The error of time
confirmed by badde custom has made men mistake these Notions of Christ and
Antichrist, truth and untruth, and so to misplace their affections and
actions about them, but open your eyes to the light God offers in his word,
and your better informed minds shall reform your affections, and rectify
your actions, Ne oro luce tenebras, pro die noctem mortem pro salut^ sumatis
Cypr Epist. 40
least you take darkness for light, night for day, and death for life, that
you may forsake Antichrist and heresies, and join your selves to the Lamb,
and his truth in the reformed Churches.

Or if you will not take Gods cause to heart, nor be Their injuries requite it.
moved with these bonds, let your Life and Crowns move you: Though he under a
Judicial hardness be senseless of the guiltiness of his usurpation, yet be
not you senseless of these indignities: He makes you to fight against your
self in his quarrel, while he abuses your power for the maintenance of his
greatness to the overthrow of your authority: Remember he is head of that
Court, whose Ambassadors boasted in England, that they served at that Court,
which commanded both other Kings and their Matt. Paris.
Courteours.

It has ever been your fault to neglect the commoun They neglect others in
their injuries.
cause of Princely authority: There is nothing more s^oothed than that that is
pleaded by many: When any one Prince was thunder-beaten by Jupiter Capitolinus,
he exhorted other Princes, that they should not betray the Barel. pietas fol,
ult.
common cause, but all in vain: For the ruin of one made a prey to many:
Therefore they suffered the present storm to pass over, and that because by a
wicked purchase some accession came to their state. This was specially when a
great Prince was broken, whose greatness was fearful to them all: The
Emperor was most left in the stir, while smaller Princes thought it their
security, if he were redacted to that state, that he might not rise to the
greatness of his Ancestors.

It is time for you to awake, when their flatterers pity Papists lament the
faintness of Princes.
your injuries, and the Jesuits admire your patience. Petrus Ferrariensis
Practic Iuris sed heu miseri imp and Principes se culares, etc.
marking how the Pope ensnared you to enlarge his own jurisdiction, cries
out. But alace miserable Emperors, and secular Princes, who suffer these
things and make your selves slaves to the Pope; and see the world by infinite
cousanages abused, and yet you think not of a remeede: And where the Jesuits
please to be free, they wonder fatuos Goldast Replic pr^fat.
fuisse veteres Imperatores, and imperij nostri ordines qui sibi tanto cum
dedecore, ora sublinia Papis sustinuerint, that Emperors and the States were
so foolish, as to be gulled with Popes.

We have better cause than Athanasius to say, I am Our time craveth doing
Princes, Athanas. Ep. ad solit.
Ecclesiae tempora oculatos* and operosos Principes requirunt, that the times
of the Church require seeing and doing Princes. He had to do with the Arrians,
but now the Antichristian Mystery rages. God has given you power; open but
your eyes to lead you in the use of it. How long will it be ere ye awake to
see how he has first led you from God in superstition, and now leads you
against God in persecuting of his Saints. Consider how Maximinus Cent. 3.
Lucit. col. 28.
the Emperor was stirred up to persecute the Church by Pagane Priests under
hope of great success: But when he saw himself overthrown by Licinius, he
destroyed his instigators as deceavers. The Pope and his Clergy have set you
on this last bloody persecution: God will disappoint you, and turn it to your
shame: It were your wisdom to avenge you of your seducers.

Look on other Princes, who have shaken off his yoke, Protestant Princes are
free Princes.
as England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, etc. Their Kings know none above them
under GOD: They are honored, and obeyed of their Subjects, without reflecting
upon any other power on earth You reign but precario, as Titulars, and they
count you but as Kings of the Chesse. Neither Marta. ^urisd. lib. 1.
dare you rule your Subjects as free Princes: Neither dare your people obey you
as such. The terror, at least the credulity of the Popes Transcendencie,
limiteth your p(...)er, and loses your people to rebel. Receive Christ in
his Gospel, and set up his Throne in your lands as they have done, and then
you shall find both the sweetness of the Grace of the Gospel, and of a free
and vndependent government. Gods Truth amongst us (Protestants) makes us not
only to congratulate our happiness in our free Kings and Churches, but also
to commis^rate your estate, when we see Gods image in you great Princes, so
shamefully abused by a deceaver. You cannot be both Popish and free Princes:
The very Notion of Popery subiecteth you necessarly to Hildebrands
usurpation, Renounce Antichristian tyranny, and come to Christian liberty,
and you shall find both grace for your persons* and glory to your government.
Angment the Popesplunges, and while that Iuglar knows not which of you to
keep, let him feel the revenging power of you all.

You got m^^y exhortations of this kind from Preachers King James a warner of
Princes.
and Theologues, but you have heard them with close ears: Therefore God has
sent you lately a royal premonition from the Pen of the King of great
Britain. The suggestions of Subjects found little access, and as little
regard at your hands: But the Counsel of a King to Kings, and that in the
matter of a Kingly authority, is more weighty. Truth is truth and
powerful, who ever speak it: But Truth in the quarrel of Kings proponed by
a great and wise King, will find more access, than private suggestions The
royal Genius which is one in Kings, makes them to have a sympathy,
specially where their common cause threateneth a common danger.

Let none be so simple as to think they will either Their hardness will not
repent.
repent their whole course, or relent its extreamitie: Though they have found,
and ( ere it be long) may find a great dash, yet they will but temporize, and
suting peace, turn to more deep and deadly plotting. They thought all Paul
Vindek de exstirpand. h^res.
their own at the Smalcaldicke war, and when God brak their forces, they
simulat a pacification, yet they w^^e ever plotting a new persecution. If GOD
shall disappoint them of their cruel intentions ( as in mer^ he has begun
to do) yet ere it be long, they would fire Europe with a new and greater
combustion. Antichrist may be destroyed; but mollified or tamed can he not
be: Their Romish temper is incapable either of the change The Popes curbing is
faceable.
of repentance, or the mollifying of moderation.

The curbing of the Popes insolency is no more just and necessar in it self
than faceable to you: Romes native cruelty carried ever the cause of her ruin
in her bosom. It was noted as ominous in old Rome, that when they began
first to execute that Roman censure interdicere Platin Vit. Bonisac 8.
igni and aqua, their Atrium or great Court was burnt with thunder, and so
since Popes began to play upon Princes with their ordinance of excommunication,
their state has been broken: When Boniface the ^^ght would take on him the
Habit, Sword, and Ensigns of the Impyre Philip of France comp^sced that
insolency shortly, and made him die in exile and greiefe: And how much their
power is broken, since Luthers time, the world sees: King Henry of England
devorced his Kingdom from the Pope* because Clement the seventh impiouslie
denied to devorce him from his incestuous Queen, to whom Julius the second
dispensation tied him. Scotland in the minority of her Princess, proved both
Mayor and masculous in shaking off the Popes yoke: Denmark, Sweden, and many
Princes of Germany Philip the second his threatening in killing Six tus the
^^^^^.
have cut his wings in their Dominions.

What an angry King can do to him, was lately seen betwixt Philip the
second, and Sixtus the fifth, Cardinal Philip the second his threatening,
killing Sixtus the fifth is ominous.
Estensis the ruler of the Consistory, promised to make him Pope if he would
never promoue Hieronymus Mattheus, but being chosen Pope, he made Hieronymus
a Cardinal, and so Estensis sent his hand-writ to Philip the second, to prove
his perjury and Symonie: hereupon Novus homo page 4. Bulla ^ul. 2. B^rclai^
Epist. ad Lector.
Philip minded to call a Council to process him for these two crimes, and
declare the nullitie of his Election according to their Laws: But while Sixtus
is grieved for the intended process, and devising a revengfull excommunication
against Philip he contracted a fever, and dyed. If that stir had gone on,
possibly the Pope had been curbed, or Spain reformed, to be as eminent in
true zeal, as now pertinax in supperstition: But Gods time is coming: And
seeing the republic of Venice gave him a wound which he can not cure; What
may not you great Princes do, whose glaining is greater than the vintage The
Romans have curbed the Pope.
of Abiezer?

As Princes and Republickes, so his own Romans have curbed his pride: And God
set up bars to it so soon as it began to overflow, for Cincius Platin. vit
Gregor. 7.
a Roman, compesced Hildebrand in Rome, while he was abusing the Emperor in
Germany, and when Alexander the third, by his Legate was disciplining Henry
the second for Beckets cause, the Romans had expelled him out of Rome. And
Onuphrius Perpetua per annos quin quaginta inter Populum Pontificesq. discordia
civis lis fuit. Onuph annot ad vit. ^l^m 3.
marketh, that for the space of fifty years from Celestine the second to
Clement the third, the Romans did so entreat the Popes, that some of them died
for displeasure, others were almost killed in tumults, and a third sort were
banished; and that in their heat of usurpation over Kings. God hereby was both
taxing the feebleness of Princes, and teaching Posterity, the possibility of
the Popes curbing. His Brieves, Bulls, and Legates, did more in Kingdoms, far
distant than his own presence could do in Rome. He domnineered absolutely
abroad, while he fought at home for the government of the City, and safety
of his own life.

Gerson has made his curbing problematicke, and it is your part to turn his
problem in effect. The Apostle He shall be finally curbed.
descryving Antichrist, takes some part of that Description from Nero, whose
tyranny he saw, and Uespasian Gerson, de auferib. Papae.
(the reformer of Neroes wickedness) pulled down the golden Head he had set
on the Collosse, and in stead thereof placed the image of the Sun. It were
good service to God, to pull down that head, that has lift it self above the
Church, and is the life of heresy and schism, the impediment of reformation
and of peace in Europe; and in his place to make the Gospel, the image of the
Sun of Righteousness to shine cleerelie.

Saint Austine Tractat. 6 in Johan, Ibid Tract. 11
tells you from your own Laws, that they who will not in peace worship the
God of peace, nihil The best way of his curbing.
nomine Ecclesiae audeant possidere. And thereafter, If Princes do not so, Quo
modo possunt Deo rationem reddere? How shall they give a count to God? But
Baronius is more legal, Eijciendus vt Latro, he is to be cast out as a
thief, who in an evil conscience possesses that which is not his own. (b)
Baron. An 886 n* 28
Io. de Rupe scissa tells you the way in his Parable, that when a naked bird
was busked by other birds, she became proud, and beat them: Therefore they
took back their lent feathers, and left her naked. Take back again your
profuse donations, wherewith you have busked the Pope, and ^^ossard. vol. 2.
then, moveat coruicula risum, furtivis nudata coloribus.

If he be redacted to an Apostolic Preacher, his Cardinals will return to
their primitive charge in sepeliendis mortuis in celebrating the Funerals of
the defunct popish Synagogue: Rome has been twenty times taken since Christ's
days Atalar. Eg^nolph.
And Charles the fifth, took it last, in show for a Revenge, but indeed to
found his Monarchy. Why may not ye in the zeal of God destroy the whore to
vindicate your own Monarchies? God has foretold Babels destruction, and it
will certainly come to pass: The time thereof is both fixed and known of God
alone. And ^o^^^ final (...). R^^^l. 17.
at that time he will not want instruments; for he will put it in the hearts
of Kings to fulfill his will. For they will make bright arrows, and gather the
shields: because the Lord has raised up the Spirit of the King of the Medes:
For (...). ^^* ^1.
his device is against Babylon to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of
the Lord, the vengeance of his Temple. Exhortation to Papists. (...) igi^ (...)
and vita (...) licet provid^te -- Ad v^ra Religionis candidam ^uce^^ d^
profund^ and te^ebrosa, etc. ^^^^ Ad* De(...)ian* in (...)*


To the Pope and his wilful adhaerents, I speak as Cyprian did to Demetrian,
Provide for your security and life, while you may: We offer to you the whole
some gift of our counsel -- And we exhort you, while ye have occasion, and
are alive, to satisfy God, and come to the pure light of the truth, out of
the deep and dark night of Superstition. VVe^ envy not your prosperity, we
render you love for hatred* and show you the path of life, in recompense of
these torments, ye inflict upon us. Believe, and live, that ye who persecute
us for a time, may rejoice with us for ever.

I close with Gods command to the elect people who for a time are captivat in
Babylon: Come out of her my people, (...) to the (...)ct to for(...) Babel.
(...)l. 18. 4. 5 6. ^. 21.
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues:
And his command to you Kings, Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and
double unto her according to her works, in the cup which she has filled,
fill to her the double. Therefore, let her plagues come in one day, that as the
Angel speaks, Great Babylon may be thrown down, and found no more, as a
millstone cast into the Sea. That all the Saints may have matter to sing.
Halel^iah, Salvation, (...). 19. 1. ^
and glory, and Power unto the Lord our God: For true and righteous are his
Judgments for he has judged the great whe^re which did corrupt the Earth
with her fornication, and av^^ged the blood of his Servants at her hand.

AMEN.
Do illis eruditionem: Do doctrinam: Sed fidem and religionem ^^^quam
coluerunt, Cicer. de Graec.

